Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 4 July 1996 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , a year ago exactly , we heard the news of the fall of Srebrenica .
The inhabitants of Srebrenica were trusting in the fact that in April 1993 , as you will remember , their town had been declared a UN safe area .
They were bitterly disappointed when the Serb forces , under the command of General Mladic , took the town in July 1995 .
In front of the United Nations soldiers , the Muslim men were then separated from their families and the women and children driven from the town .
Since then , some 8000 people have been reported missing .
They have probably been killed .
It is now up to the investigations which are under way to establish the facts of the matter , amid the horrors of the mass graves .
The massacre at Srebrenica is one of the most dreadful of the war in Bosnia - sadly , one among many others .
The international community cannot rest until the facts of the massacre have been established and those guilty have received the punishment they deserve .
We owe that to the victims of Srebrenica and their families . We owe it to justice , which the tribunal in The Hague is seeking to dispense .
I would ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to join me in paying tribute to the victims of the massacre at Srebrenica by observing a minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence )
Madam President , on a point of order .
I occupy room 238 in IPE 2 , from which I normally have the pleasure of observing the French countryside . However , I find that I now face a wall of concrete , about which the Quaestors appear to know nothing .
Could you tell us whether all the other inhabitants of the second floor are to be subjected to this on a permanent basis , or would you recommend that we move to Brussels until we have a chance to have offices that again return us a view of the French countryside ?
I have visited one of these offices myself , Mr Spencer , which as you say have practically been walled in .
I think it is absolutely terrible .
You ask if there are many offices in a similar position .
Those on the first and second floors are affected , but the ones above do have a view .
I think we need to investigate the matter , and I was intending to raise it at this evening 's meeting of the Bureau .
I cannot say any more than that at present , but I entirely share the feelings experienced by yourself and other Members in the same situation .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I just wish to say that I have had the same experience .
Members of this House are kept in the dark and covered with manure like mushrooms , and it is about time it stopped !
I have no daylight in my office and it is an appalling insult !
I have just said what I think of the matter , and you have heard that I share the same feeling .
We shall have to see what can be done .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I beg the indulgence of yourself and the House to ask you , Madam President , on behalf of this Parliament , to express our outrage at the capitulation by the British Government , the Royal Ulster Constabulary and the security forces in Northern Ireland in the face of Orange Order mob rule ; also to express our outrage at the first bombing to take place in Northern Ireland in the last two years , which took place at the weekend .
Fortunately , there were no fatalities .
Furthermore , to express our outrage at the running down of a Catholic man by an RUC armoured vehicle during a peaceful protest in the city of Derry ; to condemn the use of over 4 , 000 plastic bullets by the Royal Ulster Constabulary against Catholic and nationalist people , as against 150 plastic bullets used by the RUC against the Orange Order when it flouted the rule of law ; to express our outrage at the burning-out and the running-out of their homes of Catholic and nationalist families in Belfast and Derry whilst the security forces stood by ; and call on all parties to get back to inclusive talks to ensure that we can restore not only the peace process but justice , equality and fair treatment for all citizens .
It is an absolute disgrace the way that the RUC , the British army , the British Government and the Orange Order have decided that they are definitely going to make the six counties in the north-east of Ireland a Protestant State , an Orange State , for an Orange people , and forget about the human and civil rights of the nationalists and Catholics who are living there .
I naturally note what you say , Mr Crowley .
You will appreciate that we cannot start a debate now .
As you know , this very serious situation will be examined in due course at this part-session .
I would ask you please not to start a debate on the subject by means of a point of order .
You will have ample opportunity to state your views , for example on Wednesday morning when the Irish presidency presents its programme .
Madam President , I am not going to make this into a debate but since the question has been raised , I want you to confirm that it will be on the agenda and that we will have a statement from the presidency .
Northern Ireland is demonstrably ungoverned and may be ungovernable under the present structures .
The citizens of that state do not have equal rights .
Yes indeed , Mrs Ahern , that is what I said .
Order of business
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to stress that I am keeping to the agreement reached by the Conference of Presidents concerning the declarations to be made , and we in the Conference instructed a working party to try to produce a text on which a consensus can be reached .
This is not exactly what has happened , but the objectives we are pursuing are still vitally important for this House , which has come under attack so often , particularly in recent times .
I think it is absolutely crucial for the credibility of the House that we should reach a decision this week .
As we see it , there is just one small problem left to clear up , which is that we need to define - and this is something the Bureau can do - exactly what constitutes a gift or benefit .
I think the House can reach a consensus on this .
Indeed , as we have seen in various Member States , including my own , it is easy to reach agreement on the principles governing declarations of assets , but far more difficult to put them into practice .
We think the Bureau has an important role to play here in defining the text .
It should also be possible to settle the issue of gifts and benefits very quickly - before the end of the year , in our opinion .
In any event , I should like to confirm that we intend to stand by this agreement and that we are determined to reach a consensus .
I think we should be able to adopt the text by a majority of more than 314 votes this week , on the understanding that the Bureau is to be instructed to produce a definition , which will be important when it comes to applying the agreement .
This need not involve a delay , it is simply a precaution , and we really do feel that it is extremely important in the present circumstances for Parliament to reach a decision this week .
I am taking a risk in proposing this , but I am convinced that we have to do everything we can to protect Parliament 's credibility when it comes under attack .
Various people in this House have been working hard for years to win greater power and influence for Parliament , and I think this has to go hand in hand with working to improve our image .
That is why I think we have to decide to vote on the text this week .
I would remind the House , if need be , that at this stage we are voting on the agenda .
Let it be clear , therefore , that there is no question of opening a debate on the substance of the matter .
Mr Martens has just explained why he wished this item to be reincluded on the agenda for this part-session .
I have several requests to speak from group chairmen , and I think it is important for them to be able to state their views .
As you know , the eyes of the media are upon us .
We are dealing with a very sensitive issue .
I shall therefore give the floor to Mr de Vries , who has asked to speak , then Mrs Green and Mr Puerta .
Clearly , we are not opening a debate , but I think that before voting on whether or not to reinclude this item , it is essential for the group chairmen to express their views .
Madam President , the House has spoken on behalf of the people of Europe in repeatedly calling for greater transparency in the operation of the European institutions , which are all too often seen as dark , secretive bodies , sometimes unfairly , but often also with a grain of truth .
But if we want the Commission and the Council to be more transparent , we must also be prepared to make the workings of Parliament equally so , and an important element here is transparency in Members ' financial interests .
My group feels it is vital that we should vote on the Ford and Nordmann reports this week , and we support the Christian Democrats ' proposal on the subject .

But let me warn you : we are prepared to help the Christian Democrats obtain the majority they need to amend the Rules of Procedure , but not if it means sacrificing the principle that there is , and must remain , a ban on accepting gifts .
There is absolutely no reason why this House should allow Members to accept gifts , and if we instruct the Bureau to draw up a definition of what constitutes a gift , it must take account of the spirit and the letter of the Rules of Procedure we adopt .
What is banned is banned , and the only possible exceptions , as far as I am concerned , are bunches of flowers and cups of coffee .
( Applause )
Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Martens for reiterating his personal commitment to the agreement made by the group leaders to ensure that the Nordmann report passes through this House before the summer recess .
I would also remind the House that agreement by the group leaders included an absolutely clear commitment that Members should refrain from receiving gifts , payments or benefits .
It is important that the House understands that .
It is important that the House understands the crucial nature of getting that agreement through this House if we are to demonstrate the transparency which Mr De Vries spoke about .
My group will support putting the Nordmann report on the agenda as long as it is clear that , as far as we are concerned , that agreement holds .
Last week it was not so clear as far as the Group of the European People 's Party is concerned .
Mr Martens has expressed his desire that it should hold .
We will support him by putting our votes behind the clear commitment made by the group leaders earlier this year .
Madam President , with the same degree of seriousness and commitment as the other group chairmen , I wish to express the concern of my group at the way in which the Nordmann report is coming before plenary .
In our view , it is clear that the circumstances have not changed since last week .
I would remind the House that the Conference of Presidents decided by a majority to withdraw the Nordmann report on Thursday afternoon . And it did so because the amendments that were to be presented raised serious problems regarding the gifts and benefits that Members would be able to receive .
We did not agree beforehand , and we expressed our concern in the meetings of group chairmen or deputy chairmen that the formulas being used - whereby support in terms of staff or material would be permitted , though that support would have to be declared on the register and transparent - were very dangerous , notwithstanding the traditions of certain Member States in the regulation of this matter .
Our opinion has not changed .
We believe that this amendment - which some people now wish to interpret , and which leaves the distinction between gifts and privileges to the discretion of the Bureau - is extremely confused .
I agree with the other group chairmen that there is a need to ensure complete transparency in the eyes of public opinion , that demagogy should not be permitted , and that the credibility of Parliament must not be undermined . And it is for precisely this reason that - in the same good faith as the other group chairmen , but on the basis of a different opinion and decision - we shall oppose the reinclusion of the Nordmann report on Tuesday 's agenda , with a view to its possible adoption .
Madam President , the Greens in Parliament are certainly in favour of debating the Nordmann report , provided that it is done with great frankness , such as we have already heard from Mr de Vries .

Mr Martens came close , but he was still not entirely open .
He said that he wanted to keep to the agreement reached in the Conference of Presidents , an agreement we thought was a minimalist approach , but which has now been thrown open by an amendment from the Christian Democrats .
If the question is whether we agree that we should deal with this issue , then the answer is certainly yes , as far as the definition of gifts and so on is concerned , but it means that Mr Donnelly 's amendment on behalf of the PPE Group which refers to gifts which are not likely to influence Members ' views should be withdrawn , otherwise the situation will become as unclear as before .
Madam President , I also wish to say that our group is in favour of the Nordmann report being debated during this part-session .
Nevertheless , I should like to point out that we are only having to discuss the reinclusion of this report because the Conference of Presidents decided by a majority to remove it from the agenda , and that our group did not vote in favour of its removal - a decision which was adopted by a simple majority of the Conference of Presidents .
The supposed conscience of the people of Europe is frequently invoked in this Chamber , as it was a short while ago .
The fact is that the peoples of the various Member States expect their elected representatives , and especially those in the European Parliament , to adopt clear and transparent rules governing their own conduct .
How can we fail to note the fear of a great many of our colleagues at the adoption of these simple rules , rules which concern the declaration of assets ?
It is not a question - it should be emphasized - of referring to national legislations .
The European Parliament is capable of adopting these rules .
Certain colleagues do not wish their income to be transparent ; they do not wish gifts to be prohibited .
Our group is in favour of maximum transparency , since in order to be beyond reproach , elected representatives must adopt clear rules on these matters , which are very important in the eyes of public opinion .
Madam President , the Union for Europe Group , like the Europe of Nations and PPE Groups , voted in the Conference of Presidents to maintain the Nordmann report on the agenda .
We shall therefore remain consistent with that vote : we shall vote for the reinclusion of the report , because we too are in favour of complete transparency on this matter , whereas the amendment that was proposed introduced an element of doubt .
We are thus in favour of transparency , without indulging in demagogy of any kind , and I therefore believe that it is right that the Bureau should exercise a kind of moral authority in deciding what should or should not be termed a ' gift ' .
Furthermore , the solution proposed by Mr Martens does no more than make explicit what was implicit .
Indeed , I recall that when we entrusted the task of mediator to Mr Cot , he himself proposed that it should be the Bureau which determines what constitutes a ' gift ' and what does not .
Consequently , our group has absolutely no hesitation - quite the opposite - in voting in favour of the reinclusion of the Nordmann report on the agenda .
We hope that this report secures the 314 votes required and is adopted during the current part-session .
Madam President , it goes without saying that our group is ready to debate and adopt the Nordmann report .
However , in accordance with the procedural agreement reached by the group chairmen , we wish to vote on the compromise text without amendment .
What has really confused matters is the amendment tabled by members of the PPE Group , in which the possibility of Members of Parliament receiving gifts is recognized .
Let us hope that we have misunderstood it .
In any event , whilst we are in favour of the Nordmann report being debated , we shall refuse to allow the fundamental nature of the report and its conclusions to be changed by such amendments , which ultimately recognize the possibility of Members receiving gifts - which is not what my group wishes at all .
Matters must be made clear , and not complicated by last-minute amendments .
Madam President , the rapporteur wishes his report to be reincluded on the agenda , not from personal vanity , but in the firm belief that postponing the debate on the report again would give the impression that the European Parliament is incapable of amending its Rules of Procedure to ensure the increased transparency that is essential .
Consequently , I should like to indicate my personal readiness to work for a compromise .
In the Rules Committee , we made progress towards a consensus .
And we did so whilst remaining faithful to the guidelines drawn up by the working party set up for this purpose .
The amendment , or compromise , referred to by Mr Martens implies either that new amendments will be tabled , or that a compromise formula will be proposed to the House in the form of an oral amendment at the time of the vote on Wednesday , if the report is replaced on the agenda .
I believe that the correct procedure is to agree on a text which will secure an absolute majority of 314 votes .
This implies that the text should conform to the spirit of the working party 's conclusions : in other words , restoration of the ban on gifts and benefits , and provision for referral to the Bureau - if necessary - of the detailed points of implementation to which these rules may give rise .
However , this provision for referral to the Bureau must not seem to negate immediately what has just been adopted .
This , Madam President , is the spirit in which the rapporteur wishes to continue his work - with total readiness , I repeat , to reach a compromise , and recalling the words of France 's most radical-socialist king : ' Paris is certainly worth a mass ' .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
Madam President , I think that all Members will have read in their respective national presses the decision by the US administration to ban from American soil a Canadian company in application of the Helms-Burton Act reinforcing the embargo against Cuba .
I think that this decision , apart from the protests which it has led to , could also affect large numbers of European companies . May I remind you that 45 % of trade with Cuba is carried out by European companies .
I think that at various times we , in the European Parliament , have already demonstrated against the embargo on Cuba and all measures taken to enforce that embargo , both the Torricelli Act and the Helms-Burton Act . I think that once again we cannot stand by without reacting against this measure by the United States .
Of course , the Council is meeting today , Monday , and is examining this situation and I would like to draw their attention to this novelty , as we might say . I therefore think that on behalf of my group it would be important to introduce a Council declaration on this matter .
I know that our agenda for today 's business is extremely overloaded . But I do think that we should do all we can and should call upon the Council to make this matter a special priority .
If we leave this until later on , our September part-session , for example , we might miss the opportunity of getting the Council to do something .
That is why I do not think that we can leave this matter until later on .
Would you agree , Mr Novo , to this important question being covered in the statement by the presidency on its programme , or do you wish to have a separate statement ?
Madam President , I think that our group could accept this suggestion by the presidency as long as the Council declares at this time that it will include this matter in the discussions for Wednesday .
If that is the case I am entirely in favour but if it is not I think that we should deal with the question as a separate issue .
Madam President , to be quite honest , this is because Mr Galeote has an unexpected and very urgent engagement elsewhere .
As you know , Mr Martens , it is possible for rapporteurs to arrange deputies for themselves .
Madam President , I would ask the House to accept Mr Galeote 's apologies .
His engagement is something which has come up quite unexpectedly .
We would therefore ask that the item be removed from the agenda or postponed .
Madam President , if the PPE Group were really so interested in postponing this report , it would present its reasons to the House .
As we do not know its reasons , my group will vote against the request .
Madam President , I am in favour of it being postponed , provided it comes back on a Friday morning as the last item on the agenda !
( Parliament decided to keep the report on the agenda )
Madam President , I wanted to raise something on Tuesday 's agenda - not to change the agenda but to ask for clarification from you .
We have the discussion on Tuesday morning on the Commission 's information policy regarding BSE ( mad cow disease ) .
There was an absolute demand from the Conference of Presidents that Mr Santer himself should address the plenary on this matter because this is not an issue for the agriculture Commissioner but concerns the Commission policy on information .
Could you please inform us whether it will be Mr Santer ?

I can tell you straight away , Mrs Green , that in view of the importance of this issue , which we all appreciate , both Mr Santer and Mr Fischler will be present .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome a delegation from the Japanese Diet , who have taken their seats in the Official Gallery .
( Loud applause ) This delegation consists of members of the House of Representatives and the House of Councillors , and is led by the former Prime Minister of Japan , Mr Tsutomu Hata .
Our Japanese colleagues , who have our warmest greetings , are in Strasbourg today to take part in the seventeenth interparliamentary meeting between the European Parliament and Japan , co-chaired by Mr Bertel Haarder , chairman of the European Parliament delegation .
On behalf of all Members of the House , I sincerely welcome you to the European Parliament , and I hope that our work together will be extremely successful .
( Applause )
Major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0224 / 96 ) from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council ( C40222 / 96-94 / 0014 ( SYN ) ) with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive on the control of major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances ( rapporteur : Mr Bowe ) .
Madam President , before I begin I should like to say that I come here as the rapporteur on this report at second reading .
I took it over at the beginning of this Parliament , a lot of the work on it having already been done by a colleague of mine , Claude Delcroix .
Before I go on to talk about it , I should just like to express my thanks for the work that was done by Mr Delcroix in the last Parliament and say that a great deal of the work that I offer you today and that Parliament has done was achieved under his guidance .
We owe him a debt of gratitude .
We have in front of us a directive up for a third revision , it having been thought necessary to review it in the light of experience , technical progress and operating knowledge .
We should not underestimate just how important this directive is .
Far too often many of the installations which this directive is designed to safeguard , operate quietly and unobtrusively without people realizing the great dangers that they pose .
It is only when something goes dramatically wrong - serious explosions or fires and people injured or killed - that we realize how important this legislation is to ensure the safety of the people of Europe and that our industry can operate not just economically and profitably but also safely .
The common position before us today is generally one which Parliament would agree with .
It does not alter the general structures of the proposal .
In fact it has certainly been improved by the addition of some of Parliament 's amendments from first reading .
But there are some areas where we believe that acceptance of some more of Parliament 's amendments might improve the text further .
We therefore offer the Council and the Commission second reading amendments to make improvements in the following areas .
Firstly , we object to the scope of the directive being diminished by granting exemptions from obligations such as the safety report , the emergency plans and the provision of information to the public .
We feel that seriously weakens the directive and should be improved .
Secondly , we are concerned that certain installations are excluded from the directive , particularly military establishments , land-fill sites and certain intermediate storage areas such as those in rail depots , docks and other places .
We feel further work should be done in that area .
Thirdly , we feel that there is a lack of clarity with regard to the time limits to conform with the provisions of this directive and that insufficiently binding obligations are placed upon certain operators to ensure that they are fully adhering to the provisions of this directive within appropriate time-scales .
In addition , there is the issue of land-use planning .
As a principle , this has been weakened within the directive as compared with first reading , just when the problems of urban sprawl and the growth of cities around these dangerous and hazardous sites are becoming acute .
We feel it is important that we , the Council and the Commission go back and re-examine these issues and ensure that the ordinary development of cities and towns does not threaten or create new dangers .
It is also essential that there is proper public participation and that the public is informed and given full information about the planning and licensing procedures for these sites and for new installations in particular .
We placed particular emphasis on this at first reading and we do not feel that enough of our concerns have been taken up by the Commission and the Council so far within the proposal .
There are a number of other technical issues with regard to harmonization of certain reporting criteria and harmonization of certain aspects of the inspection of these installations .
However , we recognize that this is the kind of legislation which grows incrementally , as it is now moving on to its third reading .
It is legislation which grows as we learn of the greater dangers that are occurring around us , and which we would expect to see grow , perhaps as a result of future revision in years to come .
However , that does not in any way exempt the Commission or the Council from guaranteeing the safety of the people living around these dangerous chemical sites and other dangerous , large installations that have the potential to create such cataclysmic damage .
We would therefore appeal to the Commission and the Council to examine again this proposal and take on board more of Parliament 's amendments to ensure that we continue to lead the world .
We have been leading the world and are proud to lead the world in chemical plant safety and protecting public health and the safety of our citizens .
We feel that is what should be being done now and into the next century .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we recently celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the Seveso disaster .
This major accident occurred in 1976 .
Since 1982 , there has been legislation in the European Union on the major-accident hazards of certain industrial activities . Minor amendments to this legislation were made in 1987 and 1988 .
As the Commission has ascertained , the provisions of this legislation - especially as regards the technical aspects , the prevention and tackling of accidents , and emergency plans - have proved very successful .
Nevertheless , they have not managed to prevent some 130 accidents from occurring since 1982 .
In the past , the legislation has affected some 1866 undertakings .
Following repeated requests from Parliament and the Council , technical progress and the benefits of more than ten years ' experience of the existing legislation have led to the submission of the text that we are discussing today at second reading .
It is not simply a question of the revision of the 1982 directive but , in substantial areas , of a completely new directive , as well as an entirely new approach .
Mr Bowe , as rapporteur , has already said something on this point .
In our view , the protection of people and the environment in the vicinity of potentially dangerous installations must be improved further .
The top priorities are to prevent major accidents involving dangerous substances and , should such an accident occur , to limit its consequences for people and the environment .
Our group supports this goal fully and absolutely .
However , I have doubts that we are achieving it .
These doubts are fed by the hitherto inadequate level of transposition and implementation of the directive in the Member States , as well as by certain basic considerations .
I believe that it is important to bring this directive into line with other legislation on the same subjects .
I therefore welcome the fact that , in its common position , the Council has finally taken on board some of the criticisms repeatedly made by Parliament - and , in particular , my group - in the sense that the content in at least some of the areas been brought into line with the provisions of existing directives .
This includes the definition concerning the IPPC directive .
Also in line with the IPPC directive , requirements for operators to provide information have been introduced .
The rules concerning the provision of information have been brought into line with those contained in the existing directive on free access to information on the environment .
My group is therefore opposed to some of the amendments which have been tabled , which might call this consistency into question .
However , the main problem concerns the following : as yet , the Commission has failed to submit to Parliament appropriate proposals for the annexes , although , according to Article 9 regarding the security reports to be drawn up , these criteria have to be established .
I regret the fact that they have not been submitted on time .
I questioned the Commission on this matter in committee , but I did not receive a reply .
Parliament and the Council are excluded from this decision : it is a matter for the Commission alone .
I therefore greatly regret the fact that Parliament has not been included in this regard .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , after seventeen months , the proposal for a directive concerning the revision of Directive 82 / 501 , the so-called Seveso Directive , on the major-accident hazards of certain industrial activities , has returned to the House for second reading .
We can only welcome the common position adopted by the Council , in that it reflects the basic thrust of the proposals made by Parliament at first reading , striking a satisfactory balance .
Certain aspects could of course be developed further , especially those relating to the definition , at Community level , of the essential provisions to which inspection systems adopted by the Member States must conform , and to the adoption by the Member States of the measures needed to ensure adequate training for those who draw up external emergency plans , those who take decisions in the case of serious accidents , and for workers , contractors and subcontractors at high-risk establishments .
Despite agreeing on the need to define the concept of major-accident hazard , for which there still exists no definition , we do not regard the rapporteur 's proposal as satisfactory ; moreover , we are strongly opposed to the inclusion of military establishments in the scope of this legislation which , it should be remembered , must respect the principle of subsidiarity .
What is more , the rigid timescales proposed in the amendments rejected by the Council could hamper industrial activity and production still further , without achieving the desired results .
Lastly , I believe that this directive must be finalized and implemented in the Member States as soon as possible , in order to improve the systems available to industry and to the competent authorities - limiting the risk of accident hazards and simplifying the criteria for implementation - thereby making it more responsive to industrial change .
Madam President , at one time it would have taken a major disaster like Bhopal or Basle for this directive to be amended , but this time , I am glad to say , the revision is not the result of any serious accident .
I think the Commission 's proposal is sound , but there is still room for improvement , and it is now up to Parliament to put forward amendments to consolidate it .
Having heard what the rapporteur has had to say , not just today but over recent months , I can tell you that the Liberals will support all the amendments he has proposed .
I shall not go through them all , particularly on such a hot afternoon , but I would like to mention nuclear and military installations and storage facilities .
The Liberals feel that it can only improve public safety if such installations are covered by the directive , and I therefore do not understand why Mrs Baldi says that for reasons of subsidiarity , military installations should not be covered , since they face the same risks as similar civilian installations .
It seems inconceivable to me that the second should be covered , but not the first .
And if we look at nuclear power plants , it is clear that although radioactive hazards are already regulated by the Euratom Treaty , the other hazardous substances found at nuclear installations need to be covered by the directive for the sake of public safety .
We are therefore happy to vote for the amendments , and we would ask the Commission to support them , since they are designed solely to provide better protection for the public against the risks presented by concentrations of dangerous substances , particularly in urban areas .
Mr President , I support Mr Bowe and his report and the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I totally disagree with Mrs Baldi .
It would appear that she is basically a spokesperson for the military and for industry .
Parliament has a duty to support what the Environment Committee is proposing .
It has a duty to increase the safety of citizens facing dangers posed by the concentration of hazardous substances in the atmosphere , particularly in urban areas .
Parliament 's duty should first and foremost be to the citizens , not to industry or the military .
I support most of what other speakers have said regarding the twenty years since Seveso and also what have we learned from the Sandoz disaster .
It is completely unacceptable that the military or landfill or any of these things should be exempt .
Also , I would support Mr Bowe on public participation .
That is vital .
I come from Ireland where a recently published report by the Cork University Hospital - one of the two centres designated for treating victims of nuclear and chemical accidents - stated that there are no facilities presently available to enable it to fulfil this role .
Basically , Ireland is very ill equipped for dealing with major accidents in the chemicals industry .
It is lax in the extreme that the hospital which is located near the biggest concentration of chemicals factories in Ireland has no decontamination unit for treating chemicals workers or members of the public who fall victim to major accidents .
In 1993 a fire in the Hickson plant in Cork raised public awareness about the threat from the chemicals industry but no lessons have been learnt by the Irish authorities since then .
The authorities have been reckless in allowing the Norwegian multinational , Dinochem , to start construction of a glue manufacturing plant at Marino Point .
14 , 000 people live on the nearby island , and if there were to be a major accident , their only point of exit would be a bridge which is only 300 metres from the new plant .
In such an event the possibility of so many people being marooned is alarming .
There is already a need for EU legislation to make Member States take account of the need for the adequate separation of plants posing major hazards from population centres .
The Irish authorities decided to play with fire when they set out to encourage industrial development by multinational chemicals companies in Ireland without looking at the long-term consequences .
Mr Bowe has said that it is essential that the public should participate and also that there should be proper training .
Most accidents occur as a result of human error .
It is extremely important that emphasis be put on public training .
Parliament should support what the Environment Committee is putting forward .
It is our duty to put citizens ' interests first and not the interests of industry or chemicals companies .
People must come first !
If you look at what happened at Bhopal in India , people are still suffering .
They have received no compensation .
What has happened to those people ?
Mr President , Parliament may remember that I tried to get an exemption for whisky bonds - almost all of which are in fields away from residences , though there are some older , smaller ones nearer residences - but I was not successful .
I have never really been able to regard whisky as a dangerous chemical .
Perhaps I am a little prejudiced , representing as I do almost all the Scotch whisky in the world .
But I am happy to say there is an exemption for part of the procedural arrangements .
There is nothing more secure than a whisky bond for the reason that it is guarded by the police because of the tax value of the whisky in the bond .
It is a bit like going to Fort Knox to go to visit a whisky bond .
So I am happy that there has been at least part exemption .
Mr President , the Council adopted its common position unanimously , and incorporated a considerable number of amendments from the first reading .
This is extremely good news .
It was noticeable that the Commission initially refused to support some of the amendments which the Council accepted , but in any event the common position now before us is a considerable improvement on what we had before .
The remaining points need not , in my view , present any insuperable problems for the Commission or the Council .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the way he has handled this whole issue .
His amendments have always taken a very clear direction , focusing firmly on safety and openness , and it seems likely that the new Seveso Directive will be a clear and easily implemented piece of legislation .
The protection of workers and the public in general is important enough to warrant legislation of the very highest quality .
I know that industrial safety is primarily the responsibility of the firms concerned , but there is still a need for a clear legal framework .
We know that 90 % of serious accidents are the result of human error , so internal safety measures and worker training in firms are of vital importance .
At first reading , Parliament adopted an amendment on compulsory information , training and equipment for workers , and I regret that this amendment has not been incorporated into the common position .
Can the Commission explain why it did not include this amendment ?
Many chemical firms already regard training , refresher courses and fire drills as important , but there are still far too many others which do not , and these are the ones that need to be put under a legal obligation .
Loss of concentration , the gradual decline into lazy habits and becoming inured to dangerous situations are risks that workers face every day .
One final point : there have been complaints that extending the scope of the obligations in the directive will impose too great a burden on industry , out of all proportion to the gains in safety .
I should like to hear what the Commission thinks about this .
Do we know how great this extra burden will be ?
Mr President , the major accidents which have occurred in recent years have demonstrated the threat posed to human society by certain essential but dangerous industrial plants if stringent operational safety measures and accident contingency plans are not in place .
To allow any recurrence of accidents like those at Chernobyl and Seveso would be unthinkable .
This directive has as its specific objective the control of major accident hazards involving dangerous substances produced and used at industrial installations . It will replace Directive 82 / 501 , also known as the Seveso directive .
That directive was adopted in 1982 following a series of accidents involving dangerous substances and was amended following two major accidents , namely the one at Bhopal and the one at Basle which polluted the Rhine .
Fourteen years on from the introduction of the directive , the wealth of experience acquired in the interim had to be incorporated into the legislation .
This present directive draws on that more recently acquired knowledge and experience to provide a more effective future approach to major accidents involving dangerous substances .
Speaking now , in this place also , I should like to stress the importance of the register of all accidents involving dangerous substances and the exchange of information at the European level .
That is a vital element of this new directive , because the exchange of information , the general provision of information and the periodic review of the safety reports will facilitate an ongoing process of adjustment .
Also important is our amendment defining the ' almost major accident ' concept : that is to say , a major accident avoided owing to an intervention , whether or not planned in advance , or owing to a chance coincidence , the result of which was that the major accident did not occur .
In our view , the registering of almost major accidents will provide important information which can further the cause of safety , for the simple reason that almost major accidents are more numerous than those which actually occur .
In concluding , Mr President , I should like to commend the important work done by Mr Bowe and to urge the Commission to accept the amendments of the Committee on the Environment and Public Health , including those which introduce the concept of a near major accident , which were approved unanimously .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking the Environment Committee and in particular its rapporteur , Mr Bowe , for the effort and attention which they have devoted to this proposal .
This is a directive which has a serious background and is of great importance for the public and the environment , as the majority of speakers have emphasized .
So there is no doubt that we are dealing here with a valuable proposal which gives the EU 's citizens a guarantee that their safety is being ensured as far as possible .
The proposed changes we are considering today are the result of a radical overhaul of the directive , as Mrs Schleicher also pointed out , and are based on the experience gained from the existing directive .
The changes build on the principles which are already contained in the directive , but a number of important key areas have been extended and strengthened .
These are concerned with land-use planning , safety monitoring systems , to a large extent freedom of access to information and public participation , and improving continuity in the implementation of the directive .
I also have the impression after the debate today that , as regards the Seveso Directive and this amendment to it , Parliament and the Commission essentially agree on the political commitments which the directive represents , namely to increase the safety of the public and the environment where they are exposed to the risks associated with dangerous substances .
We have the same goals in this respect .
I shall now discuss the amendments which have been tabled and indicate the Commission 's position on each of them .
Many of the amendments improve the quality and clarity of the proposal , and the Commission can accept the following either wholly or in principle : Nos 1 , 4 , 5 , 10 . 11 , 13 , 25 , 27 33 , 37 , 39 , 40 , 42 , 44 and 45 .
Amendments Nos 2 , 29 , 30 and 32 can also be accepted in part .
However , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 12 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 28 , 31 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 38 , 41 and 43 .
It has been pointed out that six of the amendments tabled express concern at the number of exemptions from the directive .
I feel that these are entirely relevant concerns , and the Commission is trying as far as possible to meet them .
The Commission is thus giving priority to activities which are in progress in this area .
We have already begun a detailed study of pipelines , with regard to Amendment No 2 , and of temporary storage in connection with transport operations , with regard to Amendment No 17 , and we shall if necessary bring forward specific proposals for these areas , as was also indicated in the debate at first reading .
Amendment No 15 concerns the exclusion of military establishments , and both the rapporteur and several other speakers referred to this question .
I can appreciate Parliament 's concern , but this matter does not fall within the area of competence of the Community .
Amendments Nos 3 and 18 are aimed at bringing land-fills , i.e. waste disposal sites , within the scope of the directive .
The Commission entirely agrees that there is a need for Community legislation on land-fills , and we are therefore in the process of drawing up a new proposal on waste disposal sites .
It was also pointed out that seven amendments deal with the need to include so-called ' near misses ' in the directive .
These are already covered by Annex VI of the common position , but a number of these amendments have been accepted because they further improve the protection in this important area .
As regards Amendments Nos 1 and 42 , and in the light of the discussions which have taken place with the Environment Committee on the importance of effective cooperation with third countries outside the EU in terms of information exchange and warning systems , the Commission can accept these amendments in principle .
It is recognized in this context that the UNECE convention on transboundary pollution is particularly relevant , and the Commission will try to put forward a more detailed text in the proposal after second reading , in order to reflect Parliament 's concerns appropriately .
Mrs Schleicher asked me a question concerning the annex to the directive on harmonized criteria , and here I would like to stress that , in the Commission 's view , it is necessary to set up special groups of experts to compile suitable particulars for harmonized criteria .
The most appropriate and effective way of establishing such criteria is through the committee procedure laid down in the existing directive .
This approach has already proved its worth in the production of guidelines in various sectors , including accident analysis , safety reports and safety management systems .
In conclusion , I would say that the amendments which have been accepted will further improve this proposal .
And I am sure that all of us can look forward to this proposal increasing the protection we provide for both people and the environment against the dangers of major accidents which could have disastrous consequences .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Water , energy , transport and telecommunications markets
The next item is the report ( A4-0022 / 96 ) by Mr Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 93 / 38 / EEC coordinating the procurement procedures of entities operating in the water , energy , transport and telecommunications sectors ( COM ( 95 ) 0107 - C4-0162 / 95-95 / 0080 ( COD ) )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the second time , Parliament is debating the Commission proposal amending the sectoral directive .
The starting point for this proposal was the first GATT Agreement on Government Procurement , which the European Union signed at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round .
The aim of that agreement is the increased liberalization and expansion of world trade .
The new agreement goes much further than the previous procurement agreement and encompasses contracts which , according to the Commission , will be worth some ECU 350 billion a year .
Parliament very much welcomes this agreement .
However , the Commission itself stresses in its proposal that amendments to Community law are not necessarily essential for the implementation of the agreement by the European Union .
An extensive debate has developed between , on the one hand , the European Parliament and , on the other , the industries concerned and the Commission , on the question of the extent to which the existing EU sectoral directive will have to be amended as a consequence of the new WTO agreement . Today , at the end of that debate , Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is submitting to the House an almost unanimous recommendation to reject the Commission proposal at first reading .
For over a year now , in a series of discussions with the Commission - but also following a hearing of the business associations concerned - Parliament has been striving to achieve a reasonable compromise .
I am personally grateful to Commissioner Monti for repeatedly stressing the Commission 's readiness - as regards any differences of opinion between Parliament and the Commission - to study Parliament 's arguments concerning the content of the proposal .
We only wish to see new legislation in the problem areas - such as threshold values , which must be adjusted - in which this is urgently necessary .
We do not wish to see a comprehensive modification of the procurement directive which goes beyond the WTO agreement , especially as regards those sectors which are not covered by that international agreement , such as telecommunications .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy reached an agreement with Mr Monti that the Commission would endeavour to withdraw its proposal and submit a new proposal to the Council and Parliament .
We are convinced that this is the only way to ensure that Parliament 's proposals are adequately taken into account in the subsequent discussions .
Mr Monti declared his willingness to support Parliament 's position in this respect , as well as on the essential issues of content .
For procedural reasons , however , he was unable to secure a majority for this position in the Commission .
We are therefore more or less obliged to reject this draft directive today , so that in the autumn , following the conclusion of this stage of the procedure , the Commission can submit a new , modified proposal to which Parliament has largely agreed in advance .
The discussions in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy pursuant to Rule 59 did not bring any new findings to light . Consequently , the committee is resubmitting today the report that has been on the table since 24 January 1996 , when it was adopted by 47 votes to 1 .
There are differences of opinion - and a need for discussion - particularly with regard to the so-called ' technical dialogue ' in the case of complex and technically demanding procurement plans .
Parliament is opposed to the idea of undertakings which are involved in the preliminary stages of an invitation to tender - helping to draw up complex technical specifications - subsequently being prohibited from bidding for the specific contract .
In our view , this will result in a significant restriction of technological progress , thereby leading to considerable competitive disadvantages for European industry , to which the directive applies .
We take the view that the procedure adopted hitherto in this respect has proved its worth .
Transposition of the GPA is of far-reaching importance for the competitive position of European industry .
This is particularly true of the high-tech areas of the sectoral directive , where in order to secure its future as a strong global player , the European Community must remain competitive when markets are opened up .
Administrative considerations such as the appropriate form of transposition , or other more or less formal legalistic arguments , should therefore not be a decisive factor in the transposition of the GPA into European legislation .
In our opinion , what is important is to maintain strict reciprocity , as called for by Parliament a few months ago in its resolution on the G7 conference .
To ensure the appropriate transparency , the GPA should therefore be transposed through a supplementary directive which will contain the exceptions and special arrangements and will refer to the existing EU directives on public tendering .
We are trusting in the good sense of the Commission as a collegiate body , as well as in the promises that Mr Monti has given us .

I should like to take this opportunity to thank Commissioner Monti for his constant readiness for dialogue , and thank my colleagues in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy for an excellent joint discussion of this draft directive . I hope that we shall be able to conclude the discussions and bring about the appropriate transposition of the GPA before too long .
I would like to thank my colleague Dr Langen for all the hard work that he has put in on this issue and I think I can say on behalf of the Socialist Group that there has been a genuine bipartisan approach to this subject .
The effects of implementing the proposals contained in this Commission document will be immense .
Every company which deals with contracting entities in any of the utilities sectors will have to adjust its working practices to conform with the rules that we impose upon them .
Before we do that , we have a duty to ensure that those rules are necessary , will work to enhance European business 's rights and opportunities , and will serve their part in the opening up of global markets in our fight to improve employment and to create a level playing field .
Even though this is an internal directive , it cannot be taken in isolation , just as the EU cannot be taken in isolation .
The fact that these proposals are being introduced to eliminate disadvantages created by the implementation of the GPA demonstrates how we are all intertwined .
So to evaluate these proposals as a whole , we should look at what we are competing against , to see what practice , or what common practice there is in the market-place .
When we look at our major rivals - firstly Japan - the Japanese are making no attempt to draw up similar legislation to that put forward by the Commission .
The United States - not only have the United States failed to introduce internal legislation to bring their home market in line with the GPA they have not even introduced the GPA itself , and what is more they do not have any intention of so doing before the election of this year , if at all .
Secondly with regard to the United States : not only have they failed to introduce internal legislation to bring their market into line with the GPA , they have failed to eliminate the ' Buy American ' Act .
More than two years ago they promised to do this , yet there has been no action .
They have had rulings in their courts that no foreign legislation can take precedent over domestic legislation , which legitimizes their protectionist trade regime .
Now with the Helms-Burton Bill , we even have the American Government taking non-American companies to court over trading with Cuba .
We do not condone this ; we call on the Commission to actively pursue these matters and insist on the full implementation of all agreements signed at international level .
We want internal legislation to eliminate disadvantages , albeit minor ones of threshold levels created by the GPA , and to set up controls to safeguard EU citizens and businesses against corruption in the awarding of government contracts .
This is very important because taxpayers ' money is involved here .
We also need to ensure that , whatever measures are put in place , our businesses will be left as competitive as possible , both domestically and in terms of overseas competition .
The problem is that at the moment we simply do not know what the right practices are .
Representatives of all sectors of industry have indicated , at a public hearing , that they see huge problems with the Commission proposals .
Unlike the Commission they did not consider these proposals as benefits but burdens , they were unanimous in their opposition .
We have asked the Commission on more than one occasion to supply information on the practical effects of their proposals , they have not so done .
I ask the Commission again , let us have studied consideration of the effects of each of the measures you wish to implement .
Let us have costings .
Let us have justifications .
Let us consult on this .
The Union pays out a fortune on studies every year .
If ever there was a clear case for a study there is a case for one on public procurement .
We have heard much from the Commission on the distortions in the internal market caused by bringing some sectors into the scope of the directive and leaving others out .
That is one question .
Another is that by changing the status of sectors , do we not distort the existing market ?
The Commission has also proposed to bring the private sector within the scope of Directive 93 / 38 / EEC : effectively in line with the GPA even though the private sector is excluded from the GPA .
Does the Commission expect companies to run two systems , one for internal transactions and one for external , thereby increasing costs ?
We have been told the Commission has a legal obligation to press ahead with this legislation .
We do not know whether this is true .
There is no proof that this has been put before the committee despite repeated requests on our behalf .
We in the Parliament need to be cautious .
We are dealing with matters which may be simple on paper yet have important implications for jobs .
What we need is time .
We have time to get this directive right because it does not have to be implemented until 1998 .
I would ask the Commission to listen to the concerns of Parliament and industry and let us have a new directive , then we can report on it , give our response and pass it through Parliament quickly .
The Commission knows what we want and we can act fairly and effectively and as quickly as possible when we get that proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group will be following the advice of Mr Langen , rapporteur for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Indeed , the Union for Europe Group cannot accept the manner in which the Commission has interpreted the content of the GATT agreements .
What is fundamentally at issue here ?
The negotiations on the extension of the GATT government procurement regulations of 1980 led to the conclusion , in December 1993 , of the second GATT Agreement on Government Procurement , which forms part of the new WTO accord .
The transposition of the GPA is vitally important to the competitiveness of the European economy .
This observation applies in particular to the high-tech areas of the directive on specific sectors .
In this context , the European Community has a duty - especially when it opens up its markets - to secure its economic future by maintaining its status as a strong and competitive global player .
What is essential , in my view , is to maintain strict reciprocity , as already called for by Parliament - with regard to economic relations with third countries - in its resolution on the G7 conference , and hence to bring out clearly all the special practical features of tenders from GPA third countries .
Since , with the system for which it provides , the proposal under discussion exceeds the scope of the GPA , it must be resolutely rejected .
The Commission is proposing to amend Directive 93 / 38 / EEC in such a way that all the proposed modifications , with the exception of the new statistical requirements , would apply to research and development services , public undertakings , and private undertakings operating on the basis of a special or exclusive right - such as a concession - in all the sectors covered by the directive , including the four referred to , which are not covered by the GPA : gas and heat distribution ; extraction of oil and gas ; transport by railway other than urban railway ; and telecommunications .
The proposed transposition of the GPA by amending the existing directive does not , in practice , make it sufficiently clear which areas are excluded from the GPA or what special features apply to contracts which have to be published and awarded in accordance with the provisions of the GPA .
This was the conclusion of the public hearing of European companies and businesses held by Parliament on 31 October 1995 .
Consequently , if we wish to ensure an adequate degree of transparency , the GPA must be transposed by means of a supplementary directive which will both contain the exceptions and special arrangements and refer to the existing EU directives on public tendering .
In other words , it should be made clear that implementation of the draft directive being proposed by the Commission would amount to granting foreign suppliers - and , above all , US suppliers - total access to the European market , whilst European suppliers would only be able to operate in the US public market .
However , the public market in the United States accounts for only a fraction of the market as a whole .
Mr Langen therefore has our support with regard to this matter .
Mr Monti will have to go back to the drawing-board .
Mr President , it is good that the Commission should be taking a constructive , serious view of the European Parliament 's wish to examine more closely what the implementation of the WTO agreement will mean in practice .
In general , however , the problem is that when market forces are given free rein and when the economy is deregulated the consequences are not necessarily clear at the time when decisions are taken .
It is certainly the case that the WTO agreement has already been ratified and that it is in force , so that , from that point of view , there are no grounds whatever for cherishing hopes of protectionism as practised in the past .
There is , however , every reason to adopt a cautious approach .
The Green Group as well fully supports Mr Langen 's conclusion that the Commission should submit a fresh proposal to Parliament .
It would be appropriate for Commissioner Monti to explain briefly , for example during this debate , on what basis the Commission intends to draw up a fresh proposal .
In that respect , the issues which concern us at least most of all are , firstly , which sectors will ultimately fall outside the scope of this agreement and , secondly , what problems will be caused by the fact that two systems are in force at the same time : the one we are discussing now and the directive by means of which equivalent rules have already been implemented within the European Union .
Moreover , extremely large sums of money are involved : in the context of this agreement , some ECU 350 bn. will change hands around the world each year which will certainly create opportunities for the European Union , but the strict application of the principle of reciprocity is called for , and for that reason , I endorse the previous speaker 's call for a little more time and a little greater clarity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my main observation to the House regarding the Langen report concerns the clarification of the legal scope of the Commission 's proposal .
We are dealing here with two different legal orders : the international agreement on the one hand and the Community directives on the same subject on the other .
In the natural way of things the international agreement regulates relations between the Member States of the European Union and third countries .
The Community directives cover the rules applicable in the Member States .
These directives cannot change the international order ; nor can they confer on suppliers and contractors from outside the European Union rights which operate to the disadvantage of suppliers and contractors in the Member States .
What the Commission has tried to do - and it has done it well - is to adapt the internal law of the Union to the international agreements while ensuring , specifically , that suppliers and contractors in the Member States have at least the same rights as those conferred on suppliers and contractors from third countries by the international treaties .
The argument that the legal order worsens the situation for European businesses is mistaken and groundless , and the argument expressed against the Commission 's proposals by suppliers and contractors should not surprise us .
What else should we expect them to say ?
Mr President , it is well-known that there are many other special problems in the public works and procurement sector .
Corruption is very deeply rooted . We need only think of the ' tangentopoli ' scandal in Italy and of the front page story in the Financial Times a fortnight ago about the arrest in Germany of 15 senior civil servants for allegedly colluding with contractors to defraud the German taxpayer in connection with the construction of the second terminal at Frankfurt airport .
These things are happening all over Europe . In Belgium a general committed suicide some time ago in connection with a similar circumstance .
The Commission 's desire to tighten up the system is laudable .
Its proposal will not , of course , be approved on this occasion , given that the two main groups in the House are recommending rejection , but it should at least be told that many of us consider this an excellent proposal that we can support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Langen , and recalling the context in which we are operating .
The Government Procurement Agreement , the GPA , forms an integral part of the Community 's legal order , following the Council 's decision of 22 December 1994 approving the agreements reached in the Uruguay Round negotiations .
Consequently , the GPA entered into force in the Community on 1 January 1996 , as provided for in its Article XXIV .
Its implementation in the Community does not in itself require any transposition .
The Commission has nevertheless proposed a series of amendments to this directive with a view to avoiding any discrimination against Community firms , granting them the same advantages as those enjoyed by third-country businesses under the GPA , and ensuring that the two legal orders are consistent , thereby simplifying implementation in practice .
It should be made clear that these amendments do not represent a unilateral openingup of Community contracts to third-country businesses .
The GPA governs the relations between the Community and third countries , so the rights of third-country businesses to participate in Community contracts are laid down and circumscribed by the GPA itself .
The Community directives , on the other hand , whether amended or not , govern only intra-Community relations , in other words those between contracting entities and Community firms ; they do not , therefore , grant any rights to third-country businesses .
The purpose of the Commission 's proposal is to guarantee Community businesses equal treatment to that given to businesses from third countries .
Apart from some minor amendments which are purely technical in nature , the Commission has confined itself to proposing amendments to the directive only where this is strictly necessary in order to avoid discrimination against Community firms .
In the present situation , even when Community businesses take part in the same calls for tender as third-country firms , they do not enjoy the same rights and advantages as businesses from third countries which have been signatories to the GPA since 1 January 1996 .
Community firms whose tenders are rejected have no right to be told the reason why , nor to receive information about the relevant features or advantages of the tender which is selected ; they do not have the right of access at all times to qualification systems ; they are not entitled to equal treatment in terms of the technical dialogue ; they do not enjoy the advantages in connection with ways of submitting tenders ; they do not have the benefit of the additional information which must be contained in the periodic indicative announcements ; and they do not have the advantages relating to the terms that apply to the restricted or negotiated procedures .
It may be , for the reasons mentioned by Mr Katiforis , that not all of these points emerged at the hearings .
As things stand , Community businesses do not enjoy these rights and advantages ; the negative consequences for them are obvious and serious .
With this in mind , I regret that our efforts to find a compromise with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs have not resulted in a report enabling us today to discuss the proposal 's merits and any specific amendments to it .
Clearly , however , the directive does need to be amended as soon as possible , so as to restore without delay a level playing field for third-country businesses and Community firms .
These are the main reasons why the Commission is convinced of the need to amend the directive .
Other concerns have emerged in the course of discussion .
As I have already said , and as Mr Langen has been kind enough to acknowledge , the Commission intends to take account of these concerns , and to this end I have made known the details of our proposed amendments to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I can therefore confirm that the Commission intends to present an amended proposal based on the suggestions made in the committee .
In particular , it is a matter of clarifying further still that it is not by virtue of this proposal that thirdcountry firms will have access to public procurement in the Community ; of rewriting the text of the provision on the technical dialogue to make it more flexible ; and of re-examining some of the amendments in order to restrict them as far as possible to the scope of the GPA .
In conclusion , I can summarize my position by saying that I intend to present an amended proposal for a directive , taking account of the concerns expressed in the course of the debate in committee .
I hope that in this way , we shall soon be on the same wavelength as Parliament and thus achieve what I believe we all wish for : the restoration of a level playing field for third-country firms and European businesses , in a context of adequate legal certainty .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Wine products
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0210 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1601 / 91 laying down general rules on the definition , description and presentation of aromatized wines , wine-based aromatized drinks and cocktails aromatized with wine products ( C4-0288 / 96-95 / 0287 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr P. Martin ) .
Mr President , for once , we are able to approve wholeheartedly the Council 's common position , since it incorporates the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading . We pay tribute to the Council for this very wise decision .
Indeed , the Council has understood our concern to expand on the notion of traditional product - something which , in this and other areas , is of crucial importance to ensuring consumer confidence in our excellent quality products .
With regard to wine , aromatized or otherwise , we hope that , with a view to good health , increasing numbers of consumers in all the Member States will consume wine products , which - as we know - have many physiological and organoleptic properties when drunk in moderation . These properties can be summarized as follows : wine is a food ; it is a tonic ; it calms your nerves ; it is a digestive ; it is a diuretic ; it makes good mineral deficiencies ; it is a bactericide and anti-allergic .
It is therefore important to take this opportunity to say that the consumption of wine must be encouraged in all the Member States .
I particularly welcome the fact that the Council accepted our views concerning the definition of ' Glhwein ' , which must not be watered down when it is sold ready-made in bottles with the spices , sugar , and so on , already added .
I have to say that I was surprised to learn that ' Glhwein ' is on offer to the consumer ready-made in this way , with all these ingredients already added , so that all that you have to do is heat it up . Hitherto , I had only ever heard about or consumed freshly made ' Glhwein ' , prepared in accordance with our grandmothers ' traditional recipes .
Things being what they are , it is clearly important to include a definition of ' Glhwein ' in this Community regulation , in order to prevent its manufacturers from selling water instead of wine to the consumer .
I should therefore like to pay tribute to our rapporteur , Mr Martin , for securing such a successful outcome for this draft regulation .
Since the Commissioner is honouring us with his presence , however , I cannot resist taking this opportunity to express my regret at the fact that the Council has not yet established its common position on the reform of the common organization of the wine-growing market , which Parliament dealt with at first reading fourteen months ago .
I hope that the Irish presidency will finally succeed in presenting us with a common position , something which the French , Spanish and Italians - the biggest wine producers in the Community - proved incapable of doing when they held the presidency .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by very sincerely congratulating our colleague , Mr Philippe Armand-Martin , on the magnificent work he has done on this report and that he has already done on other reports , whenever we have debates here on wine .
In our Committee on Agriculture it is always Mr Philippe Martin who deals with this subject and that is because he is the leading authority on the matter .
Once again he has demonstrated that authority which is why his recommendations and proposals , already approved by us in the Committee on Agriculture , were approved in full by the Council . That is why it is not difficult for us to support this joint position given that it is full of common sense and good reason .
I think that wine-based cocktails and drinks aromatized with wine products are now being recognised as traditional in certain markets and for certain consumers .
I think that for this reason this debate is positive since we are speaking about products which guarantee the use of wine and enhance it through a number of derived products .
This is very important as long as the rules of the game are clear in terms of quality and discipline .
I should like to conclude by echoing what Mrs Lulling said . I should like to remind the Commission that three years ago exactly , the Commission - the Commissioner was not in his post at that time but his job was held by his predecessor , Mr Ren Steichen - presented a working or study document on common organisation of the market in wine .
Two years ago there was a respective proposal by the Commission .
In the meantime the European Parliament , 18 months ago , approved a compromise proposal , a very interesting opinion , but the whole matter has been forgotten .
I would like to ask the Commissioner : in which draw is the wine COM ?
I think it would be good for us to discuss this .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , whether it is a matter of the wine-growing sector in particular or agriculture in general , I am committed to defending rural traditions , whilst avoiding the trap of social or economic regression .
As Mrs Lulling indicated a few moments ago , we must welcome the fact that the amendments included in Mr Martin 's report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have been incorporated into the common position .
With regard to aromatized wines - for example ' Glhwein ' , for which the possibility of adding water has been eliminated - our principal demands have been met , notably as regards the requirement of a minimum wine content of 75 % , the use of grape musts , and the need for a clearer classification and definition of products .
I am thinking in particular of ' Fernet Branca ' .
On behalf of my group , I would urge all colleagues to approve this common position , which reflects a consensus in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and which forms part of the efforts to strengthen our European agricultural identity .
Mr President , I also wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Martin , for his report .
Nevertheless , at second reading of this proposal , I should like to make one or two critical comments .
We are discussing aromatized wines , wine-based drinks and wine-product cocktails .
All these terms include the word ' wine ' .
In accordance with all current foodstuffs legislation in Europe , wine is a drink that is produced from the fermentation of fresh grapes .
We must bear in mind that , in using the word wine to describe a composite drink with a minimum wine content of only 75 % - aromatized wine , that is - we are to a certain extent undermining the significance of this natural process , which has been employed by man for over 5500 years .
I believe that we must respond to this situation with clear rules governing descriptions .
When consumers purchase and consume this product , they must be able to recognize clearly that it is a composite drink .
They must be able to trust in the fact that they are not being offered a counterfeit .
I agree with the opinion of previous speakers that we must adopt a common organization of the European wine market and find a joint solution as soon as possible .
I believe that this will make an important contribution to ensuring the confidence of European wine producers and consumers , who have a right to be offered quality products .
Mr President , Sweden is not a wine-producing country but we in Sweden are consumers of the wines and other drinks concerned in this report .
The report deals with definitions , descriptions and presentations of aromatised wines .
The main theme of the report is that traditional methods and traditional products , as defined in the respective Member States , should be respected .
My contribution to the debate concerns precisely this respect for individual Member States ' patterns of production and consumption and for their traditional policies on alcohol , for the two are connected .
They are not the same in northern Europe as in southern Europe .
If we in Sweden and the other Nordic countries respect the traditional methods of production and definition of the wine belt our social policies on alcohol and our stricter rules on the production , import , consumption and sale of alcoholic drinks should also be accorded respect .
I do not believe that it is outside the remit of the report that we should demand respect for our stricter import regulations which limit the amounts which may be imported and for the stricter conditions we impose on the sale of wine , wine-based drinks and other alcohol and the system of selling alcohol only in special establishments - state off-licences - which we have in Sweden .
I also consider it natural to respect the production of agricultural products and drinks in other Member States , on condition that other countries also respect the production , consumption and health policy requirements we have in Sweden , including for example the special provisions on the import of wines and spirits which we have today .
We hope that these rules will continue to apply in the future .
Mr President , this is more than anything a small reminder to the Commission and the Council and I hope that they will take note of the different rules on production and health policy patterns which exist in Europe and in the Member States of the EU and thus be able to see this report as providing support , as a matter of principle , for traditional decisions on rules for the production and consumption of alcohol which will also apply in respect of a country like Sweden .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we discussed the proposal now before the House at first reading , I was able - as you will remember - to accept all the amendments that were tabled .
You will no doubt be aware that they have all been incorporated into the common position established by the Council on 29 April 1996 .
I am pleased to be able to say that we are also in agreement at second reading .
The common position contains only a few new features and makes only a small number of changes , principally of wording .
Parliament was informed of the Commission 's approval of the common position on 23 May 1996 .
I welcome the fact that the unchanged recommendation of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and its rapporteur , Mr Martin , is now before us for second reading .
This should enable the Council to adopt the proposal without delay .
In conclusion , I wish to thank Mr Martin and the Committee on Agriculture for their work , which has made it possible to achieve a rapid solution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Groundhandling at airports
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0229 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive on access to the groundhandling market at Community airports ( C4-0220 / 96-94 / 0325 ( SYN ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Seal ) .
Mr President , I should like to start by saying , as rapporteur , how unacceptable it is to be told on the Friday before the part-session commences that in fact the agenda has been changed on this item and it has been brought forward a day .
It is not just because of my inconvenience , but many people were interested in this particular debate and have made arrangements to be here tomorrow .
It seems to me very unprofessional of Parliament to make changes to the agenda at the last minute when people do not know and cannot change their arrangements .
Having said that , I am extremely disappointed , as rapporteur , at having to recommend to Parliament rejection of this common position .
I and members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism wanted to be positive about this draft directive .
We wanted to improve the service given at airports for passengers , for the airlines , for everybody concerned with airports .
We wanted to improve choice .
We are not against liberalization .
What we wanted was more choice , but choice which maintained safety and security standards for passengers .
None of the committee or Parliament favoured complete deregulation with a free-for-all .
That is why we felt that the Commission draft directive on groundhandling was indeed very poor .
We felt it was incomplete .
We felt it had not evolved from discussion with the interested parties .
In fact , there had been negligible discussion with the interested parties , as I found when I started to meet them as rapporteur .
I would like to compliment the members of the Transport Committee who worked on this report .
They worked hard to change that draft directive ; to change it into something that was acceptable and something that would work .
We spent a lot of time doing that .
As rapporteur I was very proud of the result .
The amended draft directive was then accepted by all the parties : the airlines , the airports , the independent groundhandlers , the trade unions .
Everyone felt that the amended directive was then acceptable .
So what happened with the Council ?
The Council then used an approach which I am afraid is becoming all too common .
Not only did it reject most of our amendments , but its approach to Parliament was very much ' take it , or leave it ' ; a very high-handed approach that it has also used on the trans-European networks and it intends to use on the environment .
There was no discussion .
Certainly , although this is a cooperation procedure , the Council would not even agree to informal talks with Parliament .
And so what have we got ?
Because of this we have a common position that is totally unacceptable .
It is totally unacceptable to everyone , even to Mr Jarzembowski , who seems to have done a U-turn on this at the last moment !
Let me point out to you , Mr Jarzembowski , as well as everyone else , that the independent groundhandlers find it unacceptable .
They want rejection . They do not want a ' Big Bang ' change and they do not want existing contracts to be dropped , but that is what it says in the common position .
The airlines are not happy .
They want rejection .
Even in the United Kingdom , to my amazement , British Airways and British Midland both feel that this common position should be rejected and have asked Members to do that .
The airports are not happy with the common position .
Not only does it remove much of their authority , but it will not allow them to manage in the way they need to manage as airports .
I am afraid that the airports , however , are worried about a much tougher stance by the Commission if this is rejected .
I certainly hope - and I say this to the Commissioner who has now arrived - they do not try to bypass Parliament if this common position is rejected .
Finally regarding the workforce .
The workforce is extremely unhappy with the common position .
It too feels that Parliament ought to reject it .
The user committee has been emasculated and the social safeguards that Parliament felt it very important to insert in the draft directive have been mostly ignored .
Let me say also that the customers are not happy .
I believe that , if they knew about the compromise on safety and security , the customers would be extremely unhappy indeed .
In Parliament , we too should be very unhappy because not only were there not any informal discussions , but certainly as far as the Council is concerned , it wants to bypass Parliament and set up a completely different advisory body .
It is entering into comitology and that is something that we certainly cannot allow .
I feel that Parliament is willing to have more competition , it is willing to give more choice , but it is not willing to tolerate this unacceptable approach that has been put forward to us by the Council .
I urge Parliament to reject this common position .
Mr President , as the rapporteur said , this issue of groundhandling has been a long-running saga and , in fact , was initiated by the airlines themselves .
When the committee of experts reported back it could only provide a majority report .
There was not unanimity in their particular report .
I appreciate the difficulty for the Commissioner because this is something that he inherited rather than instigated but I would have to support the rapporteur 's view that there is something gravely wrong with the position which has been agreed at the Council of Ministers .
The PES does not object to competition at airports in the area of groundhandling nor does it oppose liberalization just for the sake of it .
But we believe that where there is liberalization there are certain matters that have to be taken into account .
In this particular area of groundhandling , airports in peripheral areas , airports with seasonal traffic , and the social consequences to jobs and the conditions of services and safety , have to be paramount when deciding any legislation .
Parliament recognized these problems at the first reading and amended the proposal accordingly , particularly in the area of social protection .
However , the Council chose to ignore Parliament 's view and agreed a common position that is unacceptable and something of a dog 's breakfast .
It is very difficult to find anybody who actually agrees or likes this particular common position with the exception of the group opposite .
Member States , whose common position it is , even had the nerve to approach Members to see if they could slip in amendments to make it better .
So what have we got with this common position ?
We have something that the airports do not like ; we have something , as the rapporteur has mentioned , that airlines do not like - and remember they are the ones that initiated the whole procedure ; we have something that refuellers and groundhandlers do not like ; we have something that trade unions do not like ; and we even have something that some Member States do not like .
So one has to pose the question in those circumstances : if there are so many people who do not like this particular groundhandling common position , why should we as a party vote for it .
It appears to my group that only one course of action is open and that is rejection .
I remember as a teacher , if a child produced work that was totally wrong , inappropriate or not on the task , then you would try and help them , but you would write at the bottom ' Start again and try and answer the question ' .
These are words , I believe , that should be placed at the bottom of the Council 's common position .
My group supports the recommendation for rejection that has been put forward by the Committee on Transport and Tourism through its rapporteur .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I think you need to have a word with your British Labour colleagues on this occasion .
I should simply like to say that , as the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy unanimously sought to ensure , the Council 's common position proposes a cautious - in some areas even limited - opening-up of access to the groundhandling market at Community airports : in the case of self-handling , from 1998 ; and in the case of third-party handling , from 1999 , with transitional arrangements until 2002 .
Mr Simpson , Mr Seal , I cannot understand you at all !
Naturally , I encountered the same problems : neither the airports nor the airlines were very happy with the proposal .
They all said , however , that some kind of regulation is better than none .
I can only say , therefore , that you are being unrealistic !
Without a common directive , both airports and the airlines would be totally at the mercy , so to speak , of Mr Van Miert and his officials , since then only the possibility of individual legal actions pursuant to Articles 85 and 86 would exist .
I therefore support Commissioner Kinnock 's call for the introduction of basic rules enabling airports and the airlines to adapt to the emerging legal framework and achieve security of planning - and this also applies to the workforce , Mr Simpson and Mr Seal , because employees also have to know which way the wind is blowing .
As Christian Democrats , we are in favour of the liberalization of groundhandling services .
Commissioner , perhaps you could give your Labour colleagues an individual tutorial on this matter !
I should like to indicate that , in my view , the Council 's liberalization proposal represents a fair compromise between partly complementary and partly contradictory objectives .
Those objectives include : the efficient use of airport installations through the existence of competition rather than monopolies ; efficient , economic management by the airport undertaking , if necessary - and here I agree with my colleague , Mr Mann , of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment - with provision for socially acceptable adaptation measures ; fair market-access opportunities for new groundhandling undertakings ; most importantly , the possibility of airlines being able to choose whether to perform their own handling services or have them performed by the airport undertaking - as hitherto - or third parties ; and , finally , high safety standards at airports .
And I have the feeling , Mr Seal and Mr Simpson , that you forget that the objective is also to ensure the best possible service for passengers - since airports exist not for the benefit of the airlines , but for the benefit of passengers .
Sensible liberalization , therefore , is what we must strive to achieve .
Of course , there are a number of points with which we are not happy , and I hope that the Commission will take up the amendments that we adopt in tomorrow 's vote .
For example , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is calling for the exemptions provided for under Article 9 to be extended to include a special derogation for cases in which the managing body of an airport can show that further extension of the airport is not possible for relevant , objective and transparent reasons .
As regards the choice of service providers , I think the major airlines should not be discriminated against : they must also have fair market-access opportunities .
It should be made clear , moreover - and here I agree with Mr Seal - that this liberalization directive must not lead to new market restrictions or interfere with existing contracts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I believe that this is a reasonably balanced compromise , and that if nobody is entirely satisfied or dissatisfied with it , then it is a good compromise which we should approve !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow , in approving - with amendments - the Council 's common position , or rejecting it , Parliament will have the choice of assuming its political responsibilities or , once again , bringing discredit upon itself .
There is a great deal at stake in this proposal for a directive on groundhandling .
We all agree that the text of the common position is far from satisfactory , since we all share the concern to ensure the highest possible standards of safety and service , whilst respecting social imperatives .
I personally tabled a number of amendments at first reading expressing these concerns and , like all my colleagues , I deplore the fact that the Council has taken up so few of the nonetheless essential amendments we adopted .
We are faced with a simple choice .
Our first option is to adopt a principled stance and register Parliament 's dissatisfaction by rejecting the common position .
We must weigh up the implications of such action .
If there is not unanimity in the Council , we shall have to start the entire process all over again - something which would take months , if not years .
There would then be a legal vacuum .
As you know , ladies and gentlemen , nature abhors a vacuum .
There would therefore be countless long and complex legal disputes .
Let us also not forget that if a directive is not adopted , the Commission will be at total liberty to decide and lay down rules pursuant to Article 90 ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
We must consider all the implications of this .
Our second option is to amend the common position .
In doing so , Parliament will display an attitude of constructive criticism , by defending the essential points that are inadequately taken into account in the common position .
Personally , I prefer the second option .
I shall therefore vote against rejection of the common position and in favour of the amendments which seek to ensure increased safety , improved quality of services and the maintenance of social protection .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the Commission .
It is quite clear that if no one is happy , you find a compromise so you are able to say that everyone can be happy , even though they are all unhappy .
A considerable number of amendments have been tabled , a fact which speaks for itself .
It also means that when the committee voted by a majority of one to reject the common position , it was already fighting a lost cause .
I think this is an extremely dangerous situation for the dignity and position of the House .
My group will not on any account support the rejection of the common position , nor did it do so in the committee .
Mr Donnay 's group is not prepared to do so , Mr Jarzembowski 's group is not prepared to do so , so the common position will simply not be rejected .
That is not to say that the compromise before us is exactly ideal , and I should like to hear whether the Commissioner is prepared , now that he has heard all the objections from both sides of the House , to examine how further improvements might be made , because I think - and the Commissioner knows - that the ministers were also not entirely happy with it .
I would therefore urge the Commission to make use of its right of initiative , and I would also urge the House not to reject the common position out of hand , because it is surely better to have something than nothing at all .
Mr President , the draft directive on groundhandling at airports , now before the House for second reading , does not take account of the principal amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading .
The aim of this directive is to deregulate the sector in order to open it up to free competition .
Thus , access to the groundhandling market will be granted to external players from whom no guarantees are required .
Certain US companies - chiefly motivated by financial considerations - are stepping up pressure in all the Community 's institutions for the adoption of this directive .
In Parliament 's debate on this subject in November 1995 , I stressed the gravity of the likely economic and social repercussions of the directive , which have not been assessed at all by the Commission , and which concern the issues of employment , flexibility , the increase of job insecurity , the jeopardization of public services , the dismantling of staff regulations , the growth of subcontracting and the encouragement of social dumping .
Besides being unacceptable from a social point of view , these repercussions are bound to have an impact on the most crucial aspect of air transport : safety .
The Council 's common position also fails to take account of the analyses and proposals put forward by trade union organizations , which have formed a united front on this issue . What a contempt for public aspirations and the most fundamental rules of democracy !
This is the hidden side of all the talk about a social Europe !
The Committee on Transport and Tourism - and I welcome the fact , since we contributed to this outcome - has delivered an opinion in favour of the rejection of the common position .
This opinion must be endorsed in plenary , in order to send a clear message to the Council and the Commission : your proposal is unacceptable and must be fundamentally amended .
Firstly , in drawing up any new proposal , the Council and the Commission must take account of the views of the trade unions .
They must evaluate the social costs and consequences of implementation of the directive - as the Commission undertook to do before this House .
They must provide for effective measures to combat unfair competition and social dumping , as well as ensuring that we meet the objectives of public service , the improvement of safety and the safeguarding of social gains .
Consequently , Parliament will bring credit upon itself by rejecting this negative common position and encouraging the submission of a proposal which meets the common interests of users - who wish all aspects of air transport to be safe and reliable - and the workforce , who legitimately refuse to accept the deterioration of their working and living conditions , just a few years away from the twenty-first century !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Seal 's report illustrates once again the interest that Parliament takes in transport issues .
This interest was confirmed by the vote at the last meeting of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
All the political groups mobilized their troops - both Members and officials - in an extraordinary case of lobbying .
At the time , we in the ARE Group advocated abstention , since we believed that rejecting the Council 's common position without having voted on the amendments tabled by the various groups was a very strong measure , in political terms .
Now , the ARE Group has discussed this report and reached the following conclusions .
Firstly , we regret the fact that a whole series of amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading - especially those with the greatest social content - have not been accepted by the Council .
We therefore condemn the Council 's socially insensitive attitude , which is perhaps the result of its excessive liberalizing zeal in dealing with this package of measures for the air transport sector .
Secondly , we would have preferred to support the common position , had it incorporated our two amendments to Articles 4 and 5 , concerning respectively the separation of accounts in the management of airports and the user committee .
Faced with this impossible situation , we have no option but to announce our rejection of the common position .
Nevertheless , we await with interest the political developments which may occur between now and voting time .
Mr President , the Council 's common position is , in our opinion , far from ideal , but we do not think this is sufficient reason to reject it , as Mr Seal has recommended on behalf of the majority in the Committee on Transport .
The current situation regarding groundhandling does not meet the requirements of the single market , and does not allow airlines to obtain an adequate service at a reasonable price .
Rejecting the common position will only prolong this undesirable state of affairs .
Judges in any disputes which might arise between the airports and the airlines will have to rule on a case-by-case basis , resulting in a lack of any clear , consistent line .
The common position has a number of shortcomings , not least of which is the possibility that the airlines might be completely excluded from the groundhandling market .
But there are also various points where the Council has tried to accommodate Parliament 's wishes , for example in providing protection for the rights of workers and its extremely cautious approach to liberalization , where it makes provision for a number of exceptions .
In short , this is a cautious step in the right direction .
By adopting a number of amendments , we can improve the common position further still , and only those who do not want to see the situation change could have any reason to reject it .
Mr President , the common position established by the Council on access to the groundhandling market at Community airports is likely not to be approved .
Mr Seal has rightly tried to make it clear that this common position did not appeal to anyone , in spite of the complexity of the problems , which are interesting in certain ways .
Various committees were unhappy with it : first and foremost the committee responsible , the Committee on Transport , and likewise those consulted for an opinion : the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I am in partial agreement with Mr Seal : the Commission 's common position is unacceptable to the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which has worked very hard , while the Council has taken no account of the wishes of the European Parliament .
Parliament did in fact attempt to improve the proposal for a directive by submitting various amendments , almost all of which were ignored by the Council .
The Commission must pay due heed to the role of airlines in groundhandling and acknowledge the European Parliament 's attention to social factors , which are of particular relevance in the case of groundhandling .
Since the common position is not unacceptable in its entirety , it requires further amendment , and certain amendments must be accepted ; Parliament must therefore express its views on some of these aspects in plenary sitting .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again we are witnessing how , under the cover of comprehensive and sweeping liberalization which is claimed to be essential , important social and economic structures at airports with outstanding operational records are being called into question , thereby prejudicing both employees and the undertakings operating at those airports .
Moreover , there are a number of negative aspects arising in connection with the procedure .
The fact that the Council was not even prepared to discuss informally the improvements overwhelmingly called for by Parliament indicates a disrespect for this House .
This is an outcome which the European Parliament can only note powerlessly .
The majority of our proposed amendments have not been taken up , and if our proposal for rejection of the common position does not secure the necessary majority , that will no doubt also be the fate of the other amendments tabled .
In comparison with the original inadequate Commission proposal , a number of changes and improvements have been made , but important elements are missing .
Parliament 's proposals for social measures , as well as those geared more towards making the measures workable , have been almost completely ignored .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists is therefore calling for the number of suppliers of one or more categories of groundhandling services in all or part of an airport to be limited , in order to safeguard the viability and profitability of airports ' current investments and investment plans , if relevant , objective and transparent reasons make this necessary .
Airports must thus be able to control the technical and operational management of infrastructure .
Furthermore , we are calling for the establishment of user committees in which employees are also represented , and - as a supplement to the common position - for the job specification of aircraft handler to be expanded , thereby contributing to competence and safety .
Finally , we are calling for workers ' organizations to be supported in their defence of social protection and the criteria for participation in the event of structural change .
As was made clear in the debates in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , the PSE Group totally rejects the accusation that the unions have been playing with marked cards .
We support the unions ' position , since realities and current developments are proving them , as well as our own stance , right : subsidiary companies are being set up ; wages and salaries are being reduced ; social protection standards are falling ; and part-time jobs are replacing forms of employment which have been established for decades .
These are realities which the PSE Group cannot accept .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , competition is a key element of our social market economy .
Who would not be in favour of the liberalization of competition ?
Who would be against curbing any domination of the market ?
However , the details of what is acceptable in principle must also be correct .
The conditions of competition must be fair .
Dumping in terms of prices or conditions is unacceptable .
The criteria for suppliers and their services must be quite clearly defined .
With regard to groundhandling services at Community airports , the following must be taken into account : firstly , the different physical capacities of the Community 's airports , which frequently cannot be extended because of limited space or for environmental reasons ; secondly , the need to ensure quality , in the interests of both passengers and airlines ; and , thirdly , the capabilities of suppliers , since not all suppliers are able to guarantee that they can meet the necessary technical , industrial and operational safety requirements and high environmental standards .
The Council 's common position incorporates only some of Parliament 's proposals .
These include express recognition of the fact that the Member States must guarantee a high level of social protection .
Employees ' rights with regard to training and occupational safety must be taken into account .
The proposal to restrict self-handling for reasons of space and capacity is also included .
However , the necessary balance in the safeguarding of the interests of users - passengers and airport employees - is absent from the common position .
Further points must also be incorporated into the common position .
Firstly , in any restructuring process , priority must be given to safeguarding existing jobs and guaranteeing the social protection of employees .
Secondly , with a view to ensuring quality - a key element of industrial productivity in Europe - a higher level of training , conforming to the ISO 9000 standard , should be aimed at .
It is in the interests of passengers that no mistakes are made in groundhandling , that precision is not the exception but the rule .
A qualified groundhandler makes an essential contribution to maintaining the highest standards of safety .
Thirdly , the concept of self-handler must be clearly defined .
If parent and subsidiary companies simply provide groundhandling services for each other , then we must seriously ask ourselves whether competition is genuinely being ensured !
Fourthly , the planned user committee must include representatives of travel organizations and airport employees , with a view to protecting workers ' interests .
In order to ensure the committee 's neutrality , its chairman must be independent of the airport and its users .
I call on the Commission to support these views .
If it backs us in the vote on these and other amendments tomorrow , there will no longer be any argument for rejecting the Council 's common position .
Our positions have moved closer together .
Now the Commission must take the decisive step !
Mr President , in my opinion Mr Seal has done an excellent job , as regards both the approach to the subject and his proposal that the common position be rejected .
In the circumstances , if Parliament does not reject the common position and ends up humbly acquiescing in a common position that no one here is satisfied with , it will essentially be abdicating its role and making a mockery of itself to the Council .
The argument that we should accept this because it is less bad than the present situation is ludicrous .
Rather than doing that , we would all be better off sitting on the beach back in our countries , I think , bearing in mind the time of year .
I , too , offer support for rejection of the Council 's common position .
This has nothing to do with being against liberalization and competition or with supporting the monopolistic and archaic situations which currently prevail at a great number of airports and everything to do with seeking to ensure , as other Members have already said , that the objectives are tied in with requirements relating to safety , service quality , the peripheral status of many of the airports and the social rights of employees .
Mr President , if the common position is adopted in this form , it will lead to serious discrimination against airlines at their home airport .
The draft directive will allow all airport managing bodies , from the outset and for an indefinite period , to provide unlimited groundhandling services without being required to undergo a selection procedure in the same way as the airlines .
From the economic point of view , there is no real justification for airport managing bodies to receive better treatment than the airlines which use the airport in question as their home base .
The airlines possess the necessary facilities and qualified staff at their home airport .
They should therefore be fully allowed to utilize these staff , as well as to make optimum use of all these facilities , so as to be able to offer a complete third-party and self-handling package at their home airport .
The destruction of current and future jobs within airlines can hardly be the Council 's intention .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have before the House today a report which has been causing us a great deal of concern for several months .
I should therefore like to reiterate that our main objective is - and must continue to be - to ensure that airports remain as independent economic bodies .
At both readings , therefore , we have attempted to introduce stringent requirements for self-handlers .
This is the only way to preserve the investment power of airports and to protect groundhandling services from market dominance by home airlines .
I also believe that it is imperative for employees to be represented in the user committee .
The thinking of management and labour must undoubtedly be incorporated into such important decisions .
The harmonization of training and safety standards will be to everyone 's benefit : airlines , passengers and employees .
It is very rare that a common position is rejected by the committee concerned .
However , we have been confirmed in our decision by the numerous comments of all the interested parties .
It must be clear to everyone : the Council and the Commission have failed to achieve a balanced compromise between the interests of airlines , airports and employees .
If the Commissioner is unable to assure us today that he supports our amendments , this House will have only one course of action : rejection of the common position !
The Council must finally take on board the fact that this House takes its work very seriously , and that - as is widely known - Parliament 's proposals have met with the broad approval of the various interested parties .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission proposal which attempts to introduce a degree of liberalization and competition in groundhandling services in airports from 1998 .
Regrettably , the common position dilutes the whole basis of the Commission proposal , seriously delaying the introduction of liberalization and competition .
I would like to place on record the position as it exists today in the United Kingdom , where liberalization and competition exist in groundhandling services at airports and where airlines are allowed to self-handle .
Why should British travellers not be allowed the same standard of service when travelling in France , Germany , Italy , Greece and Spain as is currently available in the UK ?
I find myself in an extremely uncomfortable position since , in spite of all the work undertaken by the Commission , the Committee on Transport and Tourism ( notably our rapporteur , Mr Seal ) , the airlines , the airports and all interested parties , the common position fails miserably to achieve the objectives of the original Commission proposal .
I fear personally that Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty would achieve more in the way of opening up groundhandling services at European airports to competition , defeating national monopolies and ending the privileged and protected position enjoyed by many of Europe 's flight carriers .
I want the best for Europe 's travellers , an excellent service at a reasonable price .
Currently , travellers have poor service at a high cost .
We must give the travellers choice and introduce competition .
I want each and every one of us to stand up and be counted and to vote for competition , choice and lower prices .
Mr President , I support the proposal of the Committee on Transport for rejection of the common position and I commend Mr Seal for recommending that .
The Council 's common position appears unable to resolve any of the problems created in the European airport industry by the whole air transport liberalization policy .
As it spreads to Europe 's airports this policy is assuming even more dangerous proportions .
The Council has provocatively disregarded the European Parliament 's amendments .
It has ignored the consequences for service quality and , most importantly , the consequences for the safety of groundhandling services .
It has ignored the social consequences and the proposals for worker representation on the user committee .
Lastly , it has ignored the special interests of airlines which account individually for more than 25 % of the traffic at an airport and also the special factors affecting island airports .
In the circumstances , I think that the only thing that the European Parliament can do is to support rejection of the common position .
Mr President , the Council proposals liberalizing airport groundhandling services could actually have very serious consequences for jobs and safety at the airport in my own constituency , Dublin , and indeed at other major airports throughout Europe , as has been mentioned by other speakers .
While I , like Miss McIntosh , welcome increased competition in principle , the proposals currently being put forward by Council are badly thought out and ill-considered .
They would mean thousands of job losses throughout Europe in aircraft refuelling , servicing , cleaning , passenger handling and baggage registration .
They would also lead to a serious deterioration in safety standards , a matter which we must all be very concerned about .
The Council 's suggestions have been rejected by everybody directly involved in the industry - in particular by the airlines and the trade unions - and this must tell us something .
Aer Lingus estimates that up to 200 jobs would be put directly at risk if it is forced out of airport groundhandling services while the central representative Council of Trade Unions at Dublin Airport envisages a steep decline in safety .
I really regret the way in which the Council has refused to discuss the matter properly with Parliament .
It has refused to take up any of our suggestions to safeguard jobs and ensure safety standards are improved .
The Council has even declined to discuss the matter on an informal basis with the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I am sure that Mr Seal and his colleagues have noted this position .
I will be urging Members to vote against the Council 's common position and I hope that we succeed in getting the required number of votes .
Mr President , the issue of liberalising access to the market for groundhandling services at Union airports can be compared with a number of other liberalisation proposals which have been debated by the European Parliament recently .
Each time the socialists and other Members on the left have opposed and tried to prevent developments leading to a greater role for the market economy in the areas in question .
The liberalisation of postal services is one example , groundhandling services at airports another .
Socialists , Greens and others appear to want to keep us in a society governed by old-fashioned laws and regulations , a society where free enterprise is not encouraged and where the state regulates access to various markets .
Until now I had always thought that Barry Seal 's party in the UK , the Labour Party , wanted to put this image behind it and instead pursue more up-to-date and market-oriented policies .
This is clearly not the case , which is particularly regrettable .
The Commission 's attempt to create greater competition at Union airports is a good and commendable one .
If more parties are active in the market competition will increase and prices will fall .
Airlines and ultimately passengers will benefit .
In the long term those companies which are exposed to competition will also benefit , as they will be compelled to develop and improve their activities .
Obviously it is true that there are also areas and sectors where it is difficult to open up the market , especially where services require a particular infrastructure , such as baggage handling and refuelling services .
It is my opinion nevertheless that , by responding positively to the Council 's common position , we must demonstrate our willingness to carry out the Commission 's intentions .
I believe that a gradual liberalisation in the manner proposed would be extremely positive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to say first of all that the common position of the Council is clearly better than the Commission proposal .
The Council has improved on the Commission 's positions and recommendations , and I must also point out that a number of provisions approved by the European Parliament at the first reading have been accepted by it .
However , I must ask this question : if the common position is rejected , what will the situation be afterwards ?
That appears to be something that Members on the other side have not thought about , perhaps because they feel that in the end the common position will not be rejected .
I say this because if the common position is rejected , no one can be sure that the Commission will want to bother with it again or that the Council will want to re-examine it .
We shall be left , that is , with a situation in which groundhandling services market will be regulated by Mr Van Miert on the basis of the general provisions on competition , and that will mean having the same regime in European air transport as that which pertained in the United States after the liberalization of air transport during the Reagan presidency .
On that basis I think that we should support the common position as it has come to us , after amending it as best we can .
Members on all sides have already tabled amendments , and I feel that if the Commission - and I address myself directly to Commissioner Kinnock at this moment - can state that it accepts them , or tell us which it can accept , it will help greatly and serve as a powerful means of putting pressure on the Council to accept the amendments that we approve .
That is what I wanted to say , and I think that we should concentrate on getting adoption for those amendments which genuinely improve the common position .
Having the Commissioner as our helper and ally will greatly assist the achievement of that .
Mr President , I see that a considerable number of amendments have been tabled by various groups , including those who are in favour of rejecting the common position .
In deciding on whether or not to vote for rejection , a good number of Members will undoubtedly be swayed by the Commission 's position on these amendments .
I should therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether we can have the Commission 's position on the amendments in writing before the vote .
Mr President , over the years there have been many occasions on which I have agreed with Mr Seal and I find myself in a similar position again , certainly in respect of the remarks he made right at the beginning of his contribution this afternoon .
Until last Thursday this debate was scheduled for tomorrow .
Like several Members of this House , I consequently accepted important public engagements .
The procedures of this House , however , apparently mean that important business can be changed at very short notice .
In order to be able to attend this important debate on groundhandling , therefore , I had to cancel my engagements last Friday .
I consider it important that the relevant Commissioner with a portfolio is in this House to respond on the business for which he or she is responsible .
That is why I had to cancel .
To say that I was infuriated and embarrassed by having to commit such a discourtesy to the very large number of people I had to let down is to make an understatement .
I have to say that whilst I am not in the least bit concerned about my personal inconvenience - that does not matter at all - I must urge the authorities of this House to reform procedures both for the sake of the good name of this Parliament and out of respect for the general public , some of whom , of course , wanted to be able to attend this debate and had made arrangements to be here tomorrow and found it impossible to change them in order to be here today .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal on groundhandling has , not surprisingly , as we have heard this afternoon , proved to be controversial and that - of course - is demonstrated by the recommendation of the Committee on Transport and Tourism that the common position be rejected by this House .
I regret that .
I like to be in agreement with the committee as frequently as I can and I certainly understand the reasons for the view of the committee .
Nevertheless , I cannot avoid recognizing the reality that groundhandling services at most Community airports are still often the monopoly of the airport or of the dominant airline and that condition certainly does not meet the requirements of the single market .
Nor can I ignore the fact that for some years past the Commission , the Council and , indeed , this House have emphasized the need to deal with the liberalization of groundhandling in the Community .
The main objective of this proposal , therefore , is to introduce basic rules to ensure that air carriers are provided with a genuine choice of suppliers so that they are able to obtain services that meet their needs at a reasonable price .
In an effort to ensure that liberalization takes place as smoothly as possible and takes into account the interests of all stakeholders , particularly airports and employees , the proposal is formulated in a balanced way .
As with the airline sector , we are therefore proposing arrangements which give stakeholders a reasonable period of time for transition .
We have heard this described this afternoon from some quarters as ' too reasonable ' and ' too long a period of time ' for transition , but we are doing this in order to avoid abrupt changes with significant social consequences .
The gradual introduction of the new market organization and the possibility of granting exemptions in exceptional cases will allow Member States sufficient time to adjust to the new situation .
Some airports will obviously be able to meet the requirements more quickly than others and some services will find change easier to implement than others .
For that reason , the common position adopted by the Council provides for full access to the market and freedom to self-handle on the land side of the airport .
On the air side , however , where services are clearly subject to greater safety , security , space and capacity constraints , it will be possible to limit the number of suppliers or of carriers that want to self-handle .
In addition , under specific circumstances , exemptions can be granted by the Member State under the supervision of the Commission .
The reason offered by Mr Seal and Mr Simpson and their colleagues for rejecting the common position refers to the dissatisfaction of the different stakeholders .
I understand their view , since change will always provoke opposition from interests seeking to defend their established position whether they are representatives of employees or in some cases airlines or , in some cases , airports or suppliers .
I must say , however , that by its very nature this proposal cannot give absolute satisfaction to any one group of stakeholders since it tries to take into account the problems of each relevant group .
Indeed , if I were the teacher referred to in a speech by Mr Simpson I would have to take account of two factors when marking the work .
First of all , the need to adhere to the competition rules of the Community and secondly , the diversity of interests involved in groundhandling .
When , as a teacher , I took account of these two intractable and unavoidable questions I would give at least 8 out of 10 for content , 9 out of 10 for effort and 10 out of 10 for originality .
The problem raised here is not a matter of conflict between airlines and airports despite the efforts in some quarters to use the vocabulary of the battlefield ; the issue relates directly to applying the Treaty rules on commercial activities to monopolies or quasi-monopolistic situations , whether the holder of the monopoly is the airport itself or the dominant carrier of the airport .
It also relates to the need to ensure that our airlines , which have Europe as their main market , are not hampered by competitive disadvantages by comparison with United States or Far East competitors .
The Commission is keen to ensure that the opening of the market does not have negative consequences for employment .
That is why we sought to provide for a phased implementation that is carefully adapted to circumstances .
We bear in mind also that where groundhandling has been liberalized , the consequence has , in some respects , been an increase in employment opportunities .
At Parliament 's request , the common position includes the possibility for Member States to take measures to ensure an adequate level of social protection and respect for national social legislation .
We could also accept the addition of some references to regard for , and defence of , social rights , especially in the approval clause or in the standards and technical conditions of the selection procedure .
It is , of course , difficult to introduce special rules offering derogations for reasons of social protection for the groundhandling sector alone , or to insert amendments which would constrain the opening of the market and so reduce the scope of the Directive .
In addition , the Commission is not in a position to change the scope of Directive 77 / 187 on the transfer of undertakings by making reference to its application in the groundhandling text .
It is clear that Directive 77 / 187 will certainly apply in many situations .
But its application in particular circumstances depends on the way in which they fit into the general principles established by the European Court of Justice .
Against that background , I wish to respond to the amendments to the proposal that have been presented by different groups in this House .
First , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 8 , 9 and 39 in part , and Amendments Nos 27 , 31 , 34 , 37 , 38 , 40 , 42 , 43 and 45 in full , since they have been accepted at first reading and they contribute to the improvement of the text .
Second , the Commission can accept , in principle , subject to some redrafting , Nos 7 , 11 , 15 , 17 , 20 , 21 , 30 , 33 and 36 .

The Commission cannot , however , accept parts of Amendments Nos 1 , 8 and 39 or any of Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 18 , 22 , 23 , 25 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 32 , 35 and 44 , either because they do not correspond to the scope of the Directive or because they reduce the scope too much .

We cannot accept part of Amendments Nos 9 or 39 or any of Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 10 , 24 , 41 concerning thresholds , dates , subsidiarity and comitology .
It is very difficult to reach an agreement on these matters with the Member States in Council , and the Commission must resist reopening any of the issues since that would most certainly divert and delay progress with the legislation in a very negative way .
Finally , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 6 , 16 and 19 , which are considered inappropriate in this context or are contrary to normal business practice .
In answer to Mr Cornelissen 's question : he can most certainly have the abbreviated explanations or reasons for acceptance and rejection of amendments and they will be at his disposal shortly after the debate .
In general terms , the common position - which was , incidentally , adopted by a Council of Transport Ministers , including eight socialist ministers - corresponds to the balanced approach we have all tried to adopt in this issue of groundhandling liberalization .
For a variety of sometimes differing reasons , the majority of airports and airlines now support it and prefer to accept the proposed text as it stands rather than find themselves in a state of continuing uncertainty .
The Directive is needed in order to complete the liberalization process in the air transport sector .
To underline that , I draw attention to the fact that the Commission has received a number of complaints over the years about the high prices and the quality of groundhandling services at many airports where these services are supplied in monopolistic conditions .
It is therefore necessary to improve the situation with a broad measure that will ensure a degree of market liberalization in all Community airports for the benefit of users and passengers , while allowing the Member States the means to guarantee sufficient levels of safety and security and , of course , respect for employees ' rights .
The common position fulfils these requirements and I therefore urge the House to support it .
That concludes the debate .
I will ensure that the remarks that you made on the timing of business are drawn to the attention of the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , I am pleased that you made your last comment .
I entirely support the criticisms by the Commissioner , and I think that what happened was extremely unfortunate , particularly for those trying to follow our debates .
I also did not hear about it until Friday , since no one took the trouble to inform the chairman of the committee responsible .
I asked the secretariat on Friday to telephone as many people as possible to warn them not to come tomorrow .
I hope you will look into this , Mr President , and let us know what you decide .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon tomorrow .
( The sitting was closed at 8.09 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday evening a serious plane crash occurred at Eindhoven airport , seven kilometres from where I live , in which 32 people were killed and nine were injured .
Hundreds of their relatives in Belgium and the Netherlands are now mourning their loss .
On behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the Dutch and Belgian Members of this House I would ask you , Madam President , to send our condolences to the relatives of the victims .
I shall be discussing with Commissioner Kinnock today whether the European Commission should be involved in the investigation into the cause of the crash , because it is extremely important that we should learn as much as we can from such tragedies .
I am sure the House will join you in expressing sympathy and condolences , Mr Cornelissen .
Madam President , I have a question concerning yesterday 's order of business which was approved when the agenda was finally adopted .
My question is this : how can a report - in this case the report on groundhandling services - be brought forward by a day ?
It is one thing to expect us , as Members of the European Parliament , to be capable of preparing a speech in an hour and a half , but what about those members of the public who are catching an early flight this morning so that they can be here when we discuss groundhandling services this afternoon , and who have made a hotel reservation for tonight so that they can be here for the vote tomorrow ?
This makes a complete nonsense of the effort we have all been making to ensure that our sittings are open and members of the public can participate .
I take note of your comments , but this was a decision taken by the Conference of Presidents and confirmed by Parliament .
Are there any other comments ?
Madam President , I have to beg your indulgence for the error of my ways , since I failed to sign the attendance register yesterday .
It is my own fault , but I was hoping that you could perhaps vouch for the fact that I was present , thereby correcting my mistake .
In any event , I have to apologize , since it is my own fault .
Madam President , could you express to the British Government the outrage of Members of this House at the treatment meted out to protesters in Garvaghy Road , Portadown , last week and the fact that small sections of the community should bring commercial life in Northern Ireland to a standstill .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Decision on urgency
Madam President , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture , I would ask all colleagues to vote in favour of this urgent procedure .
This measure is basically intended to rectify a situation which has been worsening progressively of late .
In my report on agricultural prices , I proposed a 10 % reduction in setaside , which seemed at the time to diverge significantly from the Commission 's proposal .
Now the Commission is sensibly proposing 5 % , and that is what farmers are now expecting .
But we must vote on the Gillis report this week , because the Council meeting early next week , on 22 and 23 July , will need to ratify our decision .
I therefore strongly urge that this report should be adopted during this part-session .
Is there anyone wishing to speak against ?
There is not .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Free movement of persons
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0095 / 96 by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive ( COM ( 95 ) 0348 - C4-0357 / 95-95 / 0202 ( COD ) ) amending Directive 68 / 360 / EEC on the abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for workers of Member States and their families and Directive 73 / 148 / EEC on the abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for nationals of Member States with regard to establishment and the provision of services ; -A4-0219 / 96 by Mr Ford , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 95 ) 0347 - C4-0468 / 95-95 / 0201 ( CNS ) ) on the elimination of controls on persons crossing internal frontiers ; -A4-0218 / 96 by Mr Linzer , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 95 ) 0346 - C4-0420 / 95-95 / 0199 ( CNS ) ) on the right of third-country nationals to travel in the Community .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , before I start , I should like to make a brief point concerning speaking time .
We have come to a slightly different arrangement within our group , to the effect that Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn 's speaking time will be split between Mr Nassauer and myself , so that I hope I shall have rather more than five minutes .
It is a fact that the history of these three proposals goes back a long way .
The old European Community Treaty already included provisions for the creation of a common internal market in Europe .
Parliament has consistently expressed the view that this concept obviously includes the right of free movement without frontier controls between the countries of the European Union , or the European Community as it was then .
For a long time , the Council failed to agree on the issue , and for many years the Commission also shied away from taking the initiative in any move towards practical legislative proposals to abolish frontier controls in Europe .
The first consequence of this was that a number of Member States took the initiative themselves and , going beyond the Schengen Agreement , created a special set of agreements in parallel , as it were , to the European Treaties , with the result that this internal market goal - the elimination of frontier controls - has now been achieved de facto in at least part of the European Union .
Several years ago , because the Commission had taken no action , Parliament initiated proceedings against it before the Court of Justice for failure to act .
Thanks to the cooperation of Commissioner Monti , the new Commission - which was also the first to be confirmed , and to require confirmation , by Parliament - has clearly changed its stance on the issue and has submitted three proposals for directives that aim to finally abolish internal frontier controls within the European Union .
I wish to make it very clear , at the outset , that we welcome these proposals from the Commission and support the action that it is taking on this issue .
I have a number of comments on the three proposals . One of them - the subject of my own report - is a proposal from the Commission to amend two existing directives which flow from Article 48 and the following articles of the Treaty , that is to say from the rights of citizens of the European Union .
The aim is to make provision within the existing legal system for workers and people who wish to exercise the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services , so that in future they cannot be subject to frontier controls when they wish to move within the internal market .
The other two proposals concern the elimination of controls on persons , and freedom of movement for thirdcountry nationals who are lawfully in the territory of the European Union .
This follows naturally because it is obvious that , unless they check identity documents , border officials cannot determine whether a person is a third-country national lawfully in the territory of the European Union or a citizen of the European Union .
As regards my report , it may be useful to make the following additional points on the basis of the discussions that took place in the committees which contributed to it , in particular the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
We have here a directive that is subject to the codecision procedure , a typical internal market directive over which Parliament 's powers , since the Maastricht Treaty , are very far-reaching .
And this is where my report differs from the other two reports that are before us today , because the legal basis of the other two directives is Article 100 , and they must be adopted unanimously by the Council , with Parliament merely being consulted .
We are therefore entitled to effective involvement in the decision on workers ' freedom to travel and the exercise of their right of establishment and right to provide services .
Because we welcome and support these proposals in principle , we should expedite our discussions in Parliament and let the Council have our vote so that a decision on the issue can be reached quickly .
However , there has now been a new development : since last week , you will have been aware that the Irish presidency has made its own proposal for a draft joint action on the freedom of movement of third-country nationals in the European Union , on the basis of Article K.3.
I believe this is directly at odds with the Commission 's and Parliament 's approach to the issue , as regards the legal basis .
It is our view that the question of eliminating controls in the internal market is quite definitely an internal market issue , and that is why it belongs within the institutional decision-making framework of the European Union and cannot be decided solely by the Council of Ministers through a draft joint action .
What has happened now creates a new situation , because it is clearly quite bizarre that , alongside the process of opinion-forming and decision-making here in Parliament and earlier in the Commission , the Council should have started to take action on its own initiative , as it were , and obviously with a full knowledge of what is going on elsewhere .
We must consider how , as a Parliament , we are to react to this situation : whether we can , in fact , vote and decide the issue today , or whether we ought not to refer it back to the committees so that we can then get an opinion from the Council on these new moves by the Irish presidency .
I should like to make one final comment on my report . A number of amendments have been tabled with a view to having freedom of movement for third-country nationals included in my report as well .
In my view , this is not legally acceptable , because the legal basis for the Lehne report and the corresponding Commission proposal is Article 48 and subsequent articles of the Treaty , which define citizens ' rights .
For that reason alone , the report cannot be extended to cover third-country nationals .
For purely legal reasons , the issue cannot be dealt with in this directive , but will have to be addressed by the other two directives .
Madam President , I should like to say that I am pleased on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs to participate in this joint debate on the Lehne report , my own report on the Council directive on the elimination of controls on persons crossing internal frontiers and on the Linzer report .
These reports arise directly from the Treaty of Rome which sets out very early a commitment to the free movement of goods , services , capital and people .
Unfortunately in the European Union , while the first three flow freely , there has been much more resistance to the free movement of people .
It is absolutely vital for the future of the Union that the people of Europe - if you want the prime group constituting the European Union - be allowed to move freely around the Union itself .
The Commission has been very tardy in bringing forward proposals in this area ; in fact so tardy that this Parliament , during the last Parliamentary session under the urging of Amde Turner , the British Conservative Chairman of the Civil Liberties Committee , actually took legal action against the Commission because of their failure to act .
The second result was that because there was a failure to act by the Commission we saw the Council set up the Schengen system , that semi-clandestine organization with no accountability , no reporting back to Parliament which means that free movement has not proceeded in the way that we would like .
Then , on the very eve of the European Court taking action against the Commission , the new Commission and the new Commissioner , Mr Monti , brought forward these proposals .
When I first saw them I had my doubts as to whether they constituted a genuine proposal because they were linked to a whole series of accompanying measures which threaten to act as a poison pill such that the proposals would never come into operation .
Unanimity is required in these areas and the current British Government has said it will not vote in favour of these proposals so that they cannot be implemented .
The current British Government can , of course , be changed and that is something that may happen in the future .
But more importantly , in terms of the accompanying measures , the external frontiers directive is linked to the British / Spanish dispute over Gibraltar .
Despite the clear legal position it is also very obvious that there is no easy solution to this problem .
When the government and opposition of both Spain and the United Kingdom are so committed to their current position it is not obvious that the external frontiers directive will come into operation early .
There are similar problems with the Dublin Convention .
The Socialist Group wants a clear , unadulterated , uncluttered set of proposals that sticks to the fundamental principles of free movement and has no accompanying measures .
The more the Commission 's and Parliament 's proposals vary from these clear principles the more difficulty the Socialist Group will have in supporting them .
Yes , of course we agree that there are other measures that will have to be taken in order for these proposals to operate , but they should flow from an agreement and not precede it .
We know that the Member States will very rapidly reach an agreement on security and other issues if they have to , but while they can use them as an opportunity to block the proposals we will see no progress .
I also agree with Mr Lehne on the draft joint action proposal that has come forward in the last few days .
This has clearly complicated matters and perhaps we need to take all three reports back to committee to see how the new proposal on the draft joint action programme impinges upon them .
The people of Europe have a right to expect substantial progress in this area .
The Commission has not given it to us in the clearest possible way .
We look to the Commission and the Council to proceed , and the Socialist Group - and I hope Parliament - will vote accordingly .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I have the privilege of bringing before the House today a report from the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs on the right of third-country nationals to travel in the Community .
The aim of the report is , at long last , to enable third-country nationals who are lawfully in a Member State , and family members of European Union citizens who do not have citizenship of a Member State , to travel more easily for short stays in the territory of other Member States .
I have already established for my report that the Commission proposal will not , in effect , mean any significant change in the situation on the ground .
Given that virtually no frontier controls are now carried out and , in fact , controls between the Schengen countries have generally been abolished , the real aim of this Commission proposal , which is based on Article 100 of the EC Treaty , is to create an appropriate legal context for a situation that already exists in practice .
My report is based on one of three Commission proposals referred to the committee , which were drawn up with a view to fulfilling the obligations imposed by Article 7a of the EC Treaty .
Article 7a deals with the establishment of the internal market by 31 December 1992 .
The internal market was to comprise an area without internal frontiers , in which the free movement of goods , services and capital , as well as what we are talking about today - the free movement of persons - was to be ensured in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty .
I would remind you that this is 1996 , and it is only now that the House is discussing these three Commission proposals for fulfilling the obligations to which I have referred .
Although it has taken more than three and a half years to bring practical proposals from the Commission before the House , we are grateful that we now have them .
The only reason that the proposals are now before us , however , is that as long ago as 1993 , the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs of the European Parliament took the initiative and gave the Commission a practical incentive to submit proposals by bringing proceedings for failure to act .
My report is primarily concerned with clarifying the situation and facilitating freedom to travel for third-country nationals who have entered a Member State with a visa and who wish , during their stay there , to make a short visit to another Member State ; and also for third-country nationals who have a residence permit in one Member State and wish to visit another .
In general , the fact that the right of third-country nationals to enter and remain in a Member State , even for a short period , is regulated by the Member States ' national legislation - which is neither coordinated nor harmonized - means that individual citizens face further bureaucratic obstacles .
The effectiveness of the directive therefore depends on removing the link between the exercising of the right to travel and the requirement of citizenship , and building on the principles that residence permits and visas should have equal status and that visas should be mutually recognized .
I would take this opportunity to emphasize that people will measure the political credibility of the Union by the way the internal market operates , and particularly by the way the free movement of persons is implemented .
A gap in the overall concept of the internal market will also mean a loss of confidence among the great majority of European citizens .
Sometimes , however , I cannot help feeling that some of the institutions involved in creating the internal market fail to realize the full weight of their responsibility .
The approach of the Commission and Council to completing the provisions for the free movement of persons indicates how important it is that the European Parliament should be more closely involved in the legislative process .
I can only hope that the Intergovernmental Conference will bring Parliament all that it seeks in this respect .
Who else but ourselves - the democratically elected representatives of the peoples of Europe - can bring the necessary energy to bear in looking after citizens ' interests ?
If , as has been widely reported over the last few weeks , the Commission is making full implementation of the freedom of movement of persons in the European Union contingent on the application of accompanying agreements and measures , particularly as regards asylum and visa regulations for third-country nationals , then its behaviour indicates to me that it has not yet learned the lessons of recent years .
Clearly , the Commission cannot do without these accompanying measures if it is to have the support of the Member States , but in my view the two sets of issues should be considered separately .
By approving these proposals for directives , which are intended to give people the right to move freely from one Member State to another , we shall remind the Member States of their duty to turn their attention more actively and effectively towards instruments for implementing these measures .
Madam President , the proposals of the Commission in this area are to be welcomed .
Article 48 of the Treaty of Rome laid down a fundamental right for free movement of its citizens .
This was extended to free movement of persons and the Court of Justice has , in its case-law , extended the rights to free movement .
This is a very important plank in the achievement of a single market . Therefore , I support the proposals in the Lehne report , which simply extend existing rights .
I also want to support the Linzer report , giving rights to third country nationals to travel in the Community .
This is a very new but important right and I know from my own experience in my constituency that this will enhance academic and professional links between the European Union and other countries .
It has a humane face to it in that it will permit visits to families for weddings , funerals and illnesses .
It also enhances the cultural links in the European Union .
Many people want to come to Europe to see our cultural heritage and this I believe is an important part of our economy and also our links with the rest of the world .
There are no problems for the Member States because this does not impact on employment or on social benefits .
That is made quite clear in the text and therefore there should be no concerns for Member States .
It also provides and stresses the right of Member States to remove people who are a public security threat . The safeguards are quite adequate and the words ' or to its international relations ' should be excluded .
Madam President , like other Members I welcome the Commission 's three proposals to make a reality out of free movement .
I see them as a genuine and realistic attempt to achieve long-held and cherished objectives of the European Community .
I am speaking specifically on the Linzer report on the right of third country nationals to travel .
The object of this proposal is to harmonize national provisions concerning the right of third country nationals to travel and remain within the territory of the Union .
At the present time this type of journey is governed by divergent national provisions , most of which require third country nationals legally present in the territory of another Member State to obtain visas .
This is an insult to third country nationals who are living legally and subject to the proper conditions in the Member State , and some of these nationals can be second or third generation third country nationals .
For example , in my own country Pakistani and Indian citizens often prefer , for reasons of relations at home , to keep their Pakistani or Indian nationality .
They will be living in the UK all their lives , yet they have to apply for visas to travel to some Member States of the European Union .
This situation would be resolved by the Commission proposal , and they would be able to move across frontiers freely in the same conditions as other citizens of the European Union .
As Ms Oddy has said , this proposal would not involve the right to work or other rights of establishment .
It is simply a right to travel .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has two concerns .
We are worried that the Commission chose to add the words ' threat to its international relations ' to the normal grounds for expulsion from a Member State .
The Treaty has a formulation - which has been tried and tested through the European Court - which allows expulsion for threats to public order or public security , but we have never seen this expression ' threat to international relations ' before .
I hope the Commission will consider withdrawing that phrase as requested both by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
This would mean that third country nationals , for example , could be expelled simply because a third country complained about their presence in a European Union Member State 's territory .
The Council 's recent initiative complicates the matter somewhat .
On the one hand , we welcome the fact that the Council is showing an interest in this .
On the other , we regret the fact that it is under Article K.3 and therefore a third pillar matter , weakening the rights of the European Parliament and the European institutions , but we believe it is worth looking seriously at the Council 's initiative and we will probably support withdrawing these three reports and referring them back to committee .
Madam President , I rise to speak as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment in connection with the Ford and Linzer reports .
Our committee insisted , above all , that it should be made quite clear in the text of both reports that , whilst the Commission proposals on the abolition of controls on individuals at the European Union 's internal frontiers are good schemes - the submission of which , though belated , our committee welcomes , since a happy event never comes too late - this does not mean that their provisions can be made subject to the adoption or implementation of accompanying measures relating to the external frontiers convention , or any other measures .
And our committee welcomes the fact that the relevant amendments have made it quite clear in both the Ford and Linzer reports that the provisions in question constitute a clear obligation on the part of the European Union , which cannot in any way be made subject to such conditions .
Secondly , the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment wished to stress that the abolition of all controls at internal frontiers must not be an isolated measure , and that - at least as far as the free movement of workers is concerned - other obstacles which continue to exist must also be removed : the failure to complete recognition of diplomas and professional qualifications ; the lack of coordination of supplementary social security schemes and special social security schemes ; and the absence of Community provisions relating to the direct taxation of migrant workers .
Our committee has called on the Council and the Commission to adopt the necessary measures to eliminate these obstacles .
Finally , the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment insisted that the implementation of these provisions be accompanied by an extensive information campaign .
At present , the Commission is already carrying out an information campaign on the single market .
It is essential for our citizens to know that these obstacles are being removed - and this requires more than just the publication of this information in the Official Journal .
There is a need for all citizens to be made aware of these effective measures .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would remind us all of what we have promised , and of the great expectations aroused by Europe 's undertaking to introduce freedom of movement for persons by 1 January 1993 ; it is now July 1996 , and this free movement of persons has still not come about .
This is in clear violation of Article 7a of the Maastricht Treaty , which was endorsed by the Member States ; what is more , it is completely illogical in view of the cost / benefit ratio resulting from the lack of free movement for persons .
It strikes me that our obsolete internal borders are now no longer able to stop anything whatsoever - not goods , not trafficking , nor crime - except poor , honest citizens , who find that they have to show their identity cards every time at our ridiculous , obsolete border checks .
An additional element is that certain EU Member States have decided , in the form of the Schengen agreement , to go one step further than Article 7a of the Maastricht Treaty , which sanctioned this right to free movement of persons .
This proves that , in effect , when the political will exists on the part of the Member States , there is indeed free movement of persons , whatever concerns and reservations one might have .
The Schengen agreement , however , is certainly not a Community initiative , a European initiative ; it is the initiative of individual Member States .
Thus I believe that all the reservations and - let us be frank - the excuses being put forward about the question of accompanying measures should be cast aside .
The package presented by the Commission goes in the right direction , but in my opinion the accompanying measures are still being used by the Member States as an excuse for their own serious lack of political will .
I believe that with every day that passes by without the free movement of persons becoming a reality , we are dealing a perhaps irreversible blow to our citizens ' hopes of having a real united , federal Europe without all these visas , permits , certificates and red tape which are in practice impeding its development .
With regard to the opinion assigned to me by the Committee on Civil Liberties , concerning the abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for workers of Member States and their families , I believe that it is necessary to consider whether the proposal for a directive is comprehensive enough as regards the problem of free movement for nationals of non-member countries who are legally resident , whether they are directly or indirectly entitled ; to consider the possibility of issuing a single list of residence permits on the basis of the four or five directives which already exist , duly published in the Official Journal and conferring the right of free movement of persons ; to consider whether these entitled persons who are not nationals of a Member State will have the same rights as a Community national ; and , finally , to consider whether to introduce an amendment to this end .
In this context , I too think that the Irish presidency 's joint action programme should be scrutinized by Parliament 's Committees on Civil Liberties and Legal Affairs .
Our group will not object if a proposal is made to refer this matter back to committee .
But , I repeat , Europe cannot take shape without free movement of persons .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when it comes to people , freedom of movement in the European Union is a complicated business .
Mr Caccavale was quite right to point out that all kinds of things can be transported within this Union , and all kinds of things can move unhindered across the frontiers - which indeed no longer officially exist .
Only people may not move as freely in the European Union as we would all have wished .
That is why I should like to remind you of something again today , namely that the European internal market began on 1 January 1993 , with fireworks and celebrations throughout the European Union .
And what were we celebrating ?
Was it the fact that anyone may now take any product , service or capital holding and move freely with it in the Europe of Fifteen ?
Yes , that was part of it .
But we were not - at least my group was not - celebrating the fact that some essential preconditions for the implementation of people 's right to move freely in the newly created Europe would still not be met almost four years later .
So why has this right not yet been implemented ?
It has not been implemented because a number of Member States - or rather their governments - regard with mistrust the fact that their citizens , and permanent residents in their countries who are not citizens , can move freely in the Union .
We have heard all kinds of arguments this morning for curtailing this individual liberty .
But one thing is crystal clear : the overwhelming majority of people who live in our Union - I do not know the exact figures , but we can assume that we are talking about well over 90 % of the population - are honest , upright , decent folk who ought to be able to travel freely from one part of the Union to another , whether they are passport holders of one of the Member States , or citizens of a third country with a permanent address in the Union .
Why are the governments mistrustful ?
Why do they continue to restrict these people 's freedom of movement because of the criminal activities of a few small groups such as heroin and arms dealers and those who traffic in human beings ?
Such groups undoubtedly pose real problems , but they cannot justify the continued restriction of freedom of movement .
It is high time that we made progress - by creating a confidence offensive .
After the delays which caused the conflict between Parliament and the Council and Commission , we are now debating these reports because of initiatives taken by the Commissioner , who is with us here today : initiatives which , though commendable , are insufficient .
Now , in the midst of this process , we learn that the body representing the Member States , which are responsible for the delays - namely the Council - has clearly gone behind the backs of Parliament and the Commission once again , by initiating a procedure which seeks to replace everything that we are debating today and in which neither we nor , of course , the Commission will have any part .
There is only one way for us to respond : we shall request postponement of the vote , pursuant to Rule 129 , to give us the opportunity of reconsidering this latest development in committee , as provided for under Rule 60 , because it is absolutely unacceptable that the right - and in particular Parliament 's right - of democratic participation , which is not extensive at the best of times , should be further thwarted by an attempt , at this stage of our deliberations , to make a mockery of the consultation procedure , in the sense that the Council is ignoring everything that we say here in the House and producing a fait accompli behind our backs .
In my view , this is something that we cannot accept .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the actual date by which freedom of movement in Europe ought to have been made a reality was 1 January 1993 .
Consequently , according to the Treaty that was signed by all fifteen Member States , what we ought to be doing today is not debating the introduction of freedom of movement , but instead , for example , receiving a report on how it has functioned and deciding what action to take , and how to achieve further progress if possible .
But we are a long way from that .
I am not saying that the failure so far to achieve freedom of movement is a breach of the Treaty , but it goes against the intention to which all fifteen Member States put their signature .
The fact is that the idea was not just to create freedom of movement for services and capital : at this important time , people too should be able to experience Europe in the fullest sense .
They should be able to travel freely in Europe and to see , as citizens , what they make of this European Union that we have entered into .
That has not happened .
And I am not saying that it is the Council , as such , which has prevented it from happening - we must cultivate the habit of taking a rather more critical look at things .
There are certain Member States that are not fulfilling their obligations under the Treaty .
It is only a minority of them which are in this position , and the arguments which they employ do not stand up .
They say that freedom of movement cannot be created just like that , because the internal frontiers have played an important role in combatting crime , for example .
That is a completely anachronistic position to adopt , ladies and gentlemen .
It is an untenable position nowadays for any expert on the subject .
It is quite ridiculous to claim that crime cannot be effectively combatted without frontier controls .
If that were the case - if frontier controls were really necessary for combatting crime - we should have to reintroduce them between Bavaria and Hesse , for example .
Such a thing is unthinkable .
Nowadays , criminal activity needs to be tackled using quite different instruments - Interpol , for example , and the data bases that are to be installed there .
That is the modern way to combat crime - and , amazingly , its implementation is being delayed by precisely the same countries that are denying us freedom of movement on the scale sought by the Treaties .
One of the catchphrases is ' accompanying measures ' .
It is true that the Council still has some homework to do before freedom of movement can become a reality .
It is true that frontier controls cannot simply be abolished without putting some alternative options in place .
The external frontiers must be secured .
It must be clear , in future , that by crossing an external frontier into a Member State of the European Union , a person acquires freedom of movement throughout the Union .
This means that the country which allows a person to enter across its external frontier also becomes responsible for that person 's freedom of movement in the Union as a whole .
It should be noted here that we seek this freedom of movement not only for citizens of the European Union , but also for citizens of third countries who are legally resident in the Union .
There is really no other concept of freedom of movement .
We cannot have a two-tier system of freedom of movement in Europe ; freedom of movement must be enjoyed by everyone who is legally in the European Union .
It seems strange in this situation that , just when the Commission is doing what Parliament asked it to do by submitting appropriate proposals - and Commissioner Monti 's proposals have our unqualified support - and just when we are reaching a position on those proposals , some entirely new ideas should be published in Council circles .
I do not intend , at this point , to discuss institutional developments , but it is very clear indeed that the first thing we need to know now is what the Council is actually seeking .
That is why I am convinced that we cannot come to any conclusion until the Council supplies us with some information as regards what it is really up to with its new joint action .
We wish everyone in Europe to have freedom of movement as soon as possible , and those whose fault it is that such freedom is not yet in place must now be called to account .
Madam President , the three proposals for directives now before us are the Commission 's response to the proceedings brought against it by Parliament in the European Court of Justice for its failure to act in the field of the free movement of persons within the European Union .
Realizing that these proposals touch on important issues in the fields of immigration and internal security , the Commission has written into them accompanying measures which it regards as essential for maintaining a high level of security in an area without internal frontiers .
However , the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs has not only rejected an amendment by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , the aim of which was to provide a list of these accompanying measures , but has also adopted amendments stating that the free movement of persons cannot be made contingent on the implementation of those measures .
One could therefore be forgiven for wondering if these amendments are simply demagogic .
The adoption of these proposals for directives requires unanimity in the Council .
And certain Member States , for a variety of reasons , are not prepared to call into question these accompanying measures , which fall under the third pillar .
Using the powers conferred on it by Article K.3 ( 2 ) , the Commission could have cooperated with the Member States - if Parliament had not served notice on it , as it were - to achieve the free movement of persons within a negotiating framework acceptable to all parties .
Furthermore , in its report on the draft directive on the abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for nationals of Member States with regard to establishment and the provision of services , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights proposes the deletion of Article 3 ( 3 ) , for the reason that it conflicts with Article 6 of the EC Treaty , which prohibits discrimination on the grounds of nationality .
However , possession of an identity card may also be considered as a means of citizens ' protection : it is proof of their entitlement to exercise a right .
Possession of an identity card or travel document is one of the fundamental freedoms to which people living under the yoke of dictatorship aspire .
Possession of an identity card is the best means of protection against arbitrary treatment for the Union 's citizens .
Madam President , this debate concerns one of the fundamental aspects of the European Union : the free movement of persons .
As other speakers have pointed out , we should have had a completely open internal market with freedom of movement for goods , services , capital and people by the end of 1992 .
But this did not happen .
We had freedom of movement for goods , services and capital , but not for people .
You can see this if you go to the United Kingdom , to mention just one example , where there are still immigration controls under the old legislation , European Union or no European Union .
So what we are talking about here is the move from a financial Union to a citizens ' Union .

It is absolutely ridiculous that it has taken us until now , in 1996 , to hold such a debate , when the planned measures should have been introduced by 1992 at the latest .
The previous Commission was wrong not to put any proposals forward , and the European Parliament was even forced to bring a case against it before the Court of Justice , which is the most serious step you can take under our European system of law .
Now , at last , the present Commission has finally come up with some proposals , too late , of course , but now that we have them , the Liberal Group feels that they should be examined on their merits .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party supports the proposal for a directive on the right to travel of nationals of non-member countries who are legally established in the Union .
Such people - many Turks and Moroccans , for example - currently need a visa to be able to travel within the European Union , causing them great inconvenience , and a solution to this problem is therefore most welcome .
The proposed directive on the elimination of controls on persons crossing internal frontiers is really what this debate is all about .
We know that the Commission 's idea here is that the internal frontiers have to come down throughout the whole of the European Union , but that before this happens - and I am paraphrasing the Commission 's argument here - we need to take a series of measures to deal with any unwelcome consequences , such as the spread of crime and illegal immigration .
Then there are accompanying measures on improving the policing of our external borders , the division of responsibilities in asylum policy , a common visa policy and data exchanges through a European information system .
The Liberal Group finds it entirely understandable that these various measures and the directives before us should be linked in this way , because people want to see border controls abolished , but they also want measures to be taken to prevent any increase in crime .
As a representative of the people , I think that the national governments are at fault here .
The Dublin Treaty on asylum policy has been in the pipeline for years and still has not come into force .
Equally deplorably , the external frontiers convention has been ready for the last five years , but has not been introduced because of differences between the United Kingdom and Spain over Gibraltar .
This is extremely regrettable .
The ELDR Group feels that the European Parliament must adopt a clear position here .
The Maastricht Treaty does not link the free movement of persons to any conditions , and there can be no question of introducing legislation to link the removal of the internal borders to measures to combat crime and illegal immigration .
But there is a political connection between the two issues , and it is up to the national governments to take the necessary measures as quickly as possible .
Today , Parliament must consider what it really wants .
Do we want to haggle over principles , refusing to consider accompanying measures , but knowing that we will then end up with a decision that gets us nowhere , or do we really want freedom of movement to be introduced ?
In our view , we have to be realistic .
The Commission and Parliament must join forces in sending a message to the Council of Ministers that freedom of movement needs to be introduced , and it needs to be introduced quickly .
If the Council then fails to do so , it will have to account for its actions in public .
Madam President , I should like to make a number of comments on the three proposals for directives .
The first is that Parliament 's position has always been that , in order to make the free movement of persons a reality , all restrictions on travel and residence must be removed .
In the particular case of workers and their families , the Member States have an obligation to eliminate controls at internal frontiers .
However , the corresponding Commission proposal makes a right enshrined in the Treaties subject to new conditions , on the grounds that accompanying measures must be introduced in order to make possible the abolition of these controls .
This is unacceptable , to the extent that it means , in practice , postponing the elimination of controls at internal frontiers - in other words , maintaining surreptitiously precisely that which we are purporting to abolish .
Implementation of the Schengen Convention has demonstrated that it is quite possible to eliminate controls without introducing accompanying measures ; and to promote such measures is to undermine the right to free movement .
We are opposed to that .
We must not acknowledge a legal link between the abolition of controls on persons and the accompanying measures .
Turning now to other matters , the single market comprises an area without internal frontiers . This implies that the free movement of goods , persons , services and capital is guaranteed .
Consequently , anyone who is legally present in the Community must have the right to travel within it without any kind of restriction or discrimination .
It should be borne in mind that Articles 3 and 7a refer to the free movement of persons , not of citizens .
It therefore seems inconsistent to impose on third-country nationals who are in possession of a valid residence permit or travel document the obligation to report their presence .
Such treatment is discriminatory .
The Union must recognize the right of third-country nationals who are legally resident in the Community to travel within it under the same conditions as Community nationals .
Otherwise , there will be an inconsistency between the free movement of capital and goods and that of persons .
As a final comment , the proposals for directives make the right to free movement contingent upon preconditions which do not appear in the Treaty , although the abolition of controls is a clear and unconditional obligation on the part of the Union .
Furthermore , the possibility of suspending application of the directives cannot be left to the discretion of the individual Member States - in particular , since matters concerning the free movement of goods and capital do not fall within their sphere of competence .
Such an approach will undermine the Union 's political credibility .
The free movement of persons contributes to the meeting of cultures and the development of democracy .
Whatever safeguards are needed must be implemented , not at the Community 's internal frontiers , but at its external frontiers , by means of the instruments which are already available to us - and with a view to combatting drug trafficking and organized crime , not to harassing those who are legally resident in the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what we were promised was open frontiers , unrestricted freedom of movement , and no more controls .
How often have we heard it said that Europe was a single territory ?
But that was - and is - a lie .
No other European promise has been broken so often as the promise of a frontier-free Europe .
Now , as we consider three proposals for directives and we learn what the Council is getting up to behind the scenes , it is not the old idea of Europe that is becoming a reality , but the old lie .
The fact is - and many speakers have made the point - that the crucial Article , Article 7a , states in black and white that as from 31 December 1992 , the internal market is to be an area without internal frontiers : with no ifs or buts , no restrictions , no so-called accompanying measures , no delays , and no directives that seek to qualify the process or call it into question .
It is now patently obvious that the order of priorities in Europe today is : goods first , then services , then capital .
Those are the only priorities - or if people are a priority , it is only some people , not all of them .
Is this a viable way for Europe to function ?
No , it is not , because the frontier-free market must apply not only to prunes and potatoes , but also to people !
Since 1 January 1993 , we have been bending an article of the Treaty .
That article is becoming meaningless .
Article 7a is being breached , because controls are still in operation , from London to Athens and from Stockholm to Munich .
The governments of Europe have adopted a take-it-or-leave-it attitude to the old legal principle that pacta sunt servanda .
However , that cannot be our position , nor should it be the position of the Commission .
But in the case of freedom of movement , the Commission has failed to perform its most specific task .
Instead of being the guardian of the Treaties , it runs the risk of becoming nothing more than the Council 's henchman .
Moreover , if the collective might of the Council is now being brought to bear in an attempt to instil fear into Europe , if the fear of immigration outweighs the right of freedom of movement , then Europe 's spell will be broken , and we shall pay dearly for that !
We are against referral back to committee , because we think it is high time that Parliament took a stand and made its position clear to the Council and Commission .
Madam President , the object of this exercise is to determine , through examining the question of the free movement of persons , whether or not the will exists to build a genuinely united Europe - to act , that is , in accordance with the Treaty on European Union , which defines the Union as an area without internal frontiers .
Following the legal episodes of which we are aware , the Commission has the credit of moving our endless task forward once again .
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to Commissioner Monti for his prudence and courage , even if this initiative does not go as far as our group would wish .
But let it be quite clear that , at present , the Member States , the national governments - or rather certain Member States and national governments which are not really in favour of European integration - would have us share their irrational fear of immigration , which is wrongly blamed for all the ills of our society .
The need to safeguard the Union 's security is put forward as an argument for restricting freedom of movement .
But freedom and security go hand in hand .
Let us take care to ensure that , following the example of a certain Middle Eastern country in which the obsession with security is resulting in the peace process being brought to a halt - a country which nevertheless remains a friend - the need to safeguard the Union 's security is not allowed to serve as a pretext for those who do not wish the European Union to move forward .
Lastly , I wish to express my support for Mr Ford 's conclusions to the effect that , without banging its fist on the table , Parliament must be clear and unequivocal in its intention to defend the free movement of persons , and that no legal link must be established between the elimination of controls on persons and the accompanying measures , which must not become a barrier to the exercise of our most valuable asset , namely freedom .
Madam President , this debate today is surreal .
Just when the Member States are struggling to combat the problems of drug trafficking and illegal immigration , the European Parliament is dealing with a number of proposals for directives aimed at eliminating throughout the European Union all controls on persons at internal frontiers , whether those travelling are Community nationals or nationals of third countries .
The Commission tells us bluntly that , whatever the circumstances , the elimination of controls is ' an unconditional obligation which derives from Article 7a of the Treaty ' , and that it must dismantle all controls at internal frontiers , ' whatever their form , and whatever their justification ' .
You heard correctly : ' whatever their justification ' .
We are unable to agree with this extremist approach to the abolition of border controls , for a number of reasons .
Firstly , Article 7a , which provides for the creation of an area without internal frontiers , was , like the Schengen agreements , conceived at a time when the pressure of economic migration was not as great as it is today , and moreover when the Union 's eastern border was formed by the Iron Curtain .
Secondly , within the Union itself , illegal trafficking - especially of drugs - has increased .
And the fixed controls at internal borders have a part to play in stopping this trafficking , as the recent seizure of 106 kilograms of heroin at Calais , with the help of a French customs scanner - an instrument which is , by definition , fixed - has just made clear .
Thirdly , the Member States must retain control of their territory , in order to be able to exercise the national rights which a number of Treaty articles - for example , Articles 36 , 48 and 100a - rightly recognize them to have . And lastly , Article 7a is not entirely unambiguous - although , contrary to what Mrs Roth just said , it was accompanied by an explanatory statement - and in any event , it must be interpreted sensibly .
No : freedom of movement is not hindered by appropriate controls at the Union 's internal frontiers ; on the contrary , those controls serve to protect our citizens ' freedoms !
The proposals for directives which the Commission is presenting to us today are therefore totally inappropriate .
Not only must the Council reject them , but the Intergovernmental Conference must rewrite Article 7a . Furthermore , the Member States must agree not to eliminate the controls at the Union 's internal frontiers , but to improve them , supplementing the concept of fixed controls with that of a territorial filtering strip - as proposed , in France , in the recent report by Senator Paul Masson .
However , today 's debate seems even more surreal when we consider that it is taking place against the background of the ' mad cow ' crisis , in the context of which the Commission stands accused of having sacrificed public health on the altar of the dogmatic objectives of free movement at any price .
The situation with regard to these directives on the abolition of the Union 's internal frontiers is exactly parallel .
If they are adopted , they will give rise to a serious deficit in security - and , in ten years ' time , Mr Santer 's successor will come to this House to explain that is not the Commission 's fault , since public security has always been its top priority .
That is not true : it is clear from this debate that the Commission 's priority is not safeguarding public health or security , but above all promoting the fusion of the peoples of Europe , notably by eliminating the Union 's internal frontiers !
Madam President , do you by any chance have any explanation to give me about the request I made as Chair of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs for the Council to attend this debate ?
I imagine that you have no explanation to give me because , of course , the Council did not even bother to answer our request .
But it is a shame that it should not be here .
Madam President , regardless of the fates which these directives might be reserved a word of thanks to Commissioner Monti and Rapporteurs Ford and Linzer on the excellent work they have carried out so far .


Madam President , the situation which we are experiencing now in this House in respect of these reports and the initiative by Commissioner Monti on the freedom of movement is , thanks to the Council , quite awful from an ethical point of view and an attack on the European Parliament 's rights from an institutional point of view .
When finally after many years of doing nothing the Commission finally presented the European Parliament with three proposals for directives aimed at creating an internal market for persons and the European Parliament , as a consequence and following a number of months of debate , laboriously expressed its opinion , look what the Council did , on the sidelines of the legislative process enshrined in the first pillar , without letting the European Parliament know and without the slightest respect for the work it carries out : it has now taken a parallel initiative based on intergovernmental logic with scant regard for the efforts of the Commission and this House to achieve the first of all Community freedoms : the freedom of movement .
In the corridors and without any transparency or any parliamentary control , both at European and national levels , the Council is preparing - in the very week in which our Plenary is taking place and dealing with hope and seriousness with a fundamental legislative package for European citizens - to empty of any meaning the Commission initiative and the Parliament opinion and offer citizens an empty charade of legislation packaged up in a joint action by the Council .
Madam President , this incident is one of the most serious and gross violations of inter-institutional dialogue .
That is why we will no longer take part in this farce and will not discuss or vote for anything at all since we know , farce and hypocrisy aside , that our work over lengthy months of discussions is destined quite simply for the rubbish bin .
We refuse to take part in any legislative clowning of which Machiavelli himself would be proud without the slightest honour and very little glory , when the sole objective of the manoeuvre is to make legally ineffective the rights , enshrined by the Single Act , which the Commission and Parliament wish to offer citizens residing in the European Union .
Madam President , the challenge has been thrown down and the accusation has been made .
The Council has been acting behind the backs of the Commission and the European Parliament in bad faith .
We are owed an explanation , a justification , a notice and some information . We are at least owed a posture of seriousness .
Either the Council should do so very quickly and make all of its proposals quite clear or the European Parliament should use all political and legal means possible to denounce or to confront the Council and to make it assume its responsibility .
We will wait as long as is necessary and until this takes place we think that trust has been broken in the very minimum of interinstitutional ethics . Everything in its place .
The Council must show transparency in everything it does in its aims and responsibilities and , for our part , we know what we want : to abide by the rules and turn European citizenship into something practical while respecting the Treaty .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as other speakers have already said , there are four freedoms in the internal market .
Three are geared to economic interests , whilst one is the focus of popular expectation in Europe .
Three of them - the economic freedoms - have been achieved , but the free movement of persons has not become a reality .
I wish to know why this should be ?
We are told that freedom for people represents a greater risk .
But is that really true , if one considers the environmental risks involved in freedom of movement for goods , in the explosive upturn in mobility , the waste of energy and the excessive division of labour in Europe ?
Goods have to be given free access to markets , even if they do not meet the standards or conform to the traditions or safety expectations of the Member States .
But we are told that it is people who represent the risk .
On the contrary , we are facing much greater risks as a result of the free movement of goods , currencies and services .
Many people are prepared to tolerate those risks only because of the promise to introduce free movement of persons .
By delaying and failing to fully implement freedom of movement of persons , the Union is denying the rights of its own people .
To restrict freedom of travel to citizens of the Union , and to continue to make it difficult even for them , is to deny Europe 's openness to the world .
It means that the fears of a Fortress Europe are being borne out by Union policy .
This is a policy that is based not on people 's needs but on fear of people , a policy geared not towards cultural openness in Europe but towards total control of the population , a policy that divides , rather than unites Europe .
Madam President , freedom to travel is probably the most important element in creating the internal market as an area without internal frontiers .
Implementing this fundamental freedom will meet the expectations of many citizens of the Member States .
For several decades , the people of the former communist countries were denied the fundamental freedom to travel .
It is therefore all the more important that no one - and particularly not those people - should be treated as a second-class citizen within the Union , not least at the internal frontiers .
Amongst the measures needed to counter any possible increase in crime after the removal of all the controls , and to prevent illegal immigration by third-country nationals who are already in the Union illegally , are more intensive cooperation by police forces and social services , and the effective exchange of information through Europol .
Madam President , only last month an elderly woman of 76 was , in my view , illegally arrested on a train from London to Brussels , held overnight in a cell and put back on a train the following day because it was alleged that she had not brought with her what was claimed by the Belgian authorities to be a necessary document , namely a passport .
I believe that woman should consider very seriously taking action as an individual citizen for illegal imprisonment .
That being the case , the key to free movement is probably going to be individual European Union citizens taking actions by themselves rather than relying on the Commission or Member States to ensure that we have free movement .
I believe that free movement is not an objective of the Treaty but is a fundamental , constitutional right .
That is something without which the European Union cannot operate .
Therefore , if individual citizens are in a position to enforce Article 7a either directly or indirectly then the free movement will be enhanced .
The court case against the Commission by Parliament was not so much a mistake but should have been carried through to adjudication because it was said that the Monti proposals which flowed from that court case were in some way a kind of compromise and a way forward .
The so-called accompanying measures and the Schengen Agreement are both excuses for trying to avoid the central issue of Article 7a . If it is said that the so-called Monti proposals brought forward now will be vetoed in the Council of Ministers , that does not mean the end of all of this , that Article 7a somehow disappears .
It remains an obligation under which the Commission has to work and it remains something on which the Commission has to take action .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has always adopted a very clear position on the issue of the free movement of persons , based on two principles to which other speakers have referred .
Firstly , the free movement of persons is an obligation under the Treaty which should have been carried out by 31 December 1992 at the latest , without any preconditions .
Secondly , when we talk about persons , we mean all those legally resident in the Member States , and this has to include the 13 to 14 million nationals of third countries who have been living and working here for years , because we will not tolerate discrimination , and in any case restricting freedom of movement to EU nationals alone would be a nonsense in practical terms .
The Commission has , at long last , come round to our point of view and has produced these three directives , which are supposed to establish - three years too late - one of the few basic rights which people in the European Union have under the Treaty .
But the same parties who included the free movement of persons in the Treaty - the national governments - are now increasingly fighting shy of it and turning the whole issue into one of national security , afraid of their own shadows .
They are throwing more and more obstacles in its path , linking it to technical measures which then become legal requirements for the abolition of the internal frontiers .
The House rejects this position .
But now things really have gone too far , and this proposal from the Council for a joint action on the right to travel of nationals of non-member countries who are lawfully residing in a Member State , under Article K.3 , the third pillar , is an extremely provocative one both for the Commission and for this House .
Is Parliament supposed to be pleased that nationals of non-member countries are finally to have the right to travel ?
We are far from happy , in the first place because this joint action institutionalizes discrimination once and for all between citizens of the European Union and those from non-member countries , and it implies that those referred to in Article 7a of the Treaty can apparently only be citizens of the European Union .
Secondly , it also means the end for freedom of movement as a Community issue .
The next step will be a Schengen protocol in the Treaty and the abolition of Article 7a after the forthcoming IGC .
The Commission , the European Parliament and the Court of Justice will be completely sidelined .
It is a slap in the face not just for this House , but also for the people of the European Union , who do not want to see either Parliament or the Commission being walked over in this way .
Madam President , I am sure we will all support the aims and principles of these reports .
But the difficulties that clearly exist in the European Union at the moment in relation to these matters are due to the fact that when Heads of Government get together on various occasions there are often hidden agendas , and what seems to be agreed on paper is not always what they really intend to do : the result is that the free movement of peoples is the one area in which we have made very little progress in relation to the other freedoms .
I wish to speak mainly in relation to the Linzer report and I very much welcome some of the changes that have been made by way of amendment .
In particular , I want to stress the importance of the amendment to remove the reference in the report and in the Commission proposals to the right of Member States to expel third country nationals , not only if they represent a threat to public order or public security but also if they represent a threat to Member States ' international relations .
This is a very dangerous proposal ; it has been exploited by certain governments - including my own - to expel people who are protesting about the denial of human rights and the very serious problems in certain countries in the world which have obnoxious , racist and militaristic regimes .
These people have been threatened with expulsion owing to their activities in drawing world attention to these problems because the country concerned fears that that will affect its trade , or some other aspect of its relations .
That should not be a major factor , and I very much welcome these proposals .
Finally , there are certain difficulties for the British Labour Members in relation to these reports , and we will have to await the outcome of the vote on the various amendments before deciding whether we can or not support them , or whether we may have to abstain .
Madam President , I can understand that there are some people who are starting to become impatient to do away with the controls at the internal borders , but we have to realize that , for good reason , it is precisely this part of the internal market which is the hardest to put into effect .
We need to be realistic .
We cannot open the borders until passage across the external frontiers and the rules on asylum and visas have been settled .
Borders are a sensitive matter .
National frontiers are a central part of many people 's consciousness .
The population is simply not prepared to accept the consequences of the absence of border controls .
Whether it involves trafficking in drugs , human beings or waste which is hazardous to the environment , things will not have to go wrong many times before the EU loses credibility and is accused of doing more harm than good .
Furthermore , many people in Denmark are employed to carry out border controls , and we shall also have the problem of explaining things to them .
I should like to see a Europe without borders or border controls , but I cannot accept it if the result is that there are simply more police on the streets carrying out spot checks to make sure that people 's papers are in order .
That is what the consequences will be if we do not remain calm , but plunge headlong into open borders in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by offering sincere thanks to the various parliamentary committees , and in particular their rapporteurs , whose work has highlighted the key aspects involved in achieving the objective of Article 7a of the Treaty .
Reading the reports , one gains a sense of unfulfilled hopes and of frustration , together with an impatient wish for political decision-makers to ensure that the single market becomes a reality in terms of free movement for persons , as is already the case for goods , services and capital .
I must say that when I arrived at the Commission in January 1995 and assumed responsibility for the single market , I immediately found it unacceptable that three of the four freedoms had been achieved - or nearly so - but not the one of greatest relevance to persons .
That is why , back in July 1995 , I had the Commission adopt the proposals now before Parliament .
I can only share the feelings expressed by a majority in this House .
What does an individual or society usually do when it wishes to take action ?
It sets itself a goal , an objective , and decides on the means by which to achieve it .
But what are we seeing today ?
There is no certainty about the objective of Article 7a of the Treaty , nor is there agreement on the best means of achieving it ; and this has been the case for nearly ten years now , in other words ever since the start of the work leading to the adoption of the Single European Act .
Why has the Schengen agreement enabled progress to be made in this area , whilst the Union has been marking time ?
Quite simply , because the countries belonging to Schengen agree both on the objective and the appropriate means of achieving it .
In our case , the objective itself is rejected by at least one Member State .
As to the means , opinions differ widely : the question of the legal basis is endlessly discussed , but the reality is that one detects certain fears regarding the institutional foundations of the first pillar - the involvement of Parliament and the Court of Justice , and the role of the Commission .
Could it be that these foundations , so vital for democracy and the rule of law , are irreconcilable with the safeguarding of public order and security ?
Certainly not , in my view .
This does not mean to say that I cannot understand the concerns which have been expressed by the Home Affairs Ministers .
The free movement of persons inevitably raises questions of security and public order which must not be underestimated .
But having listened to you , and having participated in the initial discussions in the Council - in its ' internal market ' and ' justice and home affairs ' configurations - I have become convinced that the Commission 's chosen approach is indeed able to meet the various requirements .
I would make an appeal to the House , if I may , as it comes to vote on the amendments to the Commission 's proposal .

Let us concentrate on the essential points in that proposal , those aspects which are designed to send a strong message to our citizens : yes , Article 7a can and must become a reality ; yes , the means that are proposed are reasonable ; yes , the legal bases of the so-called first pillar are relevant ; and yes , the accompanying measures are appropriate , but any further delay in adopting them is unacceptable .
For this reason , the Commission will accept only those amendments whose purpose is to safeguard the legal basis of the proposals , in the Community 's best interests , and to improve or clarify the wording in keeping with the logic and discipline of the proposed texts .
With regard to the proposal for a directive on the elimination of controls on persons crossing the internal frontiers , the Commission was concerned , as I have already said , to make it clear that it did not intend to promote freedom to the detriment of security .
So I deny that there is any intention to make the accompanying measures and the actual elimination of intra-Community controls contingent on one another .
There is a link , however , and it is more political than legal in nature , since our citizens do have concerns about security .
The Commission therefore cannot accept those amendments which eliminate all links between these two aspects : freedom on the one hand , and security on the other .
I fear that by removing this link , we would not actually be doing anything to help achieve freedom of movement .
The Commission can accept four of the other five amendments , in other words Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 5 and 6 , since they are aimed at consolidating the legal basis of the proposal .
With regard to the proposal for a directive on the adaptation of secondary legislation applicable to EU citizens and members of their families , this is a technical adaptation which can be introduced once internal border controls have been abolished .
The only amendment contained in Mr Lehne 's report seems to me to overstep this particular mark , and I am unable to accept it .
Finally , as regards the proposal for a directive on the right of third-country nationals to travel within the Community , the Commission intends to accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 5 , 9 and part of Amendment No 10 , as well as Amendments Nos 15 and 18 .
There is no need to remind the House that this proposal has been subject to particular scrutiny in the Council , no doubt for two reasons : firstly , the part of the proposal for a directive concerning the equivalence between residence permits and visas , for people who are resident in a Member State of the Union , could be adopted and enter into force even before internal border controls have been eliminated ; and , secondly , this is the proposal which best lends itself , in terms of its legal basis , to being transferred from the first to the third pillar .
Here we should be careful not to detract from the traditional objectives and instruments of the Treaty , and even from the Schengen agreement which - let us not forget - already confers an absolute right to travel .
I think that all the legal and political implications of this very sensitive problem need to be assessed carefully .
I shall conclude by recalling once again what I hope goes without saying for all of us : free movement within the Union must be indistinguishable from free movement within our countries .
Like goods , services and capital , persons too should be able to move around freely .
We are duty-bound to achieve this goal , but we shall only be able to do so if all internal border controls are eliminated .
Let me end , Madam President , by referring to what has been highlighted by various speakers , namely the initiative by the presidency .
In the course of Council business , the presidency put forward an initiative of its own at the meeting of Steering Group I on 8 and 9 July .
It should come as no surprise that the College of Commissioners has not yet had an opportunity to adopt a position , and that I am consequently unable to inform you of the Commission 's stance on this matter .
However , in view of the importance which I attach to this problem , I admit that this new initiative worries me personally for more than one reason .
In fact , my concerns are threefold , and relate both to the link with our proposal for a directive on the right to travel , and to the content of the initiative and its legal basis .
Starting with the legal basis , I would recall that the Commission has always felt that the proposal on the right to travel is so inextricably linked with the question of the single market that the only appropriate legal basis is Article 100 of the Treaty .
I believe Parliament shares this point of view , especially since that legal basis is the one which preserves its prerogatives .
I admit that I am concerned about the content of the presidency 's initiative , and above all about its scope : the joint action programme is in fact confined to facilitating movement and does not confer the right to travel .
In reality it will merely allow a third-country citizen to present himself at the border , armed with a residence permit but without a visa .
This will not confer upon him the right to enter the territory of the other Member State ; thus he will run the risk of arbitrary expulsion and , what is worse , without the grounds for refusal of entry being subject to legal scrutiny by the Court of Justice .
Furthermore , this is a step back from the Schengen Convention , which already confers this right to travel .
In addition , the absence of the right of entry implies a need to maintain controls at internal borders , in order to check whether entry onto that territory can be authorized .
So , from a proposal for a directive whose purpose is to abolish controls at internal borders , we are moving to a legal instrument which will make it essential to keep those same controls in place .
In conclusion , I wish to stress that the thoughts which I have expressed thus far about this presidency initiative commit no one but myself .
Nevertheless , I shall not hesitate to make my concerns known to all my fellow Commissioners , inviting them to determine as soon as possible the strategy to be followed .
For my part , I would invite you , the European Parliament , to determine your own clear position on this problem .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.40 a.m. and resumed at 10.50 a.m. )

Commission statement on BSE
The next item is the statement by the Commission on its information policy on BSE since 1988 and measures it has taken to ensure compliance with the export ban and eradicate the disease .
I give the floor to Mr Santer , President of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , BSE is a serious matter .
The Commission has treated it as such from the outset , and I myself have resolved to treat it as such .
Since March , I have personally involved myself in this matter .
You know my position , and that of the Commission .
Public health is our prime concern , and scientific evidence is our only guide .
It is on the basis of this approach that the Commission defines its measures , and that on 27 March it adopted a strategy for confining the disease .
This strategy has been clearly endorsed by both the European Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance .
By rejecting the British Government 's appeal for the lifting of the ban , the Court explicitly confirmed the Commission 's steadfast position .
It clearly underlined the fact that the export ban forms part of a strategy in which overwhelming importance is attached to the protection of public health .
I would add that the general action plan to eradicate BSE , which was proposed by the Commission and made an agreement possible in Florence , also establishes a direct link between any resumption of exports and the elimination of all risks to human health .
In addressing this issue , the Commission has never concealed its guiding principles .
I see absolutely no reason why it would have carried out a policy of disinformation on such a sensitive issue .
I admit that the discovery of the note by a Commission official of October 1990 , which appeared to lend credence to the theory of a disinformation strategy , did cause me great concern - a concern which I made clear to you , moreover , at the time of my last appearance before the European Parliament , in Brussels in May .
Rather than over-reacting and indulging in conspiracy theories , however , I immediately sought an explanation , since what this note suggests is directly at odds with what I have observed since I have been at the head of the Commission .
As you requested , Mr President , I am prepared to submit the results of our investigations to the House today .
In this way , I hope to be able to demonstrate that the various reports which Members may have read or heard recently give a totally distorted image of the Commission 's action .
What is the situation , therefore ?
Mr Castille 's memorandum was an unrecorded note for the file .
Furthermore , it was not a minute of the meeting , but a personal opinion .
It was not addressed to either the Commissioner with responsibility for consumer protection or - with all the more reason - to the Commission as a whole .
In his note , Mr Castille refers , and I quote , to ' the representatives of the Commission ' .
The Deputy Director-General responsible for veterinary services , who attended the meeting of the Standing Veterinary Committee on that day , has confirmed to us that he personally said nothing at that or any other meeting which could be interpreted as the outline of a disinformation policy to be conducted by the Commission .
He has also said that he never heard any of his colleagues make remarks along those lines . In order to be absolutely clear , moreover , at the last meeting of the Veterinary Committee , we asked the Member States ' delegations - since the committee is composed of representatives of the Member States - to give their version of events .
The Danish delegate , the only delegate to have been personally present at the meeting of October 1990 - six years ago , that is - stated that at no time did the Commission ask the United Kingdom not to publish the results of its research .
She also stressed that the interpretation contained in the note by Mr Castille is totally contrary to the substance and spirit of the Standing Veterinary Committee 's discussions and does not reflect the Commission 's approach .
The Danish delegate 's comments are borne out by the notes of the Irish delegation .
The other delegations stated that the BSE issue has never been addressed in this way , either by the Commission or by the Member States ' representatives in the Veterinary Committee .
The Italian delegation went so far as to say that if such an approach had been proposed by the Commission , it would have been forcibly rejected by the Member States .
That much is clear , I believe .
That is the extent of the information which I have been able to obtain concerning a meeting which took place six years ago .
In any event , the Commission should be judged on its actions .
In fact , less than a month after the infamous meeting of the Veterinary Committee in 1990 , the Commission organized a scientific conference of an unprecedented size , at which 200 of the most illustrious members of the scientific community from throughout the world were gathered together , precisely in order to examine the problem of BSE . And this conference gave an undeniable boost to research into BSE .
If we are now starting to have adequate scientific data at our disposal - some of which gave rise to the current crisis , and some of which are enabling us to find solutions - it is partly thanks to the impetus provided by this conference .
Does organizing a conference of this kind and publishing its results in their entirety , ladies and gentlemen , constitute a disinformation strategy ?
I do not intend to review at present what has been done since 1990 to combat BSE .
The Commission has systematically based its proposed measures on the best available scientific advice .
And whenever new elements have appeared , the Commission has taken them - and will continue to take them - into account .
I would stress that we are faced with a complex and complicated problem , with regard to which there are - unfortunately - still no absolute scientific certainties .
I come now to a second matter which has caused a great deal of concern .
I refer to the suspicions regarding the illegal export of British beef .
It goes without saying that such exports would be fraudulent .
Consequently , this matter must be taken extremely seriously .
In this context too , however , we must not be carried away by emotion .
We must get to the bottom of things .
And that is what the Commission is doing .
We have written to Mr Seehofer , the German Health Minister , to ascertain his reasons for notifying the ministers of the German Lnder .
We have written to all the Agriculture Ministers in the Union , calling on them to exercise increased vigilance .
We have also asked them to carry out inquiries and forward all useful information on this subject to the Commission .
My colleague , Mr Fischler , has interceded with his British counterpart in order to make sure that the UK authorities are ensuring full compliance with the export ban .
Lastly , we have instructed our own antifraud unit , UCLAF , to investigate any possible irregularities .
To date , the only written replies which the Commission has received are those from Mr Seehofer and the Italian Agriculture Minister .
I place them at Parliament 's disposal .
You will see that they contain no information which might justify , at present , the serious fears provoked by the numerous press articles which followed Mr Seehofer 's action .
This does not mean that the Commission should not examine these allegations closely .
It will continue to do so , and if there is found to be fraud , the perpetrators will have to be severely punished .
The Commission will insist that the Member States assume their responsibilities .
Indeed , the customs and veterinary services , which fall within the jurisdiction of the Member States , must do their job .
As for the Commission , it is doing its job .
Next week , moreover , a new veterinary inspection team will be going to the United Kingdom , and I have asked it to pay particular attention to ensuring strict compliance with Community legislation and the strengthening of physical controls in ports .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in addressing this issue , we shall not allow ourselves to be diverted from our approach : public health is our prime concern , and the latest scientific evidence is our only guide .
Any kind of information - however improbable - will be examined .
We shall take no risks , and we shall act with transparency .
We shall assume our responsibilities .
It is in this way that we shall serve the public 's interest .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , the internal note by a Commission official of October 1990 condenses in a single page everything for which the Union 's bureaucracy is criticized by the public .
Added to the revelation of this note - why such agitation on the Commission 's benches ? - are the rumours of illegal circumvention of the ban on exports of British beef .
Since this last matter is now before the Italian courts , I shall not dwell on it .
The impact of these revelations is devastating !
Admittedly , the Commission of which Mr Santer is President is not responsible .
Admittedly , the official responsible in 1990 may well be in retirement .
Admittedly , it is probable that no Commissioner saw the note in 1990 .
However , none of this excuses us from drawing the necessary lessons from what happened in 1990 .
It is because we respect the Commission 's work , and because the Commission must be above all suspicion , that we wish things to be that way .
What does this note reveal ?
It reveals , firstly , an attitude which is frequently condemned by the Socialist Group , but which rarely appears in such a cynical form : the attitude that the market is the paramount consideration - which is equivalent to saying that anything else , in this case the protection of public health , is of secondary importance .
This attitude was born , in certain countries , of the triumphant economic liberalism of the 1980s .
The creation of the single market - in which attention is focused on the economic dimension at the expense of the social and environmental dimensions - is the extension of this attitude at European level .
Secondly , it reveals an incredible blindness to the concerns which had already been expressed at the time by the parties involved .
I shall cite no more than the written question on this subject submitted by my colleague Mr Happart in May 1990 , and the Agriculture Commissioner 's subsequent bland reply .
Lastly , it reveals a wish to create a lack of clarity in the provision of information , or even to misinform : a refusal to ensure transparency which is absolutely scandalous in a modern democratic institution .
What lessons must we draw from this matter , therefore ?
The first is that it is not a question of apologizing swiftly and turning to the business at hand , but of undertaking to bring about a profound change in attitude and approach .
The fact is that if a Commission official was able to produce such a document in 1990 - whether the politician responsible at the time knew about it or not - it is because the preconditions existed for him to do so .
In other words , giving priority to the demands of the market , a lack of responsibility with regard to the protection of public health , and the desire to deal with such matters behind closed doors must all be common currency for such a document to be produced without giving rise to questions at any level .
Furthermore , if such an attitude coincides at Member State level with very significant economic interests , lax veterinary controls and disregard for Community regulations , one can imagine the scale of the disaster , the extent of the permanent concealment of the facts , and the level of disregard for all public health and consumer protection concerns , for the benefit of economic interests .
That , Mr President , is the real scandal .
If the Commission now wishes to safeguard its credibility with the general public , it must show proof of a desire for absolute transparency and rigorous respect for the requirements of public health . It can defend itself by pleading not guilty a hundred times , but the general public will see only the permanence of the institution and not the succession of individual officials .
The Socialist Group will examine very carefully and calmly the explanation which the President of the Commission has just given to Parliament .
I should like to thank him for that explanation , since I believe that it is extremely important that he has provided the House with this very precise information .
We shall , of course , be adopting a resolution , but that is not enough : our group will be considering the appropriateness of calling for a committee of inquiry .
In any event , it could be said that if there were ever a case in which , pursuant to Rule 136 , a committee of inquiry should be set up , it is this - in order to investigate whether there has indeed been an instance of maladministration , or even negligence , in the treatment of this matter by the Commission and the Member State in question .
It is in everyone 's interests to ensure maximum clarity , in order to restore confidence in the European and national authorities : the confidence of farmers , but above all the confidence of the Union 's citizens and consumers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as early as 1988 the Southwood Commission , a group of independent British scientists , said about BSE : ' We do not believe that there is a risk for man , but if we are wrong , the risk will be extremely high . '
In the debate in this House on 12 June 1990 , I called for all BSEinfected herds to be destroyed .
My experience of the continuing saga of BSE is that what we have to deal with here is not only the question of disinformation , which is actually of secondary importance , but something else .
We have to deal with the fact that the Commission , the Council and the trade organizations , as well as some sections of this House , have in a sense failed to appreciate the situation and were not prepared to give priority to consumer protection in the interests of prevention .
Of course , we have to see this in the light of the scientific advice , because the scientists ' findings have emerged only in a piecemeal way , and as yet we have no definite conclusions .
In this respect , it is not just a question of the note by Mr Castille - and I also heard the smug remark being made at the time in various quarters that if the whole thing was so dangerous , it was best to say nothing at all !
Not only the scientific dimension , but also the impact of consumer reaction , was simply underestimated .
Mr Santer and Mr Fischler , you have been in office now for a year and a half , and I would ask just one thing of you : do not make the mistake of seeking to cover up any past omissions and possible misconduct by Commission staff , or misconduct by the Council .
You have been right to bring pressure to bear through the decisions you have now taken .
I should like to stress that point in particular , and to express my approval .
However , there has also been a series of gaffes , such as the failure to implement in good time the standards for disposing of animal carcasses .
The decisions taken in 1990 should have been implemented by December 1991 , and you know what has happened up to now .
In my view , a number of factors justify continuing with internal inquiries within the Commission to determine to what extent the officials who were involved and responsible really acted on behalf of the Community - or failed to do so .
But I would also say this : as far as I am aware , a committee of inquiry would bring nothing new before the House .
As regards animal-based meal and monitoring , we are discussing facts which have been available to everyone concerned with the issue since 1990 , 1991 or 1992 at the latest .
A committee of inquiry could provoke another over-reaction by consumers and the media , and in the end that would mean the farmers affected having to pay dearly for this a second time .
For that reason , Mr Santer , I would ask whether you can give the House an assurance that , as well as the internal inquiries which you have made about the written note , you will also examine whether the Commission staff have actually done all they could in recent years to secure implementation of the directives and regulations that have been adopted , and to what extent the necessary controls have been carried out in the Member States .
I would also ask for your assurance that the programme of culling is being carried out systematically , and that the interim research results will be made available promptly to the parliamentary committee responsible .
I believe that this would be the best means of making good past omissions .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , we were expecting a great deal from your statement , since we have the somewhat distressing feeling that , in the past , the Commission has not always fully appreciated the extent of the political catastrophe represented by the problem of mad cow disease .
On the one hand , there are bewildered and panic-stricken consumers , who believe that part of the truth has been concealed from them - something which helps to maintain a devastating climate of fear .
On the other , there is a whole economic sector , from breeders to processors and distributors , which is on the verge of despair because its very survival is under threat .
Indeed , there are regions of the European Union - in Ireland , Scotland , the massif central in France , the mountainous areas of northern Italy - in which cattle farming is the predominant , if not the only economic and human activity .
Today , the European Parliament - which has been drawing the attention of the Commission and the Council to the gravity of the situation since the years from 1988 to 1990 - is angry , because it believes that the answers it has been given hitherto fall far short of what is required .
It has the feeling that the matter is still being treated as a sectoral problem , when in fact it is the whole functioning of the Community institutions which is at issue .
Two recent incidents give us cause for concern .
Previous speakers have referred to Mr Castille 's note .
We welcome the fact , Mr President , that you have held an inquiry within the Commission . Nevertheless , we are not satisfied with what you have told us , since in order for an inquiry to be credible , both sides must be heard .
However , as far as I am aware , you did not give a hearing to the author of the note , Mr Castille , who is now in retirement , but who could have supplied some very useful information .
I , for my part , took the trouble of telephoning Mr Castille and asking him some questions , and he told me that the note had indeed been forwarded at the time to the office of the Commissioners .
We are therefore surprised that your predecessor , Mr Delors , and even the Commission 's current spokesman , should have attempted to discredit the author of the note , the intention of which - and certainly , it was a personal opinion - was to draw attention to the seriousness of the problem which mad cow disease already represented at that time .
Subsequently , I found in my records an article which appeared in the ' Science and Medicine ' column of ' Le Monde ' of 30 May 1990 , which is around the same time as Mr Castille 's note , and in which two female professors - one at the Maisons-Alfort veterinary school , and the other at the Saint-Louis hospital - drew attention to the risk of infection posed by the use of meat-based meal .
However , we had to wait until 1994 before legislation prohibiting the use of meat-based meal was adopted at European level .
We believe , therefore , that the Union 's institutions did not function as they should have .
We have the impression that , at the time , everything happened as if the watchword were ' don 't make waves ' .
The result today is that everything is being swept away by a tidal wave .
Consequently , Mr President , following these events which in our view are totally and exceptionally disturbing , we are calling on you to assume your responsibilities in full : firstly , in particular , by expediting an internal inquiry - but one in which both sides are heard - in order to establish exactly what happened in 1990 and draw the necessary conclusions , not least in disciplinary and political terms , if current or former Commissioners are involved .
Secondly , by setting up with the Member States an emergency committee to ensure compliance with the health rules currently in force , in order to guarantee that the ban on the export of British beef - as well as that on the use of hormones - is respected .
For we know that in this sector too , the Member States ' controls are inadequate .
Thirdly , by taking the initiative of proposing stringent regulations for the production of meat-based meal and its use in animal feeds , taking your lead from the restrictive legislation recently adopted by the French Government .
Fourthly , by enacting common rules making the identification of carcasses compulsory throughout the European Union , with a view to increasing the transparency of marketing networks .
Fifthly , by making available the financial resources that are necessary , on the one hand to eradicate the disease and , on the other , to rescue operators in the beef and veal sector .
It is only by restoring consumer confidence - by applying in full the principle of transparency - and not by the Commission and the Member States persisting in passing the buck , with the sole aim of justifying their lack of action , that we shall emerge from this crisis .
Mr President , the Commission 's first objective must be to restore consumer confidence in beef , but it will never do that if documents keep emerging which cast doubt on the Commission 's position .
I therefore agree with what other speakers have said in this debate , that there must be an internal investigation and an internal report published to put an end to all these rumours .
We need to be open and honest .
My group will wait to see this report before it decides whether to support the calls for a committee of inquiry to be set up .
The second question is what the Commission should do next .
There are still so many unknown factors associated with BSE , and more research is needed .
What role should the Commission play here ?
What role is it already playing in coordinating all the research that is currently being done in Europe , and what will the financial implications of this be ?
The third point my group feels is important is to restore the balance in the market for beef .
This could be a difficult process , but one of the things that might help would be the introduction of a European quality mark for beef .
Customers need to know how beef is produced , and for this a German , Dutch or Bavarian quality mark is not enough , we need a European quality mark to ensure that there is fair competition throughout the Union .
There must also be fair competition with other measures .
Germany has now announced that it will not abide by the Commission 's decision concerning the export of certain products from the United Kingdom .
What does the Commission intend to do about this ?
What does it think about France 's decision to ban the use of meatbased meal in cattle fodder ?
We need to have fair competition everywhere .
Mr President , this statement and debate were motivated by the revelation of the existence of the now infamous internal Commission note - or , if you like , note by a Commission official - concerning the disinformation strategy to be pursued with regard to the issue of mad cow disease .
However , the main problem is not the note , but the fact that at the same time , the inspection missions by the Office of Veterinary Control were suspended and the Commission failed to exercise its function as the initiator of legislation .
That situation continued for four years , during which almost 75 % of the declared cases of BSE were recorded .
If risks existed , it was during this period .
If legislation was necessary , it was during this period .
If there was a need for inspections , it was never so acute as during this period .
The Commission must explain the reasons for its lack of action during the period from 1990 to 1994 .
If we wish to avoid the word disinformation , we must talk about transparency , and it cannot be argued that the Commission 's conduct has been transparent .
The scientific basis for lifting the ban on gelatine is unclear , and the Commission has not provided us with the information requested in paragraph 6 of Parliament 's resolution of last June .
It is essential to compare the report submitted by the European Association of Gelatine Manufacturers , on which the Commission based its proposal for the partial lifting of the ban , with independent scientific opinions .
As long as the impression exists that decisions are based on information supplied by interested parties rather than on independent scientific data , and that the European Parliament 's requests for information are not being met , it will not be possible to restore consumer confidence .
We must learn from experience : deregulation and the pursuit of competitiveness by the intensification of farming have created this problem .
Experience has shown that when decisions are determined by economic - or indeed political - considerations , the consequences are grave .
In the past , important decisions have been determined by the will to complete the single market or ensure the success of a summit .
The public is aware of this , and we cannot expect to restore consumer confidence with such a record - even less so if the suspicion exists that economic interests have been put before public health in the taking of certain decisions .
We must not fall into past mistakes .
In all future decisions , the slightest risk must be eliminated .
In this affair , there are interests , winners , losers and economic costs - but above all , risks to public health .
And there are also responsibilities .
In the view of the European United Left , there is a need to set up a committee of inquiry to establish responsibility for the creation and development of this problem , and especially to ensure that the decisions taken in the future safeguard public health .
Some might say that the work of a such committee will produce new headlines in the press which have a damaging effect on consumption .
However , we already have experience of what happens when decisions are postponed or adopted in a half-hearted way .
Moreover , the long incubation period of this disease and the dangers already recognized will ensure that the press will continue to be provided with headlines in the immediate future .
For all these reasons , the European United Left will support the setting-up of a committee of inquiry which focuses on the political decisions adopted , with a view to safeguarding the public interest .
I am coming to an end , Mr President .
As Mr Fayot said , we wish to contribute to ensuring that the market is made subject to the laws of democracy and the need to protect public health .

Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner Fischler , the BSE disaster is a chain of misconduct , political misjudgement , and failure to assume political responsibility .
This is not a plague ; it is a disaster brought about by mankind , namely by the British Government 's decision to change the temperature and pressure at which animal-based meal was manufactured .
We all know what the result was for the cattle .
However , there was also a failure of judgement on the part of the Commission in thinking that this disease would not take on such proportions , but would gradually die out .
It is true that the Commission has now taken action - and I acknowledge Commissioner Fischler 's consistent approach - but it has been an emergency response rather than a policy of prevention , because some two million infected animals had already entered the food chain before the Commission intervened .
Animal-based meal that was manufactured at temperatures too low to halt BSE infection is still in circulation , and animalbased meal is also continuing to be used as fodder while it is still unknown whether temperature can , in fact , halt the infection .
According to you , Mr Santer , the Commission had no official line , and the Italian Government said that if the Commission had made the proposal in question , it would have rejected it .
In saying this , you are either making a joke or being cynical .
If you had come clean about it , we would not have needed a committee of inquiry .
The problem is that you did not come clean .
What is at issue now is not only a cure for this disease , but the reputation of the European Parliament and the reputation of European politics , which has been tarnished by all this sloppiness .
It is important that the European Parliament , which has been consistent in its approach , is not lumped together with a Commission which failed to recognize the signs when it should have done , which relied on scientists who minimized the danger , and which played along with the strategy of minimizing the danger .
That is what matters now , and that is what must be resolved .
And if we are unlucky and this disease proves to be transmissible to humans , we shall have to ask ourselves why , even at this stage , we failed to draw the necessary conclusions .
The question of a committee of inquiry is also a question of how rigorous future measures will be .
What matters is not just that amends should be made for past errors , but that the House should use the powers it has recently acquired in relation to agriculture , and that it should be incorporated in the Treaties that the House can have its say and require you to take action if we believe it to be necessary .
That is what matters , and that is why our group is in favour of setting up the committee of inquiry .
And the flabby line taken by Mr Bge , on behalf of the PPE Group - ' Go ahead and investigate it yourselves , it 's all right by us ' - is not the stance of the European Parliament .
We must do our duty , Mr Bge !
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , this week , Parliament will decide - or at least I hope so - to set up a committee of inquiry to shed light on certain aspects of the issue of so-called mad cow disease .
For whatever the merits of your statement , Mr President of the Commission , there is a need for persons outside the Commission to carry out an investigation - and through a procedure in which both sides are heard .
Today , Parliament is beginning to respond in the manner that is required .
It was necessary for an internal Commission note of October 1990 - published by a number of newspapers - to reveal what are seemingly astonishing cases of negligence within the Commission for it to do so .
This note reveals what is , to say the least , the inefficient organization of rules and practices within the Commission , and in the Commission 's relations with the Member States .
Quite rightly , the public wants to know , and it wants transparency .
I was Minister for Consumer Protection for three years , and I know very well that once consumer confidence has been lost , it cannot be restored unless consumers are convinced that they are dealing with competent , honest and impartial officials .
That is why stalling tactics used to delay inquiries or limit their scope are based on a complete misjudgement .
If we wish to protect the breeding sector - and especially the quality breeding sector , in which animals are fed on grass or cereals - there must be transparency , identification of the origin of animals , quality labels , and controls carried out by services which are independent of the farming industry and which represent consumers .
If we wish to protect the wholesale and retail distribution networks , there must be effective supervision of the whole chain from producer to consumer .
And if we wish to maintain the credibility and authority of the Commission - and our group very much wishes to do so , Mr President - it is essential not only for an inquiry to be carried out to investigate past events , but also to provide for reforms within the Commission and in the Commission 's relations with the Member States , in order to ensure that similar cases of negligence or mistakes do not occur again in future .
Mr President of the Commission , Mr President of the European Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , for the third time since 27 March , we are required to debate in plenary the problem of mad cow disease and its consequences .
In her speech on 27 March , my colleague Mrs Poisson read out an extract from Sir James Goldsmith 's book , which was written in 1992 , and in which all the evidence that BSE could be transmitted to humans was already described .
And Mrs Poisson asked the Commission a single question : what has the Commission done since 1990 ?
The reply was unequivocal : your predecessor , Mr Delors , had said that the Commission was not well informed on the subject and could do nothing .
On 3 June , my colleague Mr des Places made a call for genuine solidarity with cattle breeders , and for those responsible - in the cattle-feed manufacturing industry , in governments and in the Community institutions - to be identified .
Commissioner Fischler did not furnish him with a reply on this point .
The Commission 's planned measures will cover only 20 % of the losses suffered by our cattle breeders .
In France , for example , losses in the beef and veal sector are currently in excess of FF 15 billion , but the planned compensation amounts to only FF 3 billion .
Who will pay the difference ?
When I lodged a complaint before the European Court of Justice , with the support of a cattle breeders ' union , I was told : ' No , the Commission is not responsible ; it did everything in its power ' .
However , in the now infamous internal Commission note of 12 October 1990 - which , as Mr Pasty has just told us , was forwarded to the Commissioners ' office , so to the political authorities as it were - it is written in black and white : ' This issue must be played down by exercising a policy of disinformation ' .
Earlier , President Santer , you said that this document was no more than an internal note written by an official now in retirement , and that its contents were belied by the Commission 's actions .
No , Mr President , it was not an insignificant note .
We all know - from being familiar with the mysterious workings of the Commission - that such internal papers indicate the broad outlines of policy .
In conclusion , Mr President of the Commission , in the face of these failures to reply , you oblige me to assume my responsibilities .
Pursuant to Rule 34 , entitled ' Motion of censure on the Commission ' , I shall therefore begin , this very afternoon , to collect the 60 signatures required , so that Parliament can vote on such a motion of censure at the September part-session .
Of course , you will say that the Commissioners responsible are no longer the same . I would point out , however , that Commissioners are responsible for the actions of the Commission as a whole , and that if there was a breakdown in the operation of the Commission , then the College of Commissioners currently in office is responsible .
The Europe of Nations Group will call for a parliamentary committee of inquiry to be set up , but Parliament must assume all its responsibilities ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioners , you are , at the very least , accused of a crime .
In your defence , you describe to us what you have done since March 1996 .
The problem , Mr Santer , is not what you have done since that date : it is what you did not do before that date - and with a full knowledge of the facts .
At the political level , as long ago as September 1990 , here in this Chamber , Mr Happart and I warned Commissioner MacSharry of the dangers , after we had spoken to all the international experts , including Mr Prisuner .
On 11 June 1990 , an issue of the National Front 's newspaper carried the headline : ' The disease spreads to humans ' .
And indeed here , on 22 February 1996 , Harno Diringer , the director of the Roch Institute in Berlin , said in the presence of Commission officials : ' I warn Europe 's health authorities that BSE is spreading to humans ' .
It was impossible for you not to know !
You tell us : ' We have no motive . Why would we have done that ? '
However , Mr Santer , if the public had known the truth in 1990 , if , in 1992 , it had known that free trade , the unrestrained pursuit of productivity , was resulting in contamination , it would not have accepted the GATT agreements and the Maastricht Treaty .
That is your motive .
You concealed the contamination by meat-based meal in order to conceal the contamination by your ideas .
Above and beyond the infection by meat-based meal , the public was being poisoned by your ideas , Mr Santer !
And , in terms of the Vienna Treaty , you violated the people 's right of consent .
You secured the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty by invalidating that right of consent .
Naturally , we agree with Mr de Villiers .
It is not a question of setting up a committee of inquiry , but of the Commission assuming its political responsibilities .
In other times , history 's great poisoners suffered a different fate .
Mr President , I do not know why I always draw the short straw and have to speak after speeches like that - but there you are .
Having been here since 1988 , I have been trying to get the Commission and MEPs alike to take the threat of BSE seriously .
We must all be worried that the Commission was so concerned about the reports of the disease 's existence that apparently it decided to deny it altogether .
More importantly , at some level within the Commission we are told it was decided to keep all the information away from the public domain or as far away from the public domain as might be possible .
On the other hand , I have to say that although it might be in the interests of some people in the Community to blame the Commission for this , it has actually had a very good record by comparison , for example , with the behaviour of the British Government , which has been trying to sit on information on BSE for at least as long .
It also had the information pointed out to it at that time and managed to keep it out of the public domain .
Even when the pressure for information became overwhelming on 20 March 1996 and every newspaper , television station and radio programme in Europe carried news of nothing else , the British Government never showed any signs of being willing or able to give us the information that the public had a right to know all along .
It is not surprising , therefore , that there is very little consumer confidence in the beef industry across Europe .
That is true not just in Britain but elsewhere as well , in Germany , Italy , France and so on .
Therefore , we need to have a coherent European-wide ban to tackle this disease and that is why we are in the position we are in now .
We need to have the plan in place and after that we can begin to tackle the question of consumer confidence .
There is no point in lifting a ban if no one is going to buy the stuff anyway .
It is perhaps unfortunate that the so-called Mother of Parliaments is unable to hold its own government to account for the series of blunders that is the BSE crisis .
If , in this Parliament we have to have a committee of inquiry , that would be helpful .
However , we must be careful that committee does not turn into some kind of witch hunt .
It has to be a serious committee of inquiry and not simply an attempt to pin the blame for what appears to be an essentially British disease on other people or institutions .
The committee of inquiry , if it is set up , must be seen as a positive contribution to a European solution for this whole crisis .
Mr President it is not often I share a short straw with my colleague , Ken Collins , but following the previous speaker , I not only contradict him , but I contradict some of the points that Ken Collins has been making .
But first of all may I , contrary to some of my colleagues , thank the President of the Commission for his statement , thank him for the work that the Commission has been doing and is doing at the moment in trying to deal with the many problems that have arisen as a result of this whole beef crisis .
We have to look where we are and , following the agreement that we were relieved to receive from Florence on the framework programme , there has been considerable progress .
We should be encouraged by the fact that the issue is back where it belongs , that is at scientific and at veterinary level .
Many Members may be interested to hear what is actually happening at the moment and to note that nearly a quarter of a million cattle under the 30 months scheme have been slaughtered since the scheme began , a quarter of a million cattle , and they are still moving at the rate of 30 000 per week .
In addition every effort is being made to carry out a selected cull among the dairy herds that have suffered from BSE .
This of course has had a devastating effect on cattle farmers , cattle farmers throughout Europe , and the clean beef prices have been dramatically affected in the market place .
The fact that such action has been taken , together with the quite substantial reinforcement of existing legislation on the composition of feed and the exclusion of any tissues that may be contaminated , should start to satisfy customers , should restore confidence amongst consumers , that beef is as safe from infection as many other foods we consume .
Irrespective of this of course we have seen - and reference has been made to this by almost every speaker - that assertions on the existence of an internal Commission paper from October 1990 , referring to existing health risks concerning BSE , appeared in the media of several Member States , as well as reports on illegal exports of beef from the United Kingdom .
The President of the Commission has given us a very firm answer from the Commission on these two points , and therefore I would not wish to dwell on them .
It suggested that the United Kingdom should not publish the results of research .
Well as the President of the Commission said , quite clearly , that could be regarded as a joke but certainly it was not a paper that was received by the United Kingdom Government .
So the present crisis and the slaughter of thousands of cattle to restore confidence has proved perhaps how wrong that advice , if it had been given , would have been at that particular time ; but it was a file note , merely a declaration to the Veterinary Committee and not a formal recommendation to the government .
So I would like to thank the Commission for doing all in their power to show financial solidarity with farmers , particularly those farmers who have been hardest hit by this crisis .
I would like , if I may , to thank Commissioner Fischler for his contribution and in particular , if I may say so on a more personal basis , for his contribution at our Royal Agricultural Show a few weeks ago , when he was able to meet many farmers and was able in meeting them to restore some confidence among them about what the Commission was doing .
The additional intervention measures which have been taken are helpful , and the funding of research is crucial .
Indeed , if scientists could find a foolproof test to diagnose the disease , then it would be a major breakthrough in animal science .
Perhaps I might ask Mr Fischler if there is any progress made in this direction .
He might also care to comment on the availability of the rendering facilities since much of the product is presently going into cold storage .
I support also those who call for a European quality assurance scheme on beef and I support the call for the full identification of all animals .
Mr President , I have followed this matter since March of this year .
I represent the biggest beef-producing constituency in England and the area with the highest number of BSE cases .
I sometimes wonder if excessive concentration on detail is not turning our brains spongy .
Clearly we must have tight controls on the export of meat and meat products from the UK .
Clearly it is likely that some would have been in transit at the time of the ban , perhaps to third countries , and may have escaped those controls .
I am pleased that the Commission has asked the anti-fraud unit to investigate any cases of fraudulent trading .
But on the overall issue and the question of the cover-up , we need to take a wider view .
This issue in a sense has been the United Kingdom 's Chernobyl .
Our failure to act at the first warning signs meant that the problem became worse .
It got out of control .
We do not know its effect on human health if any .
But clearly there is substantial public concern and that public worry has been affecting us all .
As a result , safety procedures have been improved .
Measures have been put in place to eradicate the disease .
But what some people have still not realized is that this is truly a European problem .
If we want our beef market to recover we must match our resolute deeds with reasoned words .
You said , Mr President , that we must not get carried away with emotion .
I am pleased that you have written to Mr Seehofer to question him about his actions .
Yes , let us have an internal inquiry in the Commission .
That is surely only proper .
But let us not blow up the problem , let us clear it up .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , dura lex sed lex .
When it comes to tackling a disaster such as the BSE crisis which has afflicted the United Kingdom , especially when this disaster affects a community as large as Europe , one must disregard one 's own interests and be resolute , mature and worthy of living in a civil and democratic environment , especially when that community - in a spirit of cooperation - has attempted to assist the Member State concerned , albeit somewhat late in the day .
That has not been and is not the case .
Time does not permit me to tell the tale of the so-called mad cow ; I would merely remind the House that , way back in January 1995 , the president of the Alleanza Nazionale , Mr Muscardini , asked the Commission what was the truth about the disease affecting cattle in the UK .
This question received an evasive and untruthful reply from Commissioner Fischler .
So what can we say ?
Should we play cat and mouse ?
That is no use to anyone .
The lack of proper information - as stated in an internal , not to say secret Commission document , which concluded that the problem should not be aggravated - and the lack of controls are fuelling doubt and suspicion .
I would point out that the worldwide embargo on British beef is being circumvented by illegal , clandestine exports of beef from that country and , furthermore , that Parliament is still awaiting the outcome of the Commission 's inquiry into these accusations .
All these accusations create a climate of distrust in the public authorities whose duty it is to regularize this immensely difficult situation , which is affecting all of us and not just the Member State most directly concerned .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , firstly , I should like to say that we welcome this morning 's statement .
With the benefit of hindsight , however , I believe that it is clear that the Commission 's approach should not be imitated in the management of this issue .
The public has the impression that we have continually been dragged along by events , and certain information seems to confirm this - in particular , the note from the Consumer Policy Service which we are now discussing .
To suggest that not talking about BSE would prevent unfavourable market reactions is quite simply to show contempt for Europe 's citizens .
To ask the United Kingdom officially not to publish the results of its research , or to implement a policy of disinformation with regard to BSE , is quite simply to commit an act of madness that is totally out of place in the community based on the rule of law which is the European Union .
However , the solution must not lie solely in rectifying matters for the future .
There is also a need to look back and provide political remedies for the mistakes of the past .
We can express our regret at the situation in the beef and veal sector , the growth of stocks by 600 000 tonnes and the 11 % fall in consumption .
However , any measures taken will be useless if consumers believe that they are being deceived by the Community authorities .
Whoever drew up this note considered that market imperatives were more important than public health .
Today , six years later , and in spite of this policy - the duration of which , and who was responsible for it , must be established by the inquiry for which we are calling - we are faced with a much worse situation .
The disinformation measures have only served to aggravate the problem .
The only thing which can truly restore balance to the markets is the confidence of consumers in the fact that those markets are governed by specific rules , and that the products - beef or otherwise - are not harmful or dangerous to public health .
The content of the note in question amounts to turning immorality into a commercial rule .
Let us hope that this unfortunate episode will enable us to ensure that , in future , the protection of public health is placed before any other consideration .
Mr President , very briefly , I should like to respond to a number of the speeches which have been made and first of all to thank those who took part in the debate , since even if their remarks were highly contentious , they at least had the merit of making clear Parliament 's current feelings .
Commissioner Fischler will answer shortly on the more specific aspects of this issue .
This is now the fourth time that I have appeared before Parliament to talk about the so-called ' mad cow ' crisis .
In all my statements , I have been guided by a single consideration : the need to protect public health on the basis of the scientific information currently available .
It is in this spirit that we have encouraged the British Government to propose a set of measures designed to eradicate BSE - essentially so as to restore consumer confidence , which is necessary before a progressive lifting of the ban can be considered .
That is the approach which this Commission - and the previous Commission - has always followed .
I say this quite plainly , because if certain documents may perhaps bring discredit upon the Commission 's actions , it should be clearly understood that those actions are quite different from the kind that would result from a note by an official .
This statement can be backed up , moreover , by some very specific facts .
The note in question dates from October 1990 .
As I said earlier , less than a month afterwards , a conference which brought together 200 scientists from throughout the world was held in Brussels , with a view to determining the implications of the BSE crisis .
It was following this conference that the scientific research was started .
The Commission has contributed financially to this research , and it was the research centre in Edinburgh - partly financed by Commission funds - which initiated the crisis of 20 and 21 March this year .
Furthermore , a number of measures were taken by the previous Commission in this respect .
Parliament itself endorsed these measures , and here I would only refer to Parliament 's resolution of 22 January 1993 , which contains the words : ' having regard to the numerous Community legislative acts concerning Spongiform Encephalopathies , in particular Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy ' . Parliament has therefore supported the Commission in the action that it has been taking in this context since 1988 .
I believe that I am able to say , therefore , that the previous Commission did everything in its power to curb the crisis , given the scientific information available at the time .
Moreover , Parliament itself states in the resolution which I have just mentioned that it considers that there is a need to continue manufacturing medical products for human and animal use from the brain and spinal cord of cattle .
It is in Parliament 's resolution , not in an internal Commission document , that these words are to be found .
Let us turn now to the document in question .
It was , as I said earlier , a note from an official .
Mr Pasty said that perhaps we did not conduct an inquiry in which both sides were heard . However , I should like to draw the honourable Member 's attention to the fact that it was the chairman of the BSE interdepartmental working party who , on our instructions , carried out the inquiry .
His investigations led him to contact directly the author of the document , the persons to whom it was addressed , colleagues in the Consumer Policy Service and DG VI , as well as former staff of the private office .
My statement was based , therefore , on the results of the inquiry carried out by the chairman of the BSE interdepartmental working party , on our instructions .
It will therefore be clear to the House that we desire transparency .
Nobody has anything to gain from a lack of transparency in this matter .
Mr Fayot was right to call for openness and to say that it is the credibility not only of the Commission , but of all the Community institutions which is at stake .
As a result , it is in all our interests - Parliament and the Commission - that there should be as much transparency as possible on this issue , in which the Commission genuinely has nothing to hide .
We would urge you - as Members of Parliament , and leaving aside your contentious speeches here - to display the same trust with regard to this matter as you have demonstrated in respect of the Commission 's actions .
With your permission , Mr President , I shall now give the floor to Commissioner Fischler , who will go into detail on certain matters which concern him more particularly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking you for today 's debate , because I think that we urgently need to clear this matter up completely .
We cannot effectively discuss ways of regenerating consumer confidence while that confidence is being shaken by unresolved suspicions .
I have taken all the measures available to me to help resolve matters .
As regards the suspected breach of the export ban , President Santer has already told you that we wrote to all the Member States asking them to inform us of any suspicions of which they were aware and , in particular , to let us know if they had anything stronger than suspicions .
So far , no Member States have informed us of anything more than suspicions .
However - and I think this is important - I have also asked UCLAF to investigate the suspicions and , in particular , I have asked the British Agriculture Minister to look into the suspicious circumstances once again .
You know , too , that on previous inspection visits to Great Britain - on which the Member States have also been invited - we have already been investigating how the export ban is being observed on the ground , and there will be another of those inspection missions next week , when our programme will again include such investigations .
Turning now to the second accusation , about the note by a Commission official , I would say that both the holding of a major conference one month later and the fact that between 1990 and 1992 the Standing Veterinary Committee and the Scientific Veterinary Committee dealt with BSE-related issues on more than twenty occasions are indications that the Commission could not have intended to take the approach which has been suggested .
You yourselves are also aware that in the Council 's conclusions and the Commission 's decisions it has been stated clearly on every occasion that health interests have absolute priority .
I should like to make a further point in this context , because it concerns something which often causes confusion among the public : the fact that the committee is known as the Veterinary Committee does not mean that it is solely concerned with animal health issues : the vets have a worldwide responsibility for ensuring meat hygiene and , consequently , public health .
Finally , I should like to point out that our Scientific Veterinary Committee includes not only vets , but also representatives of other branches of science , particularly human medicine .
I shall be glad to take up the suggestion that was made today of pursuing the internal investigations and reporting back to the House .
Indeed , I am firmly convinced that it is high time we produced a coherent document about what has been done in this area , so that everyone can be convinced about all the steps that we have taken .
However , I also believe it is important - as was said earlier - not just to resolve what has happened in the past , but to concern ourselves with the future .
And here too , top priority will again be given to health measures .
With your permission , I shall deal briefly with a fact which was reported in the media today and which concerns our decision on gelatine .
Mr President , I should simply like to point out that the decision reached by the Commission was based on the scientific documentation available at the time , and the Scientific Veterinary Committee also delivered its opinion on that basis .
In the meantime , on 26 June , we received a new , additional report .
I immediately forwarded the new report - which differed on certain points from an initial report that played a part in April 's decision - to the experts and , in the interests of safety , I have also arranged for the whole question of gelatine to be discussed once more by the newly established multi-disciplinary committee .
It will be considering the issue in depth tomorrow . Meanwhile , the Scientific Veterinary Committee has already discussed this question many times .
Clearly , we can only have the latest scientific basis available at any given time , and we have to base our decisions on that .
One further important point is the reorganization of our rendering industry in all the Member States .
A decision has been taken on this too , and the rendering industry throughout the European Union will have to be reorganized by 1 April 1997 at the latest - so all plants which process animal carcasses will be affected .
Measures have also been announced for the transitional period to ensure that no potentially hazardous animalbased or bone meal can find its way into human food or animal feed .
Another very important step , in my view , will be the improvement of our stock identification systems as soon as possible .
We know that there have also been some major scientific breakthroughs .
Yesterday , I gave the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development a comprehensive report on the Commission 's deliberations , and in order to save time , I should therefore prefer not to cover that ground again now .
It is quite clear that we have an extremely long way to go with research into the transmissibility of CreutzfeldtJakob syndrome between different types of animals and between animals and human beings , and also with tests on living animals .
And for that reason , I have invited one of the world 's leading scientists , Professor Weissmann , to submit a comprehensive research plan in which the individual research projects will complement one another .
We are due to receive a proposal from his research group in the early autumn .
This will allow us to demonstrate quite clearly that the Commission 's promise holds good - health is the priority - and that we are acting on that basis .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Votes
Mr President , we welcome the approach that Commissioner Monti has just outlined .
We agree that the Commission should submit a new draft on the basis of the discussions that have taken place , and I should like to express my thanks for this constructive cooperation .
Mr Langen , as rapporteur , do you now wish to vote to reject the draft legislative resolution ?
If I understand it correctly , we have just rejected the Commission proposal .
That quite clearly means that the vote has taken place , and it would be mistaken to call another vote .
In my view , the issue has been dealt with .
The Commission is going to submit a fresh proposal , and our vote was quite clear .
Mr President , the Commission proposal has been rejected : our vote on it was quite clear .
We have heard that the Commission will submit a new proposal , based on the discussions which have already taken place .
As I understand it , the procedure here in Parliament has therefore been completed , since we have rejected the Commission proposal and are now waiting to receive a fresh proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to refer to the vote on the reports by Mr Lehne , Mr Ford and Mr Linzer .
By agreement with those gentlemen , as the rapporteurs , with Mr Marinho , as chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , and with Mr Rothley , as acting chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I wish to request referral back to committee pursuant to Rule 129 ( 1 ) .

Under that rule , I can make such a request before the final vote .
Let me explain briefly why I am doing so .
All three of these reports deal with the implementation of freedom of movement in the European Union , which has been a fiasco and requires a great deal more discussion , though unfortunately we have no time for that discussion now .
However , what is scandalous - and it is a slap in the face for the Commission and for Parliament - is the behaviour of the Council in the last few days .
While Commissioner Monti has taken some welcome initiatives to expedite the implementation of freedom of movement , and while Parliament has been involved in consultations and produced reports on the subject , the Council , in the midst of this consultation process , is about to embark on a procedure under Article K.4 of the Treaty on European Union which is intended to replace parts of the present Monti initiatives .
This is simply outrageous because , to quote Mr Monti himself , speaking this morning , ' There is a danger ... ' - we are not familiar with these Council documents , or just a few of us are , so I can only refer to the words of the Commissioner , who apparently knows the documents - ' There is a danger that internal frontier controls will become compulsory again ' .
It is his opinion - and I quote - ' that the Council initiative which is now being taken threatens to damage progress towards the implementation of freedom to travel ' .
If that is the situation , how can the House take a meaningful decision on the Monti initiatives which it knows about , when at the same time we learn from the Commissioner that the Council is unwilling to acknowledge everything we decide here , and plans instead to take its own measures , as it pleases , on the basis of Article K.4 - in other words without the Commission and Parliament ?
We cannot allow that .
The Council must be told here and now that democracy means the rule of the people .
Rule by secret cliques is called bureaucracy , and we must reject that unequivocally .
That is why we wish to have the opportunity of postponing the decisions on these reports until the September part-session : we would then have the chance , on 9 and 10 September , at a joint meeting of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , to ask the Irish presidency what it intends to do and whether it will drop this outrageous plan .
I would ask you to support my motion .
Mr President , I should like to support Mr Schulz 's motion to refer the three reports back to the committees responsible .
It really is surprising , to put it mildly , that just when Parliament is dealing with an opinion on a particular issue as a prelude to a Council decision , the Council is embarking on an entirely new procedure about which it is clear that the Commission and Parliament know nothing .
This is no way for us to deal with one another !
We shall therefore ask the Council to explain its motives , and to deliver that explanation where it is required - in the committees responsible .
For that reason , we would ask you not to vote today but , by referring the matter back to committee , to give us an opportunity of putting some urgent questions to the Council - which may prove embarrassing - about how it came to embark on this procedure .
Mr President , I agree with the two previous speakers that what the Council of Ministers is doing here is wrong .
It is not right that the Council should be brewing up its own little schemes while we are still debating a directive as part of the procedure .
What should Parliament do ?
We must not panic .
We must realize that postponing a decision today will not help at all , since the Council will simply go ahead with its plans , and we must not give it the chance to do so .
Instead , we must seize this opportunity to confront the Council with a joint position adopted by both the Commission and Parliament .
Sometimes you have to show that you mean business and take your responsibilities , and the Liberal Group feels that we should therefore simply proceed to a vote .
( Parliament decided to refer the reports back to committee )
Directive 82 / 501 / EEC concerning major accident hazards - the socalled Seveso directive - has been amended on numerous occasions by the Commission and the Council without their having paid proper attention to important factors and parameters relating to the hazards posed by industrial plants and to accidents involving dangerous substances . The inadequacy of the directive , as regards the protection it gives to workers in the event of an accident , to residential areas in the vicinity of installations and to the wider environment , has been highlighted in the most dramatic fashion by the serious and often fatal nature of the accidents which have occurred .
In the Thriasos plain area in Greece , where there is a concentration of large and dangerous installations in centres of population , there have been major accidents with many fatalities . Thousands of local residents are exposed to danger on a daily basis and the environment is being damaged terribly .
The numerous exclusions provided for in the directive render it ineffective and incapable of providing an adequate response to the seriousness of the problem .
The directive does not apply to installations engaged in the manufacture of explosives and weapons , military bases and military storage installations at which , by definition , large quantities of hazardous substances are concentrated and there is a high level of risk . As a result , such installations are exempted from having to submit a danger study and a major accident emergency plan , even though they are not covered by any other Community directive .
Despite the fact that even some urban areas have been turned into virtual powder kegs as a result of the concentration within them of installations using dangerous substances , with incalculable risks for the safety of their inhabitants , the Commission proposal makes no provision , in the framework of the control and planning of land use , for establishing perimeter safety zones around high risk installations for the purpose of protecting local residents , or for prohibiting the siting of new installations or for promoting the removal of hazardous installations from urban areas and centres of population .
The drawing up by each operator of a document setting out an effective major accident prevention policy is of the utmost importance .
The establishment and implementation of high safety standards and the putting in place of credible preventive measures and technical systems are vitally necessary , as are strict and regular checks to ensure that all such measures to protect employees , local residents and the environment are being implemented and the imposition of heavy penalties for non-compliance .
Operators of high-risk installations must be obliged to provide their employees with the information , training and equipment that they need in order to respond adequately to the special demands of their work in normal and abnormal conditions .
They must also be obliged to provide local residents with full and clear information about the hazards to which they are exposed and on how to react in the event of an emergency .
Recommendation for second reading by Mr Seal
Mr President , Mr Seal 's report on groundhandling at airports raises two serious problems : a social problem and a safety problem .
Once again , the ill effects of unrestrained deregulation and liberalization have been underlined .
At the airports of Paris alone , 3000 jobs are under threat .
In the name of the reduction of costs , airports are resorting to employing outside security firms and getting rid of professional policemen .
Airport security is now the responsibility of young men who are more used to dealing with shoplifters than international terrorists , and this raises a problem of passenger safety .
The reduction of social protection will lead to a reduction of protection , full stop .
Security firms are already employing migrant workers without papers .
This means that terrorists will be able to infiltrate them at will .
So let us not hear from the Commission tomorrow that they did not know .
After the scandal of contaminated meal , we shall soon be seeing aircraft falling from the sky .
We abstained in the vote to reject the Council 's common position intended to open up groundhandling at major airports within the Union to competition .
We did so because we feel that competition in ticket and baggage handling at airports will benefit consumers .
Experience in those countries , such as Sweden , which have opened up groundhandling to competition has been good .
Those who wish to prevent competition sometimes maintain that workers ' rights and employment are at risk .
This argument does not hold water .
Legislation governing workers ' rights is not at all affected by increased competition .
Jobs have never been created by the preservation of monopolies which serve no social purpose .
Those who will ultimately have to pay if monopolies are preserved are the consumers , through more expensive air transport .
Last November , Parliament delivered its opinion at first reading on the Commission 's proposal for a directive on the liberalization of groundhandling services .
That proposal was , in our view , unacceptable , since it did not take account of the realities of this sector - not to mention the absence of social provisions .
In its common position , the Council of Ministers has totally ignored our views .
I shall therefore be voting for the rejection of that text .
I simply wish to ask the Commission to consider the possible consequences of the liberalization of this sector .
For example , the safety of aircraft , and above all that of passengers , will be called into question .
And what can be said as regards the situation of airport employees ? There is the possibility of social dumping , redundancies , the replacement of qualified jobs by insecure jobs , and so on .
Such an employment policy will not meet the aspirations of Europe 's citizens .
This is not our policy , and it is not my idea of employment .
The Green Group is disappointed that the European Parliament has decided not to reject the common position established by the Council on groundhandling in EU airports .
The Committee on Transport voted recently that the position should be rejected and in our view Parliament should have voted likewise .
The Council has shown itself to be completely unwilling to take on board the concerns which Parliament expressed during the groundhandling debate last year .
As a result , the proposed directive is vague and weak from the point of view of social protection of workers and non-committal in terms of guaranteeing uniform safety standards .
Market liberalization for groundhandling services is not an idea which originated with users of airports or from workers but from the larger transport companies who are eager to reduce costs and operate more flexibly .
The rights of workers are playing second fiddle to the interests of employers .
As a bare minimum , it is necessary that workers are consulted before decisions affecting them are taken .
However , the Council does not guarantee such consultation .
It proposes that each Member State set up a user committee to oversee implementation of the directive in each airport affected but there is no provision for workers in groundhandling services to be represented at that committee .
Moreover , the directive could become a charter for low pay and unsatisfactory job conditions .
Third party handling licences could be limited for a small number of years after which they may be retendered .
Workers would therefore have no job security and no safety net to stop them falling into the dole queue once their contractor 's licence has expired .
Market liberalization also cannot be allowed to usher in a more liberal safety regime in EU airports .
If costs are to be cut , then safety standards must not be one of the areas affected .
From my contacts with workers in Dublin Airport , I have heard of instances where they have been put under undue pressure by some of their employers and expected to undertake tasks for which they were not strictly qualified .
One trade union representative has told me of his fears that workers would not be equipped to deal with emergencies such as an engine fire while an aircraft or another vehicle was on the terminal .
For that reason uniform safety standards must apply .
The Council , however , simple states : ' the provisions of this Directive in no way affect the rights and obligations of Member States in respect of law and order , safety and security at airports . ' .
It is patently obvious , therefore , that vital issues such as safety and protection of workers have not been addressed by the Council .
We need to reach a common position on groundhandling that is efficient and good for all involved in the airport system .
I know there is great concern felt by many working in the industry in the areas of cleaning , baggage-handling and maintenance .
They are right to be concerned and we must ensure their concerns are heard .
We need a balance between all interests , but security and safety should not be overlooked or diminished in any way by any proposal that is eventually adopted .
We agree entirely with the proposal by the rapporteur , Mr Seal , to reject the Council 's common position .
Deregulation does not generally result in greater effectiveness .
Rather the consequences of deregulation are poorer terms of employment and reduced wages for those employed in the deregulated sector .
In Sweden we have many good examples of sectors which were previously state monopolies and in which we were highly innovative and competitive on the international market .
Langen report
I have voted against this report because I do not believe that the option of local and regional purchasing and procurement for local needs is sufficiently provided for .
This option must be provided for to a greater extent than it is in this report .
In this report , Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is recommending the rejection of the Commission 's proposal to amend the existing directive coordinating the procurement procedures in the water , energy , transport and telecommunications sectors .
It should be emphasized that this recommendation does not stem from a rejection of the principles of the Government Procurement Agreement concluded in connection with the Uruguay Round .
Nor is it due to a rejection of the basic principle of the Commission 's proposal , which is aimed at countering discrimination between undertakings and sectors that must be seen as rivals , regardless of whether they are covered by the provisions of the GPA .
The committee 's recommendation is solely based on a wish to make it entirely clear which undertakings and sectors have to respect the guidelines on procurement proposed by the Commission , without being covered by the GPA .
This wish seems a legitimate one in every respect , and the recommendation should therefore be followed , with the Commission being called upon to bring forward a proposal for a supplementary directive which will specify the exemptions and special arrangements in connection with the implementation of the GPA and will refer to the existing EU directives on public tendering .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Trans-European transport network
The next item is the report ( A4-0232 / 96 ) by Mr Piecyk , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Decision ( C4-0364 / 96-94 / 0098 ( COD ) ) on Community guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network .
Mr President , with the trans-European transport networks , a number of the Union 's basic ideas and fundamental policies are being brought together and translated into action .
Firstly , there is the Maastricht Treaty , which explicitly provides that the trans-European networks are to contribute to the strengthening of the Community 's economic and social cohesion .
Then there is Jacques Delors ' White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment , with its idea of creating jobs and making a major contribution to the fight against mass unemployment in Europe through a large-scale Community effort - particularly in the area of transport infrastructure projects .
The Heads of State or Government have addressed this issue at numerous summits , although they have never gone beyond the stage of issuing declarations .
In positive contrast to this , there is the example of the resund project , which is fully underwritten by the governments of Denmark and Sweden , and is creating more than 50 000 direct and indirect jobs .
And , by no means least , there is the idea - which has become self-evident - that today , transport policy can simply no longer be drawn up without taking the environment into account . Indeed , a fundamental change of approach - including investment in the more environmentally friendly transport modes of rail , inland waterways and combined transport - is absolutely essential .
I am convinced that practical policies designed to achieve the three goals of strengthening economic and social cohesion - and thus the consolidation of the internal market - establishing a pro-active employment policy , and developing a transport policy in which environmental policies are seen not as a necessary evil , but as an essential component of a modern transport policy , will secure the approval of Europe 's citizens , for whom our work is frequently something abstract and impenetrable .
During what is now almost two years of negotiations on the transport networks , Parliament has endeavoured to make these ideas prevail . And I wish to stress that the Commission has always been a very cooperative and helpful partner in this effort .
In contrast , therefore , the attitude of both the Council and the European Council has been all the more disappointing .
Numerous summits - most recently , the Florence European Council - have failed to rise to the challenge of combatting unemployment .
And , in my view , the role played by the Council in the conciliation procedure has been pitiful .
Our experience of the Council in the conciliation procedure was of an institution which has an aversion to environmental policy like that of the devil to holy water .
And instead of embracing the spirit of Maastricht , it concentrated on jealously guarding national competences .
No one should be under any illusions as regards the discussions over the Intergovernmental Conference .
For the Council , codecision remains a negative concept .
However , Parliament can be proud of its achievement in the negotiations .
We secured the insertion of a specific article on the environment .
Hence the entire network will be subject to strategic environmental impact assessment by the Commission , and the practice of corridor assessment is being developed .
We have established that inland waterways are the most environmentally friendly form of transport , and combined transport and new traffic management techniques are taken into account in a new article .
The toughest negotiations concerned Annex III , containing a list of priority projects .
The Council was fundamentally opposed to such a list .
The compromise reached consisted of the inclusion of the fourteen Essen projects .
After the conciliation procedure had finished , Parliament 's delegation was therefore amazed to find , in the conclusions of the Florence summit , that two Member States wished to modify project No 8 on the list .
Our annoyance was dispelled by an unequivocal statement by the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Dini , before Parliament in Brussels .
He explained that it was not a question of a unilateral modification by the Council , but of the notification of a proposal for modification , and that of course the procedure for any amendment would be codecision .
I believe that this is an adequate explanation , and that with this proviso , we can approve the joint text as a whole tomorrow .
So we must weigh things up and make an assessment .
Following the conciliation procedure , my personal view is that the glass is half full .
Let us not throw the water out . We are aware , however , that the construction of the networks is only just beginning , and that year by year , in the course of the budgetary procedure , Parliament must resolutely seek to translate its ideas into action .
I have already mentioned that the negotiations lasted a total of two years , and at this point , therefore , I should like to offer my heartfelt thanks to all those members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism who took part in this effort .
I wish to thank Parliament 's delegation in the conciliation committee , and especially Mrs Fontaine , who in my view did an excellent job of chairing the delegation .
I should like to thank Mrs Albani , Mr van Haeren , Mr Miller and Mr Betz , from Parliament 's services , and my collaborators Michael Hoppe and Jrgen Aschmutat , without whose help this two-year task could not have been accomplished .
If , as I hope , we approve the joint text tomorrow , then this will certainly not be the last time that we discuss these networks .
That is in the very nature of the conciliation procedure and its results , and we shall undoubtedly be receiving one thing or another from the Commission by way of a postscript .
I simply hope that , in the meantime , the Council will display a little more consideration and cooperation as regards matters falling under the codecision procedure .
This , at least , is what the minister indicated that it would do at today 's meeting of the committee .

Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , our cochairmen , Mr Imbeni and Mrs Fontaine , for their work within the conciliation committee , which was very much appreciated , and the Commission , because it worked extremely hard in trying to get an agreement that we can vote on tomorrow .
It is very unusual for me , as I am sure you can appreciate , to congratulate the Council and , in this instance , it is the Italian Minister Mr Burlando , who worked extremely hard and was a very important figure in reaching an agreement .
One could argue that if the Council had shown Mr Burlando 's willingness to get an agreement perhaps relationships would be on a far better footing than they are at the moment .
My group will support the conciliation agreement reached after long , tedious hours of negotiation .
These included all-night sittings , which I thought were reserved for national parliaments , which just shows how wrong I was .
We have , as the rapporteur says , an environmental article that was important to my group and to Parliament .
We have the priority projects , something else that was important to my group and to Parliament - and the indicative list of other projects that the Commission will consider in the other annexes .
It is absolutely true that Parliament did not get everything it wanted from conciliation , but I would suggest that conciliation is not about getting everything that you want : conciliation is about that very word ' conciliating ' !
Parliament was very keen to get an agreement and the Commission helped in this .
We see the importance of the TENs , not only in transport infrastructure terms but also in terms of job creation for the people of the European Union .
The Council 's attitude at times left a lot to be desired .
I would say to the Council that in future it is important that it works with Parliament rather than going off at a tangent and doing its own thing .
Relationships with the Council at the moment , whilst cordial , are fragile .
The Council should be aware of that and should also be aware that Parliament has its rights under codecision and expects those rights to be respected .
We have to be practical ; we have to be aware of the need for TENs , in infrastructure terms and in job-creation terms and in getting people and goods moving throughout the European Union .
We have an agreement that we can live with .
It is not perfect , it is the best deal in town and , therefore , my group will support that deal that we gained at conciliation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the common position which the plenary is being asked either to approve or reject tomorrow contains certain positive elements which the European Parliament delegation to the conciliation procedure , under the excellent chairmanship of Mrs Fontaine , succeeded in prising from the Council after a hard struggle .
I must mention the substantial assistance to the promotion of Parliament 's positions provided by the Commission , and by Commissioner Kinnock in particular , and the Italian Minister of Transport in his capacity as President-in-Office .
However , ladies and gentlemen , the question facing us in tomorrow 's vote is not whether the common position is good or bad , or rather not just that .
The fact is that the common position as finally formulated creates a serious institutional problem which is harmful to relations between Parliament and the Council , given that via the common position the Council is refusing , in breach of the letter and spirit of Article 129 of the Maastricht Treaty , to grant Parliament the right of co-decision in the establishment of priorities for the major projects of the trans-European network .
In the joint text the word ' priority ' appears only in the recitals .
In the common position the Council has gone back on its word and thrown out of the window the political commitment entered into by the heads of state and government at the Essen European Council in 1994 concerning the 14 top priority projects .
It has agreed only , after much pressure , to an historical reference to the Essen conclusions .
However , ladies and gentlemen , the Council 's credibility or lack of credibility is its problem .
The determination of the governments to act and conduct themselves politically as true heirs and standard-bearers of the ideals and methods of the Congress of Vienna in 1915 is , likewise , their problem .
It is not ours .
Our problem is the diminution of a right conferred on us by the Treaty .
They are depriving us of the right of co-decision with regard to whether or not particular large projects are priority projects .
That is the situation that you are being asked to accept or reject tomorrow .
You will thus be asked , ladies and gentlemen , to decide according to your consciences and to take responsibility for approving or rejecting the common position in the full understanding that the European Union must not become an inter-state alliance , I repeat , an inter-state alliance , of economic interests in which the voice of Parliament , which expresses the expectations and interests of the peoples of Europe , can be neutralized by the presumptuousness of each and every government .
The European People 's Party , for which I speak , will decide on its voting intention this evening .
Mr President , Mr Piecyk worked very hard for a long time in collaboration with us , with the Members of the European Parliament , that is to say , and before being sent to the conciliation committee the final text of his report achieved the impossible in that it was deemed satisfactory by nearly all sides .
It set new horizons with regard to the political , economic and social criteria for the trans-European networks and accorded particular importance to protection of the environment .
I therefore wish to offer Mr Piecyk very warm congratulations .
Then the Council changed it all .
At least , it has left nothing of Mr Piecyk 's initial report as far as the general tenor of that report is concerned .
There were - I remind you , ladies and gentlemen - 78 points of dispute , 78 differences between us and the Council .
And what have we ended up with ?
Of the 78 , the Council has conceded only on 28 , so how can the European Parliament be satisfied ?
Is that what they mean by compromise ?
That is not a compromise , ladies and gentlemen : it is the product of yet another act of political blackmail by the Council against the European Parliament .
That , rather than a satisfactory compromise , was the outcome of the conciliation .
And the explanations given - and Mr Sarlis is absolutely correct - both by Commissioner Kinnock , who did what he could , and we thank him and commend him for that , and by the new President-in-Office have reinforced our anxieties instead of alleviating them .
Because , in fact , the Council can change the order of priorities without consulting anyone , and the money it gives - and Mr Sarlis stressed this point - is not from its own pocket but from the pockets of the peoples of Europe , and the Council , together with the two other institutions , ought to be representing them rather than representing a group of economic interests !
Because that is what it is doing with the changes that it has brought about in the trans-European networks .
Its reasoning was not political or social , or concerned with the environment or with the development of the European Union 's networks .
It was purely a representation of the economic interests of a specific group within the European Union .
Mr Piecyk , I personally congratulate you sincerely on your efforts , on the spirit of cooperation that you have displayed and on the wonderful report that you have drawn up .
However , for reasons of political principle I shall vote against the report .
I will make no concession of political principle for the Council of Ministers .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the delegation to the conciliation committee , represented by its chairman , Mrs Fontaine , and Mr Piecyk , on their excellent work .
Two years elapsed between the first Commission proposal on the trans-European networks - in which time Parliament and the Council expressed their views and discovered their differences - and the meetings of the conciliation committee which resulted in the adoption of a compromise text , albeit with some gritting of teeth .
The text we have before us today certainly does not live up to the expectations of Parliament , which could perhaps have achieved more and pushed through the proposals it considered best for the territory and the citizens of the Union which it represents .
Nevertheless , in keeping with the principle of the half-empty glass , I too am pleased that the final text emerging from these lengthy negotiations refers to the environment and to Annex III on the priority projects , even though its legal status remains questionable , to say the least .
Article 20 , on combined transport and new traffic management techniques , is particularly welcome .
I believe , in fact , that we must now move towards new solutions , such as the use of inland waterways , which will give a boost to regions such as northern Italy , to which I am particularly attached .
Although the final text is not quite what we would have wished for , largely because of the lack of cooperation from the Council , which is reluctant to accept the new role of the European Parliament and is not adjusting to the codecision procedure , my group will vote in favour of this project , since we believe it is important that Parliament should support this joint decision .
Voting against , which would block all the TENs , would not only make the House responsible for the failure in the eyes of public opinion , but would deprive us of the possibility which we now have of making a positive contribution to solving the problem of employment and to building a better Europe .
Mr President , this Parliament quite rightly demanded that binding environmental provisions be introduced in respect of the trans-European transport networks .
This has come to nothing , however .
All that has been introduced are the , in my opinion , usual old paragraphs which , as we have seen often enough , are in no way binding .
The trans-European transport networks are also a mixture of national and transnational projects , a mixture of positive and negative projects .
I should like to take the opportunity here to give an example of one of the most unnecessary and worst projects : the resund bridge between Denmark and Sweden .
In terms of cost , the bridge will be an inescapable burden on generations of Danes and Swedes ; moreover , it could become an absolute disaster in environmental terms if things go badly .
I should also like to mention employment .
I believe that those who advocate trans-European networks as a means of solving the unemployment problem are wrong .
In my view this is a very old-fashioned way of thinking .
When we built roads in the 1930s it was individuals with spades that were involved .
However , my experience today , in Sweden at least , is that road building involves five machines and three men .
We construct a motorway at enormous cost but without creating an especially large number of jobs .
There has been a great deal of talk about responsibility .
The Council has refused responsibility for the environment .
The Nordic Green Left accepts that responsibility .
We intend to vote against the compromise tomorrow .
We hope of course that there will be many who do the same , because the environment is the future , whether we like it or not .
Mr President , a great deal has already been said about the institutional implications of how we deal with the networks , and I have to say that the Council 's behaviour in this codecision procedure has been an absolute disgrace .
It is also too ridiculous for words that Parliament is now being led like a lamb to the slaughter and will tomorrow simply approve the compromise that has been reached .
I have to say that Commissioner Kinnock has played a remarkable role in all this .
At the beginning , he was firmly behind a number of Parliament 's demands , but now he is putting tremendous pressure on us to agree to the compromise that he has come up with .
However , I do not wish to talk only about procedural matters , since the TENs are far too important for that .
The inclusion of an article on the environment was initially an extremely important point for Parliament , which took the view that corridor analyses and strategic environmental impact reports should be compulsory , so as to ensure that the solutions chosen would damage the environment as little as possible .
Article 8 now instructs the Commission to develop methods of analysis for this purpose .
This may create some work for a few officials in Brussels , but it will not do much for the environment , unless the Commissioner can tell me - and this is an extremely important question to which I should like an answer - whether , once these methods have been developed , they will be used to readjust the TENs in any subsequent review .
I would like to hear what the Commissioner has to say about this .
The Council has promised to implement the habitats directive and the MER directive .
I wonder whether this means that it has not been doing so up to now , even though these directives have been in force for some time .
Does this mean , Commissioner Kinnock , that now that the Member States have brought this matter up again , you are now going to oblige them to implement the two directives , and that no more money will be paid to countries which fail to apply the directives in carrying out certain infrastructure projects under the TENs ?
I think it is important to have an answer from you on this .
I should also like to say a few words about the employment myth .
Research has repeatedly shown that there are many projects which provide more employment than major infrastructure projects , particularly if you also wish to achieve certain environmental objectives such as reducing emissions and meeting the CO2 targets that we have agreed on .
So it is sheer madness , as every right-minded person agrees , to scrape together billions and billions of ECU just to turn them into concrete and asphalt for more and more cars to drive on .
Creating jobs in environmentally friendly sectors and shifting taxes from labour to the environment will create long-term employment , and at the same time provide us with a more pleasant society in which to live .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have finally reached the end of this lengthy and complex conciliation procedure .
I should like first of all to pay a sincere and heartfelt tribute to my colleagues Nicole Fontaine and Renzo Imbeni for their handling of the conciliation committee , and for having enabled Parliament to conclude this procedure at long last .
Thank you so much for your organization of our work .
Having said that , we can adopt one of two attitudes today .
The first is to put a brave face on it , and to point with satisfaction to what Parliament has achieved .
The second is to admit - and I should like us to discuss this among ourselves - that we have been left empty-handed , as the saying goes , and that - to use the language of the Commissioner and the Council - this whole business greatly resembles Shakespeare 's ' Comedy of Errors ' .
I think that Parliament wished to flex its muscles , in the belief that the decisions regarding some of the fourteen priority projects , including the one at Malpensa , were within its gift ; by acting in this way , however , it further heightened the concerns of the Council , which immediately ran for cover as soon as it saw these rather overambitious aims on the part of the Committee on Transport and Parliament .
The result is that we have practically nothing to show for all our efforts !
I think that we should learn an important lesson here .
To my mind , we have discovered the limits of codecision and , above all , of our wish to take on powers which were not , seen objectively , ours to exercise .
We could easily have realized the impossibility of doing this .
We might perhaps have adopted a more prudent strategy , without referring back specifically to the political decision taken at Essen ; doing that - in my opinion - allowed the Council to adopt its position , with the result that for a moment we actually believed the words of the President-in-Office , Mr Dini .
Mr Dini is a liar : he lied to us as he has done in so many other matters of domestic policy , and as President-in-Office ; unfortunately we can only note our lack of success .
Even though our group will vote in favour of the Piecyk report , it recognizes that we have achieved very little .
I rise on a point of order because I am becoming a little concerned about the number of Members going over their speaking time .
Furthermore , I really would ask Members to think very carefully before they stand up in this public chamber and accuse anybody , never mind a President-in-Office , of being a liar .
That is what came through my headphones .
That is not the type of parliamentary language that I am used to , and I would also assume it is not the type of parliamentary language that this European Parliament is used to .
There are ways and means of objecting , there are ways and means of expressing your objection .
Calling somebody a liar is not one of them .
Thank you very much for your comment , Mr Simpson .
Coming from you , as one who defends his opinions with great vigour in this Chamber without going over the top , it is especially pertinent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur deserves thanks for his efforts to achieve a compromise in the conciliation committee , and thereby take the construction of the trans-European transport networks forward .
However , the question arises of whether Parliament can approve the Community guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network when Parliament has had little say in the matter , when not even 30 % of Parliament 's amendments have been accepted by the Council , and when the compromise reached gives precedence to the large number of projects listed in Annexes I and II over the fourteen most important projects selected by the European Council at the Essen summit of 9 and 10 December 1994 , thus applying the principle of giving everyone a slice of the cake .
Indeed , the legal character of Annex III , which deals with these priority projects , is seriously undermined by this new approach .
Thus the Brenner Tunnel project , which is so important to Austria , is also called into question .
By virtue of Article 1 ( 2 ) , moreover , the common guidelines totally ignore the basic financial requirements of both the public and private sectors .
And in addition , Article 2 ( 1 ) refers to the achievement of the objectives up to the year 2010 .
Ladies and gentlemen , without agreement on financing , these guidelines have no concrete significance , since they will be impossible to implement on time , if at all .
In the case of the Brenner Tunnel , for example , this means that fundamental preliminary work , such as test drilling , is not being carried out .
Such work is essential , however , in order to be able to make statements as regards the amount of financing required .
Without specific financial estimates , it will be virtually impossible to attract private investors .
Private investors are vital , however , since the Brenner Tunnel cannot be financed by public money alone .
Because of this , the realization of the trans-European networks will meet with further delays , and the Commission 's desired effect of job creation through the construction and rapid completion of the TENs is seriously called into question .
Mr President , my main reason for asking for the floor was to make a comment of a political and institutional kind .
First , however , I too - like Mr Simpson - wish to express my appreciation of the conduct of the Italian presidency .
I do not in any way mean this ironically , since - however strongly we in this House might criticize the Council - we cannot ignore the role of the President-in-Office , without whom we should probably not have reached a conclusion ; my thanks also go to Commissioner Kinnock for having acted as a shrewd mediator and played a perhaps even more important role throughout this phase .
The Council and the Commission found themselves confronting a parliamentary delegation which was authoritative , intelligently led by Mrs Fontaine and - in my opinion - determined ; it was thanks to our determination , admirably displayed in particular by our rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , that we achieved certain results .
However , these results were not entirely satisfactory , not least as regards the environment and various amendments .
Whichever way we choose to put it , the final result is unsatisfactory for Parliament , and our opinion on all aspects of the matter remains unchanged : it was our impression that the Council did its utmost to provoke the European Parliament into voting against the trans-European networks .
This was my impression , at least , when the Council first refused even the slightest change to the list of fourteen priority projects , and then let it be known at the Florence European Council that two countries wished to change that list .
I do not believe that this House should change its mind according to the mood-swings in the Council .
The European Parliament must insist on the need for real codecision on the priority projects of common interest .
Personally , I am deeply disappointed by the conduct of the Council and the negative outcome of the Florence summit .
But on no account - and I would invite colleagues to consider this point - should our disappointment be turned into a vote against , which could serve as a pretext for the Council to shift onto us the blame for its own difficulties and divisions .
The problem now for the Irish presidency and the Intergovernmental Conference is that codecision cannot continue in this form .
Although codecision is a procedure between Parliament and the Council , the Council - to our minds - understands it as being between Parliament and COREPER , and this means that a certain irritation becomes apparent at Council level .
It would therefore be helpful if those within the Council were to read the Maastricht Treaty thoroughly ; if they have not yet done so , it could be pointed out at the forthcoming summits , and at the special summit in Dublin , that we cannot go on accepting codecision between ourselves and COREPER .
That is not what the Treaty stipulates .
Mr President , I should briefly like to explain to my colleagues the thinking behind the conciliation over which I had the honour to preside .
In our experience , it was certainly one of the most difficult conciliation procedures ever .
This was because it was essential for two objectives to be reconciled : protecting the legitimate prerogatives conferred on Parliament by the Treaties as regards codecision , whilst at the same time completing work on the trans-European transport networks , which our citizens rightly hope will provide jobs .
And , as the negotiations proceeded , it was hard to reconcile these two objectives .
After months of wrangling , I now have to congratulate Mr Piecyk , the rapporteur , and Mr Cornelissen , chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on their admirable work , as well as all our delegation on their dedication and determination .
No effort was spared so that the major works expected by our fellow citizens could be authorized as quickly as possible .
Whether or not we have been successful is a matter for debate , as we have already heard from several colleagues .
On the positive side , our environmental concerns have been broadly taken into account , since we now have a text that refers extensively to the Commission 's responsibilities .
Progress has also been made on certain technical amendments to Annex I and on the situation with regard to ports , although it is a pity that we were unable to extend the network towards the east as far as Budapest . We have secured Annex III .
However , despite being formally attached to the legislative text , its precise legal value remained unclear until Commissioner Kinnock enlightened us in his letter of 1 July to Mr Cornelissen , chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , in which he wrote : ' I believe that the European Parliament should be involved in any changes to the list of priority projects ' .


Mr Dini , in plenary sitting on 3 July last in Brussels , confirmed Commissioner Kinnock 's assurance in the following terms : ' Any change would naturally require a new codecision with the European Parliament ' .
Nothing could be plainer , and I wish it to be known that I have every confidence in Commissioner Kinnock . Without his help , we would never have completed our task , and I thank him for giving so unstintingly of his time .
I also have every confidence in the President-in-Office , who has addressed the House and who , I am sure , will resist any pressure from administrative sources as regards the undertakings given to us .
On a more general note , I should like to take advantage of this occasion to join my colleague , Mr Imbeni , in expressing the hope that those with political power , namely the ministers , will participate in future conciliations .
That would certainly be in keeping with the spirit of Maastricht and would help to save a great deal of time .
Be that as it may , however , to return to the transport networks , we shall be vigilant as regards what we have been promised and will use our budgetary powers , should this become necessary .
It is in this spirit that I hope Parliament will approve the joint conciliation text that we laboriously concluded on 17 June .
By so doing , we shall show our fellow citizens that Parliament is both responsible and alert .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , previous speakers have recalled the events leading up to this decision on Community guidelines on the trans-European transport network , as well as the lengthy discussions that preceded the compromise agreement .
I commend the rapporteur and our colleagues who took part in the many meetings of the conciliation committee on their dedication and their excellent work .
Like all compromises , the text before us today is satisfactory in some respects and less so in others .
Like everyone else here , I feel aggrieved that many of the amendments we approved were not adopted by the Council .
It is particularly disappointing that the ports issue has not been dealt with in this document and that we will have to wait until 1997 for a specific proposal on this from the Commission .
Meanwhile , our group will do its best to ensure that the Commission has a text ready within the agreed timeframe .
However , in view of the complexity of the issue , this is a satisfactory compromise overall , and one that should be approved by Parliament .
We cannot let this develop into an endless process .
Instead , we need to establish a firm legal base so that we can tackle the crucial issue of financing the network .
At a time of economic slowdown , the stakes in terms of jobs are considerable .
It is a pity that this important element has all too often been underestimated by the Member States and that projects which have been in the pipeline for several years have not progressed further .
We therefore need to attract public as well as private investment , so that work can begin as soon as possible , thereby giving a definite signal to the socio-economic players concerned .
As a first step , it is vital that these guidelines are approved .
I shall therefore be voting in favour of the joint text drawn up by the conciliation committee , and I hope that many others here will do the same .
I see from the list that at least ten speakers have only one minute , and I must tell the political groups yet again that I consider one minute 's speaking time to be unacceptable .
They must arrange things so that their speakers have at least two minutes . It is quite disgraceful .
No one can express a set of opinions in one minute . It is only enough for the basic courtesies .
And there are ten Members with only one minute .
For goodness sake !
Mr President , I shall try to say what I have to say in a minute , even though you have already taken part of that time .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , and the chairman of the conciliation committee for their efforts in securing a satisfactory outcome .
It is good that the discussions on the trans-European networks should finally have produced an outcome , although I am not satisfied with the various stages of the process and , in particular , the Council 's decision taken at the Florence Summit , to step back from financing the trans-European networks .
In addition to the codecision procedure , we must also remember that in the sparsely populated Nordic countries in particular due note must be taken of the subsidiarity principle when determining communications and transport needs .
I endorse the conciliation committee 's decision to approve also Finland 's route 5 , the lifeline for the whole of Eastern Finland .
In truth it must be said that Finland should itself have taken a more active line on this matter in the Council .
It is ironic that route 5 was included on the list only thanks to the determined efforts of the Swedish Government .
Fortunately , the Finnish Government at least understood that it should jump on the bandwagon , although once again independent action was beyond it .
On the basis of the above , I endorse the outcome of the conciliation procedure .
Mr President , as has already been underlined , criticism must be made of the lack of balance in the conciliation committee between Parliament and the Council .
Nor are we entirely satisfied with the conciliation committee 's joint text .
We are aware that some Member States will have to reappraise or review the conditions in which the projects will be carried out , particularly as regards the environment . All the environmental impact assessment directives - which , in many cases , have not even been transposed into national law - must be complied with .
Despite these shortcomings , however , we must pay tribute to what is , in many respects , the historic impact that this joint text will have on many countries and regions .
In the Iberian peninsula , for example , infrastructure deficiencies which we have been suffering since the nineteenth century will be made good .
Many human lives will be saved as a result of these road and rail infrastructure projects .
We must take account of the overall significance of the joint text , and this obliges us to try to ensure that the environmental requirements - and all the others , including the institutional requirements - are complied with .
In view of this overall assessment , therefore , and whilst respecting and understanding the reasons of those who will be voting against , many members of the Group of the European United Left will be voting in favour of the conciliation committee 's joint text .
Mr President , as my colleague Nel van Dijk has already said , we Greens are opposed to this conciliation agreement , both because of the short shrift given to environmental protection and because it has not been possible to discuss the priorities currently being attached to the various projects which have been proposed .
But the situation has changed since the Essen Council took its decision , and several countries have already proposed substantial changes , or at least variations , dictated by political , economic , social or financial changes in those countries .
The high-speed rail network between Munich and Verona is a case in point : the cost and the environmental impact of the Brenner tunnel are such that this project is not feasible , even according to the governments of the countries concerned , Germany , Austria and Italy .
But there are other ways of linking northern and southern Europe .
Clearly , then , the intention is to approve a text which we already know to be impracticable .
However , there is no desire at all to guarantee the European Parliament any real role in deciding on the changes .
That would be a dangerous departure from the codecision procedure laid down at Maastricht , and I would ask for some assurances and clarification from Commissioner Kinnock in this respect .
Mr President , Commissioner Kinnock , ladies and gentlemen , the problem of the guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network has come before this House once again , thanks to the efforts of Mr Piecyk and the conciliation committee , which has arrived at a decision potentially acceptable to everyone - although quite frankly I have my doubts .
Everything has its price .
Is it possible to amend all fourteen priority projects ?
Mr Dini did indeed say that the whole package must be subject to codecision with Parliament .
All of Europe is involved ; but the various Member States , the main players and the principal advocates of the priority projects , need to do their sums . Whatever can be done must be done .
In my opinion , the priority projects should not be changed on any account . What happens subsequently will of course depend on the timescales , and on national and European exchange rates .
So when this problem is discussed in the House , I shall urge that the priority projects should be respected .
The rest will come later .
Mr President , are we not considerably further ahead with the development of the common transport policy than today 's debate would seem to indicate ?
I believe that the Council has been somewhat isolated .
It has essentially been the Commission and Parliament which have taken this matter forward since the beginning of the 1990s , whilst once again , the Council has had to be dragged to the ball .
Clearly , the construction of the trans-European transport networks is an essential precondition for the further development of the Union .
We are assuming that we are finally reaching the design and development stage and will soon be able to take the next step : making firm statements on financing .
Indeed , all the talk about private-sector financing and so on will not take us any further until hard and fast investment and implementation plans are drawn up , on the basis of which we can gradually make further progress and move towards a common objective in respect of the various forms of transport .
This is the message which must go out from today 's debate .
I received the impression from the conferences in both Prague and Crete that there is a common will in this respect .
At both conferences , the common desire to move forward was expressed and emphasized .
We must create the financial base and then address this matter again at the Helsinki conference next year .
We must discuss once again the trans-European transport networks , the possibilities of financing and the steps which have to be taken . And that conference may in turn represent a milestone .
In the budgetary procedure for 1997 , Parliament will have to consider carefully whether it is again prepared to allocate 75 % of the overall budget for transport policy to the trans-European transport networks or the fourteen priority projects .
I believe that this will become extremely difficult , and that we must create an additional financial framework , in order to contribute to the realization of the networks .
Mr President , the essential thing today is to highlight the political importance of the fact , in itself , that Parliament and the Council have reached an agreement in terms of the future of our transport policy and our policy on cohesion and solidarity .
I should like to set out the four reasons why , in my view , we need this agreement .
Firstly , if we had not reached this agreement , we would have to start the process of laying down Community guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network all over again , without any guarantee that , in two or three years ' time , Parliament would not be required to approve an agreement which is similar to , or worse than , the one we have at present .
It goes without saying that the enormous political and public relations cost of such a delay would be borne by Parliament , since our citizens would not understand why , having repeatedly stressed the need to build this network and insisted that it would lead to the creation of countless jobs , this House should now decide to reject the agreement reached or , in other words , to perpetuate the infrastructure deficiency , which in some Member States is very great , thereby delaying the creation of jobs .
I should like to give the House a statistic regarding the job-creating potential of transport infrastructure construction - and I would say this to Mrs Eriksson , who maintained that this was something from the last century : for every 2 500 000 euros invested , 100 jobs will be created .
And that is today , not in the last century .
And it is not counting indirect jobs .
If Members calculate the infrastructure needs , they will see that many millions of jobs can be created .
Secondly , our transport infrastructure deficiencies and associated costs are enormous .
In this context , the competitiveness of our economy , faced with the increasingly tough challenges of the international market , is at stake . And this requires immediate action - action which cannot wait for a hypothetical perfect future agreement between Parliament and the Council .
Thirdly , we are all convinced that besides improving our competitiveness , the trans-European transport networks will help to strengthen the Community 's cohesion and rectify its obvious territorial imbalances , thereby facilitating the future enlargement of the Union to include other European countries .
And fourthly , on a pragmatic level , given the present and future budgetary constraints of the Union and the Member States , and with the knowledge that nothing is more elusive than money , the European Union and its Parliament need this agreement today , because at the least sign of hesitation or differences of opinion over criteria or objectives between our institutions , the private capital which we unquestionably need to finance the development of the trans-European transport networks will go to fund projects in other parts of the world which are or will become our competitors .
I was able to verify this on a recent visit to China .
For all these reasons , ladies and gentlemen , I would urge you to vote in favour of the agreement reached by the Parliament and Council delegations on the Community guidelines for the trans-European transport network , in the secure knowledge that , in doing so , you will be rendering a service to the cause of European integration .
Mr President , we shall say yes , tomorrow , to the work of the conciliation committee , in the spirit of someone closing a major chapter of that book of dreams entitled ' trans-European routes ' .
But the story is not complete .
Who will write the next chapters ?
This is where there are grounds for concern , and although it is true that we should be celebrating this outcome - albeit with the reservations already voiced by colleagues - we are also rightly concerned about the future .
Commissioner Kinnock has confirmed today that the priority attached to the famous fourteen projects of Essen is not set in stone ; and that is quite right , because it can happen that someone who feels too secure becomes lazy during the second phase , that of implementation , which is the more sensitive one , Commissioner .
That is why I would remind you of the need to take action , in terms of launching the work programmes and the financial plans .
The partnerships so far tested between Member States , regions and private operators are becoming nothing short of cattle markets , where the rules are continually being changed and promises retracted .
Such is the case with the Munich-Verona route .
A few days ago , just as Italy and Austria were launching the EEIG , the European interest group which was to plan the entire funding scheme , Germany announced that it was no longer prepared to pay its share of the Brenner base tunnel .
So here is an indication that we also need to make arrangements for the second phase , which could compromise everything .
You , Commissioner , said to us one day : ' Tell your fellow citizens that joining in a partnership could well turn into a business ' .
I repeated this sentence at various seminars on the Munich-Verona route .
I must say , quite frankly , that I did not encounter much enthusiasm , mainly because some people suspect - or fear - that this freedom being granted to Member States , regions and private operators might just be hiding certain pitfalls .
I wish you every success in your work !
Mr President , the matter has to a large extent been covered . Allow me simply to say that we are at just about the same point as we were at yesterday on the subject of groundhandling .
The co-decision and conciliation mechanism has led us into an impasse .
Either Parliament accepts the position formulated by the conciliation committee , which will mean relinquishing , if not all of the amendments , at least the two main positions , namely on the environment for all of the projects and on the priorities and their alteration via codecision , or it rejects the position of the conciliation committee , which will mean that it will risk losing some of the compromises that it has won , or that those projects will be delayed or that the Council 's decision may finally be imposed in its entirety .
I have to say that although the Commission appears to be supporting Parliament up to a point , it is playing the role of the wise teacher at the last minute and trying to get the Council 's position approved .
At the same time , even the governments - including mine - which largely accepted Parliament 's positions are pressuring us to support this common position of the conciliation committee for the sake of delaying the projects .
It is an extremely difficult position .
Parliament has fallen into a trap again , and I feel that the situation must resolved via the intergovernmental conference .
Having said that , however , and as far as the issue in question is concerned , if we wish to be true to ourselves and to the positions that we have set out , and if we want a Parliament with genuine powers , I think that we should take up the recommendation of Mrs Eriksson and others and reject the position of the conciliation committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , we must not allow ourselves to be annoyed by the discreditable events at the Florence summit , however difficult this may be for many of us , especially our excellent rapporteur .
For indeed , the plans for the trans-European transport network have opened a new chapter in the history of European transport policy .
The launch of this project will represent a first attempt to create , at European level , a sustainable transport infrastructure for the whole of Europe .
The investment made to this end will have a twofold benefit : the development of a more environmentally compatible transport infrastructure ; and the creation of new jobs for Europe 's citizens .
Nevertheless , our work on this project will not end with tomorrow 's vote .
Following the Council 's display of ignorance and arrogance , it must be made clear that we shall continue to pursue our aims with all means available .
In particular , it will be up to the members of the Committee on Budgets to ensure that what is now the indicative stipulation that the fourteen Essen schemes are priority projects is actually adhered to , and that Community resources are used to secure a new trend in favour of environmentally compatible forms of transport .
Furthermore , we shall be required to check carefully that the environmental requirements set out in Article 8 are complied with by all the Member States .
I wish to stress the fact that I and the other Austrian social democrat Members regret the deletion of the ParisVienna route as a priority project . Nevertheless , in view of the planned swift commencement of work on the Munich-Verona route , I shall be supporting the compromise reached , since this project is of the utmost importance to the Lnder of western Austria .
With regard to financing , I should like to draw attention to the fact , in conclusion , that the Austrian Parliament recently decided , on the initiative of the social democrat Transport Minister , to invest some S 60 billion in transport infrastructure in the near future .
This is a measure which should set an example to all the Member States of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the outcome of the conciliation procedure can be viewed in various ways .
For me , the glass is not half full : it is more than half empty .
An overall assessment must be made , and I believe that , for a number of reasons , the legitimate expectations of the citizens of Europe have not in the least been fulfilled .
The listing of the priority projects in Annex III is partly not meant seriously by the Council - please listen , Mr Farthofer - partly overtaken by events , and partly incomplete .
It is partly not meant seriously because neither the Austrian nor the Italian Government is prepared to provide the necessary resources for the genuinely European project of the Brenner Tunnel in the next few years .
They will not provide the resources !
I agree with you , however , that it is a disgrace that the European Union has not included the extension of the West-East high-speed train via Karlsruhe to Munich and Vienna , with a continuation to Budapest .
That is why I regard this listing as completely unacceptable .
It is no surprise , however , that it has been incorporated in the text in this way , since the Council was not prepared to negotiate seriously with Parliament about the list of priority projects and to take a joint decision .
As previous speakers have already explained , the Council simply said that we should refer to the Essen list .
Unfortunately , the majority of Parliament 's delegation was satisfied with that .
In my view , that is completely unacceptable , firstly since the Council - or at least the majority in the Council - has denied Parliament the right of codecision conferred upon it by the Maastricht Treaty , and failed to agree to a single paragraph of Parliament 's relevant amendments and additions .
And , secondly , the Council has failed to provide the citizens of the Union with a clear and honest decision as to which are , in that case , the priority projects that are soon to be launched .
According to the statements by the President-in-Office of the Council , the Essen list is henceforth fixed and immutable , and thus we have allowed ourselves to be deprived of the right of codecision on these essential projects .
However , let us move on from the institutional questions .
A second point of criticism concerns the fact that , at the recent Florence summit , the majority of Member States made it clear that they have no intention of following up their fine words with deeds .
The Member States ' governments neither agreed to make additional resources available for the development of the transport network through the redeployment of funds in national budgets , nor even took the fundamental decision to release further resources through the transfer of funds in the Community budget .
Whilst we repeatedly remind our citizens that 95 % of the finance for these European transport projects will come from national budgets , including loans and private-sector transactions , and that only preliminary studies , interest rebates and small subsidies will be funded from the Community budget , it is becoming clear that the Member States ' governments wish to content themselves with merely designating priority projects - on the basis , moreover , of the 1994 evaluation .
Parliament should not lend this political manoeuvring by the Council the appearance of success through its consent in the conciliation committee .
Our citizens are expecting that , following the decision on the transEuropean transport network , work will now actually begin on the construction of the genuinely priority European projects in the near future .
Only in this way will it be possible to combat the impending collapse of transport systems , enhance the safety of transport users , reduce environmental pollution and contribute to job-creation and growth .
However , none of this is contained in the compromise , and I can therefore only agree with those colleagues who say that it should be rejected .
Mr President , it is now almost two years since the Essen European Council meeting .
Little , if any , progress has been made in the development of the trans-European transport network which , as we understand it , forms the backbone of the European transport infrastructure into the next century .
I am thinking of my own constituency of Connaught / Ulster in which five of the counties are border counties where we require a much improved infrastructure .
In view of the fact that in those peripheral areas we depend very much on an improvement in our road infrastructure , it is vitally important that this work should commence at a very early date .
I welcome the appointment by the Irish presidency of a former Director General of Fisheries , Eamon Gallagher , who has been appointed by the presidency to break the deadlock over funding of the trans-European networks .
I believe his experience as a negotiator at the highest EU level will bear fruit .
But while we speak of TENs , I would also like to refer very quickly to the responsibility which we have for all parts of the Union .
I am thinking in particular of the west and the northwest of Ireland where we require a major investment to bring our road networks up to an acceptable level .
Until we have this , we will not be in a position to provide much-needed jobs in those areas .
Mr President , there are four comments that I should like to make .
I should first of all like to congratulate Mr Piecyk on his powers of endurance , together with all those who have provided their political and administrative support .
Secondly , I would point out the simple fact that once this procedure is concluded , the TENs will finally have been adopted .
I think it will still take a long time before we get the genuinely lasting and coherent European transport policy that we want .
It will take a good deal of hard work and there will be many barriers to bring down , barriers between countries and regions , and also between transport techniques and in the way people think , because transport affects more than just economic growth .
My third comment concerns the conciliation procedure , which I think would certainly benefit from being given a little more substance and weight , particularly in the informal phase .
The parties involved , the Council , the Commission and Parliament - but in this case particularly the Council - need to have more confidence in each other and put their arguments forward in open debate .
Once this happens , the formal conciliation procedure can be kept purely as a safety net and will really hardly be needed , which will be a great advantage when you think of how much trouble it causes , not to mention how much it all costs .
Finally , I would just say that I think there is no point in voting against at the moment , since that will not help anyone , nor indeed the environment .
If we do vote against , the world will not stop and wait while we go away and think again .
The compromise should , in my opinion , be the start of a whole new approach with the emphasis on policy rather than procedure , because we still have a great deal more to do .
Mr President , when Parliament votes tomorrow on the joint text from the conciliation committee on Community guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network , a long legislative process will come to an end .
This will provide proof that the codecision procedure is workable , even for the most difficult issues .
We all know that it is in the very nature of a compromise that , in many areas , solutions will be reached which do not completely satisfy everyone concerned .
As a Member of the European Parliament , I am certainly not happy with the way in which the Council acted .
The European Parliament must not be excluded from participation in decision-making on transport issues .
However , we must not forget our responsibilities with regard to these projects or , in particular , with regard to the citizens whom we represent in this House .
A quick decision will mean , I hope , the rapid start of construction - and with it , an important boost to the labour market . And in view of the fact that there are 18 million unemployed people in Europe , the Union is urgently in need of such a boost .
In the case of Austria , two projects are very much to the fore . Firstly , the extension of the Brenner axis - the importance of which cannot be stated often enough or overemphasized - is essential for our country .
In the interests of our hard-pressed neighbours , a rapid start to construction is vital , to say nothing of the environmental problems which can to some extent be resolved by the building of this route and the introduction of combined transport .
I would draw attention once again in this context to the special problems hitherto involved in long-distance transport and the particular geographical situation of the Brenner pass .
The transalpine Munich-Verona route must be a matter of concern to the whole European Union , not only to the countries immediately affected .
Of equally great importance to Austria is the construction of the high-speed route for combined transport from Paris , via Munich , to Vienna and Budapest .
This project does not figure among the fourteen Essen priority projects , but must be dealt with as a matter of urgency .
At a time when the enlargement of the Union to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe is taking concrete form , infrastructure projects which bring this region closer to the existing Community must be particularly encouraged .
I would point out in this respect that Austria has only been a Member of the European Union since 1 January 1995 , but that its legitimate demands must be taken seriously .
If we are to be able to pursue effectively the objectives laid down in Article 2 of the EC Treaty in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , there is an urgent need for a modern , fast and economical transport network with appropriate capacities , which also reflects the modern attitude towards the environment .
The trans-European transport network represents a great challenge to the European Union , but also an opportunity : through targeted investment , projects which are urgently needed can be realized .
In this way , Europe will grow a little closer together and become more competitive , and jobs will be created .
The decision on the trans-European networks can be a major step towards the further development of the Union .
Let us seize the opportunity offered to us !
Mr President , I have two comments .
Firstly , there is the institutional side .
Many Members have congratulated one another today on the result we have produced and will be voting on tomorrow .
To my mind , the praises should be muted .
On the other hand , that is how things are : this is a compromise , and I shall naturally vote in favour of it .
At the weekend , I had the pleasure of visiting a trans-European project from the old Roman Empire , the first road from Rome to the Adriatic , and touching the wall built by Caesar Augustus out on the Adriatic coast .
One cannot help thinking of the Treaty of Rome and the trans-European networks when one visits such a historic monument .
One cannot help thinking about what we decided at Maastricht .
And I cannot help thinking how we spent time doing battle with each other over our own projects , the so-called ' imby ' projects - in my own backyard .
We were not thinking in a very European way , and the same thing happened in the Council .
These 14 projects have been created to bind Europe together and to sell the scheme .
So , ladies and gentlemen , let us now stop flexing muscles which perhaps we do not have .
That was my first point .
My second point is that the trans-European networks are also connected with employment .
It is not just a question of building a road or a tunnel , or whatever it may be , but of binding Europe together , just as in the Roman Empire , but in rather different terms .
I do have my own pet project , though it is a European one .
I am pleased that in this discussion , we have succeeded in raising the profile of the maritime sector .
I know that the Commissioner and the Council agree that the maritime sector is an area of potential in the development of the trans-European networks .
Let us build on that together .
It has the environmental angle , it has the right element of European policy .
We should take the decisions together - Council , Commission and Parliament .
My wish is that the increase in traffic should benefit Europe , and not just individual countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this conciliation will leave a bitter taste in the mouths of all those who have taken part in it .
We believe that codecision is an essential instrument for reducing the democratic deficit , but one that means little or nothing to the Council or the Commission - which sadly , in this case , has been its over-enthusiastic follower .
We are not going to pull our punches here . The Council has repeatedly tried to wreck the codecision process by imposing an unreasonable number of conditions for identifying projects of common interest , thereby depriving the agreement of any substance .
I would also take the Commission to task for being , in the words of an illustrious British stateswoman , the Council 's lap-dog .
Barely a fortnight ago , Commissioner , on 1 July , you sent a letter to the chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism in which you said , firstly , that Parliament should be involved in any changes made to the list of priority projects ; secondly , that your intention was to consider whether such an amendment to the guidelines for the network would be appropriate - which means , if that last phrase makes any sense at all , that you wanted to consider whether or not an amendment to the list of priority projects was required ; and , thirdly , that this amendment should be approved by codecision .
Now you tell us , in your letter of 12 July , that in the event of any possible changes to the Essen list being proposed , you would ascertain whether or not these had been identified in Annexes I and II .
If this is indeed the case , then any changes to the list would be carried out without Parliament 's involvement .
What kind of a joke is that !
Mr Simpson said that we must not call you a liar .
I have too much respect for parliamentary customs in Britain not to comply with his request .
Instead , I will talk about hypocrisy and lack of integrity .
But in spite of everything , we shall vote for this text because we know that too many people are waiting to castigate us for our lack of commitment to the networks , with a view to opposing any extension of codecision .
But in voting for it , we cannot forget the humiliation to which we have been subjected .
I am a Christian Democrat and , to quote Franois Mauriac , ' I forgive trespasses , but I remember the dates ' .
Mr President , Parliament wanted a binding clause on environmental protection in this legislation , as reflected in our second reading amendments .
I want to thank Mr Piecyk and Commissioner Kinnock for their help in winning this clause .
We want an emphasis on rail and water networks rather than massive motorway building and we want rigorous environmental impact assessments .
It was astonishing to meet such blinkered resistance on the part of the Council on this crucial issue .
We have ended up with just the bare minimum which can be accepted .
Having sat through all those long nights of negotiations , I have to say that it is a grudging and minimalist concession on the part of the Council .
It is not as good as we would have liked but , in the spirit of conciliation , it is much better than what we started with .
It does not guarantee that Member States will necessarily choose the least environmentally damaging option and therefore it will require extremely tight vigilance on the part of European citizens and environmental NGOs as these networks begin to be planned and implemented to make sure that this happens .
It will be up to this Parliament to ensure that there is no backtracking on the environment article , which we have won under such difficult circumstances , by the Member States and we will continue to watch the trans-European networks very carefully .
In the spirit that we have ended up with much more than we started with , this House should approve the networks .
Then let us get on with trying to find the money to build them and to create the jobs which we so sorely need in this Community .
Mr President , in this connection I should like to thank Mr Piecyk and the other Members who have succeeded in achieving this compromise .
The development of the trans-European transport networks is essential because the networks will further European integration and boost employment .
From Finland 's point of view , the proposal concerning the trans-European transport networks has got better and better .
All the important parts of the network , from the point of view of our country , have been incorporated into the proposal .
Due note has also been taken of our speciality , icebreakers .
The list of priority measures includes the Nordic triangle , which in Finland involves the construction of the corridor comprising high-quality railway lines , motorways and harbours between Turku and St. Petersburg in Russia .
We thank Parliament for its understanding of our special situation .
The Union must now resolve the problem of the funding of the transport networks in such a way that the required investment is not withheld for fear of adding to State deficits .
The system for calculating public finances should be changed in such a way that when the productive investment in connection with the trans-European networks is calculated , account is taken only of the costs which give rise to interest and amortization .
This would mean that at present those investment costs would represent only one-twentieth of the public investment costs under the current system .
Because account would only be taken of 5 % of the cost of such measures , in the form of annual amortization , and because at present full account is already taken of interest-rate costs , the issue is the current focus for the development of the transport networks .
Mr President , according to Article 129b , the trans-European networks must contribute to the strengthening of the Community 's economic and social cohesion .
The Union 's actions in this field are required to promote , firstly , the harmonious development of the Community as a whole , and secondly - and in particular - the linking of the island , landlocked and peripheral regions with the central regions of the Community .
From the point of view of the coastal regions , this second requirement was not at first given adequate consideration .
In the end , the Committee on Regional Policy managed to ensure that it was taken more into account .
The joint text now provides for the sea-side continuation of transport infrastructure , in accordance with the ' road to sea ' concept , which includes the integration of seaports and short-sea shipping .
From the point of view of regional policy , this is a success .
These two aspects of the guidelines must now be translated into action .
If just the major projects are implemented , only the economically strong regions will be interlinked .
That will mean that the economically weak and peripheral regions will miss out on the economic boost that is intended to result from the development of the trans-European transport network .
Furthermore , provision must be made for an adequate number of stopping-off , approach and departure points .
This is the only way to prevent a large number of regions from becoming purely transit areas .
In the view of the Committee on Regional Policy , this is a classic conflict between transport policy and regional planning policy , which can only be resolved by means of solidarity between the regions .
However , there is also a need for solidarity with regard to the codecision procedure .
The impression has been strengthened that the Member States need to be shaken up in this respect .
Parliament will no longer allow itself to be deprived of the democratic rights conferred on it by the Maastricht Treaty .
Mr President , first of all I endorse the hearty thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , who has guided us all for so long on this very complex and challenging issue .
I would also like to welcome in the most positive terms possible trans-European networks .
They are , in my view and that of my group , a clear rejection of the laissez-faire approach to transport policy in Europe which has resulted , as we all know , in record congestion and pollution and cost ECU 100 billion a year in delay costs alone .
In its place now , because of trans-European networks , we have the framework for a planned , coordinated attempt to switch traffic from the roads to the railways , the maritime sector and to inland waterways .
We are doing that by harnessing the resources of both the public and private sectors .
I would like to welcome all of that .
Secondly , I condemn the resistance of some Member States to our positive proposals to put our environmental concerns at the very heart of the trans-European network guidance .
But I would , in so doing , like to thank the Commissioner for his positive contribution to this very issue .
I think he would agree with me that its a real pity that some Member States at least say one thing in public about the environment , but do another when it comes to Council meetings .
The debate today represents real progress , a real attempt to take the environment into account .
For the first time ever we are committing ourselves as a European Union to a strategic environmental assessment .
Yes , it will take three years to influence the revision of the guidelines , but that major progress which was resisted for so long by the Council should be welcomed by us all .
Yes , we must all remain vigilant , but we must also all work together positively to make sure TENs meet our objective of ensuring we have environmentally sustainable transport policies to pass on to future generations .
Mr President , how can we fail to greet with optimism the launch of the fourteen projects now under discussion ?
Without doubt , the trans-European transport networks will represent the main arteries of a modern , competitive and job-creating European Union . At present , there are few such arteries , and they are relatively congested .
Transport is an economic , social and political factor of the utmost importance , and not only is there a need for transport networks that are geared to realities , but those networks must function at a European level , with the interoperability that is necessary and only logical .
Furthermore , we should not dismiss the result of this trial run of the codecision procedure .
I have to say that my personal observation of the Commission leads me to believe that it has been engaging in double talk on this issue .
According to its discussion partner , it has been using double talk - although , of course , in the wake of the relative failure of the conciliation procedure , Parliament does not have the best possible perspective .
Financing , Commissioner , is another key aspect of the trans-European transport network project .
The financial perspective is inadequate : it lacks balance in terms of the priority given to the objectives that we are setting .
And this will have to be put right , if we do not wish to fall into the kind of rhetoric and populism which talking a great deal and failing to provide the necessary resources ultimately represents .
Let me end with a warning , however : the Community 's infrastructure policy , Commissioner , its trans-European networks policy , is not contributing to the strengthening of economic and social cohesion which is required by the Treaty .
According to the Treaty , all policies are to contribute to the strengthening of economic and social cohesion .
I have to say to you today - and I hope to be able to speak with you at greater length on another occasion - that this policy is not helping to strengthen the European Union 's economic and social cohesion .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for my part I should like to congratulate our rapporteur and the Members of the European Parliament who are members of the conciliation committee chaired by Nicole Fontaine , for the competence , balance and good political sense demonstrated in these difficult negotiations , bearing in mind that the agreement reached was overall a positive one and that we now have the conditions for making decisive progress in the process of constructing the trans-European networks in the transport sector , something which is vital for the proper functioning of the internal market , for strengthening economic and social cohesion and for creating new jobs .
The achievement of these projects constitutes an important contribution to efficient and diversified links between the peripheral regions and the centre of the European Union , a vital condition for the existence of equal opportunities for all the citizens and undertakings in the Community .
Some aspects of this issue have to be emphasized , however : first of all the financing of the trans-European networks must be carried out outside the structural funds and the Cohesion Fund which had already been allocated for other purposes .
For us it is quite clear that we should now earmark extra credits and add those to the ones which have already been agreed upon .
Secondly , the priorities to be given to the projects must be borne in mind within a perspective of political dynamics and we should also apply the philosophy proposed in the report which we are now analysing .
In the case of Portugal , the proposal presented at the last European Council in Florence to integrate the project for a motorway from Lisbon to Valladolid into the inter-modal links between Portugal and Spain seems to us far more in keeping with the philosophy approved by the European Parliament and will actually contribute to a more balanced development of this region .
I therefore think , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that we should vote in favour of this agreement and I call upon the Commission to put it swiftly into execution .
Mr President , it is not easy to shape a policy of economic and social cohesion .
Sometimes we take several steps forward , at other times we go through a phase of stagnation ; in this case we have taken a small step forward .
That is my assessment of the conciliation procedure .
Nevertheless , we should commend the successful work of the Commissioner and the rapporteur , as well as the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the technical teams supporting all their efforts .
Our task now is to find the financial resources to ensure that this document can be appreciated by our citizens , so that economic and social cohesion can become real and tangible .
In spite of the meagre resources , we have to fight an important battle : the continual references to private funding could in some ways be ideologically inspired , in that to my mind , major infrastructure networks linking areas which include some on the periphery have a real need of public resources , and these can be made available through joint efforts from the EU budget and national policies .
There is much that we can do in this respect , I believe , to invest in jobs and take due account of the environment .
Planning decisions have been made : for the first time , we have projects which are defined as being of common interest , whether they are priority projects or not , and they are binding on the national governments .
In this context , I welcome the statement by the Commission that it wishes to prioritize projects with a lesser impact on the environment and which promote combined transport .
Here , I think that certain projects to link north and south would correspond with the Commission 's principles .
I wish you every success in your work !
Mr President , the conciliation procedure on the trans-European networks has produced little in the way of results , particularly on the subject of priority projects .
Despite all its fine words , the Council has done its best in this particular case to flout the codecision procedure agreed at Maastricht , and we shall now have to consider very carefully whether we can accept the poor results which have been produced .
In order to do so , we must look at the political implications .
Firstly , rejecting the compromise would mean postponing the implementation of the networks and thus delaying the anticipated benefits for the economy and employment .
This is certainly not what people want .
Secondly , it would seriously damage the attempts being made to find more funding for the networks from the Union 's budget and other sources .
I therefore think that it would be better to hold the Council and the Commission to their promise to involve the European Parliament in an appropriate way if the priority projects are to be substantially amended .
I would refer to the statement made by Mr Dini during the debate on 3 July , I think it was , and to Commissioner Kinnock 's letter of 1 July , both of which are quite clear on this point .
I would point out that the budget procedure offers us a very practical way of ensuring that these promises are carried out to the letter .
I should like to make one further comment about the air crash at Eindhoven .
The President of the House this morning sent his condolences to the families of the victims who were killed or injured when a military aircraft crashed at Eindhoven airport .
I hope the relevant authorities will carry out a detailed investigation into the causes of the crash , and I should like to ask the Commissioner whether he thinks that the Commission should be involved in the investigation , simply so that we can learn as much as we can from this tragedy in which 32 people lost their lives .

I should like to end by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , and Mrs Fontaine and Mr Imbeni for all their hard work in the conciliation committee , and of course our thanks also go to Commissioner Kinnock for his tireless efforts to find a compromise .
Mr President , I should like to begin by supporting Mr Cornelissen , speaking on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , in offering the condolences of the Commission to those bereaved by and injured in the appalling air tragedy in Eindhoven yesterday .
In response to the question raised by Mr Cornelissen I have to say that I confirm that the Commission does not have the legal competence to undertake investigation .
However , he can be absolutely certain that , as on all occasions , we seek to secure the fullest possible information and analysis in order to learn any lessons to be drawn from air disasters of any description .
On the issue of the trans-European transport network guidelines , I would begin by expressing my appreciation for the constructive efforts made by Mrs Fontaine and other members of the conciliation committee from all parts of the House on this important piece of legislation .
As rapporteur , Mr Piecyk clearly had a special responsibility - and I commend him for his work - over a time span that turns out to have been two months longer in total than the gestation period of an elephant .
I know that he has produced something which , in the European context at least , is not as beautiful but is certainly more functional than the average elephant .
The process of adopting the guidelines for the trans-European transport network is now moving towards its conclusion and , as the House may know , the Council gave its agreement yesterday .
I am sure that everyone who has had direct involvement will share my view that , quite apart from the significant interinstitutional issues , efficient trans-European transport networks - as several Members have said in the course of the debate - are vital for jobs , growth , competitiveness and economic and social cohesion .
They must be developed systematically and in the interests of the Union and , indeed , the whole of our continent , as some Members also reminded us in the course of this and other debates on the guidelines .
It is no exaggeration to say that the adoption of the guidelines is a significant event in the history of our Community .
For the first time and in accordance with the Treaty , the Community has established , legislated policy for the medium and long-term development of the overall international transport infrastructure network .
That will prove to be a practical binding process for our Community , as Mr Sindal suggested .
In addition , this is the first occasion on which the Member States , through the Council , have considered transport infrastructure networks in a codecision process with the European Parliament .
I am certain that will prove to be an important development in the relationship between the democratic institutions of the Community and , as several Members have suggested , this should be regarded as the beginning of the evolution and not in any sense the end .
It is a matter of fact that in general the Member States have to secure the provision of over 90 % of the funds needed to undertake projects and the codecision process only covers the guidelines for the TENs , not their implementation or financing .
It is also clear that subsidiarity is properly secured by the provision under Article 129 of the Treaty that guidelines and projects of common interest which relate to the territory of a Member State shall require the approval of the Member State concerned .
The task of codecision , therefore , had to be undertaken against the background of those legal , economic and political realities .
And whilst that naturally increased the complexity of the work , the joint text on the guidelines , as it now stands , is a satisfactory result for the whole Community .
In the course of achieving that joint text , there have been significant changes , as Members reminded us , in the course of the debate .
First , the principle of specifying environmental considerations in the guidelines has been achieved in a new article , and that provision opens the way to the development of two new means of ensuring adequate environmental safeguards : strategic environmental impact assessments and corridor assessments .
Naturally , the Commission takes these provisions seriously and will strive to ensure their useful implementation .
In answer to Miss Eriksson and Mrs van Dijk , under Article 7 of the Financial Regulation I have to remind them that the projects financed under this regulation shall comply with Community law and Community policies , in particular in relation to environmental protection , competition and the award of public contracts .
Of course , the habitat Directive , which was referred to by Mrs van Dijk , is the law of the Community and must be complied with on pain of prosecution .
In both respects , therefore , and whilst I would not claim an immaculate provision to save the environment in the context of the TENs guidelines , very significant progress was made , thanks largely to the work of Parliament so far as the safeguards for the environment are concerned .
The second change concerned the identification of projects of common interest and the amendments to the maps in Annex 1 and the specifications and criteria of Annex 2 , where the Council accepted 18 further amendments in the conciliation procedure , in addition to those accepted after first reading .
Third , on the remaining amendments , the Council and the Commission made a joint declaration with Parliament that they take note of projects supported by Parliament in second reading with a view to the future development of the trans-European transport networks .
In addition , the Commission has declared that it will examine the projects voted for by Parliament in second reading and that examination will be undertaken as part of the revision procedure which is set for July 1999 .
On the subject of ports , which I know rightly exercise several Members of this House , there are clearly very real questions of competition between these essential parts of the maritime infrastructure and , for that reason , it has not yet been found possible to achieve an approach to ports which is similar to that established for airports .
The Commission intends , therefore , after consultation with the interested parties and naturally the Member States , to present a report next year to identify eligible ports and consider whether it is appropriate to make a proposal that is comparable to that relating to airports in the Community .
Parliament also achieved changes in another area , where there was significant contention : the so-called ' priority projects ' and Annex III .
It is obviously well-known that Member States objected right from the beginning to the setting of priorities for projects in the guidelines decision .
They were convinced that the setting of priorities for projects of common interest is strictly a matter for national governments .
I know that Members of this House understand that view when more than 90 % of the costs of these major infrastructure developments have to be financed through the action of Member States .
Through negotiation in the conciliation procedure , Parliament succeeded in including a special provision - Article 19 , referring to Annex III and the 14 projects of common interest to which the Essen Council attached particular importance .
Another provision - Article 20 - is directed towards projects of common interest in combined transport and new traffic management techniques .
As Members will know , they can take satisfaction from those developments and from the joint declaration by Parliament , the Council and the Commission calling on Member States to give the greatest importance to the implementation of these projects .
Members of the House will know that at the recent Florence European Council the new Portuguese and Spanish Governments proposed modification of Project No 8 on the Essen list .
No-one will need to be told that this is a multiple development and it is clear that consideration of the issue must be undertaken with strict observance of the letter and the spirit of the compromise achieved in the conciliation committee and now recommended to this House .
We in the Commission will naturally be examining the project further and clearly we do not yet know what the political orientation of the European Council will be .
If some modification of Article 19 and Annex III of the guidelines decision was to appear to be appropriate the Commission would have to consider whether to make a corresponding proposal .
The procedure for amendment in that event , as Mr Dini for the presidency has already suggested , would be codecision .
I heard Mr Bourlanges ' contribution on this point .
Indeed I took a note of it .
I think the kindest thing that I can say about his rather immature intervention is that the name-calling that he indulged in did nothing at all to enhance his reputation .
All it did , indeed , was to demonstrate that in politics at least , it is possible to be both heavy and empty at the same time .
In conclusion , I think that the work involving Parliament , the Council and the Commission has produced an outcome for the trans-European transport network guidelines that is generally positive , economically realistic , socially responsive and helpful to the needs of the peripheral regions and to environmental protection .
Clearly the guidelines are , as I and Members have said - wisely in my view - in the course of this debate , a first attempt for the Community and no doubt there is capacity for improvement as policy evolves .
When we undertake the first revision of the guidelines over the next three years - indeed we shall be reporting in three years ' time - I am certain that the lessons from this initial experience will offer valuable instruction .
Meanwhile , for the sake of the Community in all its parts , I believe that we must make progress with the implementation of the transEuropean transport network .
I therefore strongly commend the guidelines to this House as worthy of strong support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Biology and medicine ( Bioethics Convention )
The next item is the report ( A4-0190 / 96 ) by Mr Pelttari , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Draft Convention on the protection of human rights and the dignity of the human being with regard to the application of biology and medicine ( Bioethics Convention ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the planned Council of Europe convention also has implications for research within the European Community .
Research will be made subject to legal limitations , especially in areas in which social or third-party interests might be given priority over the protection of the dignity and rights of individuals .
Consequently , as long ago as last April , Parliament 's Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy delivered its almost unanimous opinion .
The committee responsible has agreed to all the most important aspects of the Research Committee 's proposals , and considers it essential for the European Parliament - partly in view of its role in the allocation of research funds - to monitor critically the work on this Council of Europe convention .
The European public has been taking an increasingly lively interest in the development of this text .
It is therefore all the more regrettable that access to it has at times only been possible as the result of indiscretions .
In response to this situation , the Committee on Research is calling in its opinion for the broadest possible public debate and participation in policy-making , as well as the holding of public hearings and the establishment of publicly accessible data bases .
This request has been incorporated into the report of the committee responsible .
It will be further emphasized in an additional amendment tabled by my group .
The present draft convention represents a considerable improvement on the 1994 proposal .
Nevertheless , it still covers only a small proportion of the issues that need to be regulated , and it will have to be supplemented .
Care must be taken to ensure that this process of adopting supplementary protocols does not undermine the actual objective of the convention , however .
There is also a need for a stricter legal framework for research on persons who are incapable of giving consent , and to ensure that such research is permitted only if it is closely linked to the illness of the person concerned and likely to benefit his or her health .
Finally , with regard to in vitro embryo research , the draft convention represents a compromise - a compromise which is less stringent than the legislation in force in Germany and other European countries .
In any event , at least the production of human embryos for research purposes will now be prohibited .
The European Parliament should call for a ban on any type of consumptive embryo research , as well as for more precise rules on embryo protection in the case of in vitro fertilization .
The report by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights makes an important contribution to the debate on this issue , and Parliament should adopt it by a large majority .
In conclusion , I should like to point out for the record that I was not amongst the signatories of Amendments Nos 16 and 18 , as is wrongly indicated in Document A4-0190 / 96 .

Mr President , the draft Council of Europe convention on human rights and biomedicine has rightly met with criticism from associations for the disabled and the Church , as well as many parliamentarians throughout Europe .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament is examining and delivering an opinion on the draft convention , even if the legal situation is far from clear .
Mr Pelttari has submitted a good report .
I should like to thank him for his work .
His report uses clear wording and undoubtedly gives greater emphasis to the protection of human rights than does the Bioethics Steering Committee 's draft convention .
It is to be regretted , however , that Mr Pelttari 's own group wishes to remove some of this clarity , and has tabled a number of amendments which would water down the report .
As regards the content of the report , the PPE Group supports it in the form in which it was adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
We believe in clear wording and the absolute primacy of human dignity .
Firstly , I should like to address the controversial issue of modification of the germ cell line .
It is to be welcomed that the Steering Committee has pronounced itself against intervention on the germ cell line . However , in my view and that of my group , the necessary clarity is lacking .
The European Parliament must declare its clear support for a ban .
We do not wish to see a moratorium - which may be technically justified - but a ban based on fundamental ethical considerations .
Modification of the germ cell line is not a question of therapy but of the breeding of humans , and under no circumstances can we accept the vision of humanity which underlies this .
The technique itself must also be rejected , since research into modification of the germ cell line requires embryo research in which embryos are consumed on a massive scale .
And the Steering Committee 's draft is also insufficiently clear on the question of embryo research itself .
Reference is made to adequate protection , but consumptive embryo research is not unequivocally prohibited .
I ask myself : what sort of protection is it when the object of that protection ultimately dies ?
How we can talk about adequate protection then ?
We therefore wish to see clear wording here as well .
Nevertheless , the rejection of consumptive embryo research - and on this point we are agreed - requires consistency .
We must take care to ensure , I believe , that surplus embryos are not produced .
These would then either be used for research purposes or - and this also raises ethical problems - would have to be allowed to die .
Many universities are currently faced with the dilemma of what to do with the hundreds of thousands of frozen embryos on their hands .
A number of Member States have rules designed to address this problem , and these rules have not met with the opposition of women 's movements - at least , I have not heard of any such opposition , although I have asked colleagues to provide me with evidence of it on several occasions .
Consequently , I believe that the wording of paragraph 12.5 - as adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs - is extremely important .
As regards research on persons who are incapable of giving consent , I wish to say that the original 1994 version of the draft convention rightly gave rise to protests .
I also ask myself why it was not made clear from the outset , by means of a ban on discrimination against disabled persons , that no abuses would be permitted in this respect .
The Committee on Legal Affairs is calling for such a ban , and I believe that we should endorse that call .
The PPE Group is not opposed to a ban on research per se , but we wish to see strict rules .
That also applies with regard to persons who are incapable of giving consent .
Indeed , if we were to advocate a total ban , research in the fields of childhood diseases or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease , for example , would not be possible . In my view , therefore , we should adopt the report in its present form , with a few changes of wording , but no changes of substance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution which has resulted from the committee 's work is a clear step backwards in several respects compared with the draft convention .
Firstly , in the area of scientific research , the resolution envisages the setting of absolute limits before any new research work is undertaken , in other words an obscurantist moratorium on science .
The majority in the committee thus believes that there should be no further research into genetic diseases until the convention has been adopted and then ratified by a majority of the states concerned .
This would mean a delay of five or six years in combatting diseases .
All advanced research would come to a halt , and we would lose out to Japan and the United States , not least in the field of patents .
With regard to in vitro fertilization , the text approved in committee is unacceptable , as has already been stated .
It imposes theoretical limits on the production of embryos for reimplantation , when in fact it is still not possible to avoid over-production of embryos . Above all , however , it imposes a virtual ban on the conservation of embryos by deep freezing , except where there are medical grounds for doing so .
All research on embryos is also prohibited .
I should like to ask one simple question .
Who are we , the legislators , often geographically far removed from the people we serve , to say what is good and what is bad with regard to what most intimately affects a person , namely his or her sex life and reproductive activities ?
At a time when , quite rightly , we are calling for equality of the sexes , how can we simultaneously deny women control over their own bodies ?
If there is a surfeit of embryos , then we should let women have the choice of whether to preserve or destroy them , or donate them to science .
Lastly , the almost complete ban on tests for predicting genetic diseases is also unacceptable . The possibility that such information might be misused could be avoided by authorizing such tests for medical or research purposes , and with the consent of the person concerned .
In fact , this opinion contains two serious defects .
Firstly , instead of devising a framework for controlling research , it seeks only to prohibit it .
To put it simply , those who are afraid because of some of the horrific experiments carried out during the past 50 years should remember that these only took place because they were authorized and even encouraged by inhuman and perverse policies .
But in today 's political democracies , controls exist , research is done openly , new discoveries are published and medical ethics committees abound .
So we need have no fears concerning research , which is a source of progress , as long as there are clear markers to prevent abuse .
Secondly , would 626 Members of Parliament seriously claim they had the right to define what is morally correct private behaviour for men and women ?
When establishing general rules to ensure the smooth running of a liberal society , there should be no interference in individual choice , when it evidently does not conflict with the established social order .
Like the two previous speakers , I would say that if the amendments which we in particular have tabled are not taken into account , that will be what the European Parliament has done .
In which case , I hope the Council of Europe will reject Parliament 's opinion .
Mr President , one can easily concur with the central theme of Mr Pelttari 's report .
The development of biology and medicine demands that certain borders be drawn within the legal system for the protection of human dignity .
Great caution is necessary in dealing with genetic material .
People must have the right to be different .
We should today be directing much more of our efforts towards changing society to enable people to live life as fully as possible in spite of their individual illnesses and disabilities .
However , arbitrary limitations should not be placed on discovering the origins of diseases and disabilities , and on curing and preventing them .
Paragraph 12.10 of the report is in my opinion ill-considered .
This paragraph proposes that tests which are predictive of genetic diseases or which may identify genetic predispositions to disease or disability should only be authorized for life-threatening conditions for which effective treatment is currently possible .
What tests are being referred to ?
If the proposed wording were adopted , would many existing tests have to be discontinued ?
For example , it is already possible to predict certain conditions by means of blood tests , and thus to prevent the person developing symptoms even if only by changing his or her lifestyle .
For example a predisposition to adult ( II type ) diabetes is highly hereditary as is a predisposition to many other diseases .
It is already known that if one parent has diabetes , the child has a 40 % chance of having II type diabetes .
If both parents have diabetes it is known that the child has a 60 % chance of having diabetes .
However , this form of diabetes is not regarded as life-threatening although if untreated it can , like many other diseases , lead to premature death .
Such hereditary diseases are frequently the result of ' genetic defects ' .
In this way , it has been possible to eradicate many diseases from the world .
They have caused a great deal of suffering , and much still remains to be done .
Should the use of insulin have been forbidden 75 years ago ?
Was not the administration of bovine or porcine insulin to human ethically dubious ? Would it be permitted today ?
Fortunately it was permitted then .
These questions require deep consideration .
I hope that Parliament will not adopt the first sentence of point 12.10 but will adopt , for example , Mr Pelttari 's amendment instead .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , upholding and protecting the universal validity of human rights is one of the political priorities of our times .
The difficulty of this task lies in the fact that this validity is not only global and horizontal , but also individual and vertical : it extends from the Nobel Prize winner to the totally defenceless embryo , from the brain to individual body and gender cells .
Whatever form this protection takes , it must satisfy a fundamental requirement : the task of our society , which lives with the realities of nuclear physics and molecular biology , is not to establish a new code of ethics , but to confirm and clarify the consensus on the absolute validity of human rights - reached in reaction to the barbarity of world war and genocide - in the area of biotechnological research and therapy .
This draft convention on human rights and biomedicine contains exemption clauses in the areas of the right to consent , research on persons incapable of giving consent , germ cell line and embryo research , and organ transplants . These exemptions jeopardize the physical and genetic integrity of the persons concerned .
Furthermore , in comparison with the European Convention on Human Rights , the draft convention is characterized by a striking lack of actionable binding force , in that it confines the jurisdiction of the Strasbourg Court of Human Rights to supplying preliminary opinions .
Biologists , doctors , lawyers , philosophers and theologians have a great deal of work ahead of them to uphold the horizontal and vertical validity of human rights in the area of biomedicine .
Mr President , Mr Pelttari 's report deals with an extremely important and sensitive subject , namely bioethics or the ethics of life sciences .
More precisely , this report constitutes an opinion on the draft convention currently being drawn up by the Council of Europe .
I should first of all like to comment on the working methods of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
It carried out its work on the basis of a preliminary draft text of the Council of Europe dating from 1995 .
Since then , the Council of Europe , through its Bioethics Steering Committee , has carried out further work which , on 7 June this year , appeared as a new text differing somewhat from the previous version .
It is a pity that the European Parliament has carried out its own work on the basis of an already largely outdated text .
In particular , the June 1996 text , which marked the conclusion of the work of the Steering Committee - before it goes to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe , probably next autumn - to a large extent takes account of the criticisms which had been made , for example in Germany , where translation errors had distorted the debate .
The misunderstandings have now been cleared up , and the June text was adopted almost unanimously by the Steering Committee consisting of experts from all the Member States of the Council of Europe and representing all shades of opinion .
My second comment deals with some fundamental issues .
Clearly , Mr Pelttari 's report or , more precisely , the amendments adopted in committee , represent a certain moral standpoint which is not shared by all of us here .
This applies to some of the provisions concerning the very sensitive subject of embryos .
It also applies to protecting people who are incapable of giving their consent to research .
And , finally , it applies to genetic therapy and interventions on the human genome .
On all these points , Mr Pelttari 's report appears more restrictive than the 1995 version of the draft convention .
Naturally , we must protect human rights and exercise caution , but the report appears too restrictive , not to say a step backwards .
I regret this , just as I regret that the report criticizes the Council of Europe 's intention of preparing additional protocols on those issues which could not be included in the convention itself .
The Council of Europe knows what it is doing .
It knows that when dealing with such difficult matters , one has to move forward slowly , so as not to rock the boat .
A basic convention with additional protocols is the best approach .
Mr President , research in the fields of biology , biotechnology and medicine and the applications of this research offer untold possibilities , while at the same time confronting us with fundamental ethical questions .
It is therefore most welcome that the Council of Europe should be working on a convention for the protection of what is referred to as human dignity .
We must not say yes to every possibility : science , research and medicine must have their limits .

The proposed Council of Europe convention offers an excellent opportunity to establish the necessary legal framework for this , but it appears from the draft text that the Bioethics Steering Committee has wasted this opportunity , since the provisions on crucial points such as the protection of those who are unable to give their consent , the protection and use of embryos and the question of genetic therapy are entirely inadequate .
We are pleased that the European Parliament is stating its position in this report by Mr Pelttari .
However , we do not think that the European Union should accede to such a convention , since this must be a matter for the Member States to decide .
The Pelttari report makes substantial improvements to the draft convention , working on the basic principle that the direct protection of the dignity and rights of the individual must come before the interests of society or third parties , whatever they may be .
The report does not have all the answers , but certain clear limits are established as matters of principle .
Human dignity must be the first consideration , in acknowledgement of the fact that man is a unique creation of God .
This means that every life is entitled to total protection and respect from the very beginning to the very end , irrespective of whether or not it is perfect or able to give its consent .
I would therefore urge the House to adopt the Pelttari report as it stands , and to vote against the amendments which restrict the protection provided .
Mr President , in the final version , the term ' Bioethics Convention ' has been replaced by ' Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine ' .
It thus becomes clear that the draft under discussion is based on the primacy of the human being , excluding techniques relating to animals and plants .
The fundamental principle of the patient 's welfare , in the broadest sense , in any kind of intervention is generally welcomed , but on this note we would recall , firstly , that no medical intervention may be carried out without the free and informed consent of the person undergoing it ; and , secondly , that no research may be carried out on a person incapable of giving consent , unless it is for that person 's certain and direct benefit .
This position is in conflict with legislation and current practice in many European states , where the majority opinion is that the requirement for direct benefit would make it impossible to carry out a great deal of basic research on conditions relating to child development , childhood diseases or mental illness .
In any event , we do not consider these systems to be strong enough to permit any major advances .
Genetics is the most promising discipline with regard to combatting disease , in particular cancer .
For this reason we maintain that an intervention on the human genome may only be undertaken for preventive , therapeutic or diagnostic purposes , and only as long as there is no intervention in the human germ cell line .
Although some consider that this prohibition is based on fundamental ethical considerations , for others it is an elementary precaution in view of the fact that we are a very long way from possessing sufficient expertise to ensure acceptable safety conditions .
Having said that , we are broadly in favour of the draft convention for the protection of human rights and dignity of the human being with regard to the application of biology and medicine .
We particularly welcome two passages : recital L , which reads ' convinced that such forms of treatment should be prohibited because no technical controls on their effects are possible for the foreseeable future , there is no possibility of securing the consent of future generations and such forms of treatment would finally push open the door to eugenics - using humans for specific purposes ' ; and paragraph 11 : ' considers that the direct protection of the dignity and rights of individuals is of absolute priority as compared with any social or third-party interest and that the results of human genome research work must be freely available ' .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-0681 / 96 ) .
Question No 29 by Maren Gnther ( H-0529 / 96 )
Subject : EC humanitarian aid to Iraq in the light of Iraqi oil exports to finance humanitarian aid
The Commission spends an annual sum of approximately ECU 22 million on humanitarian aid to Iraq .
Further amounts are set aside for 1996 .
Does the Commission intend to release these resources in view of the fact that Iraq has now been authorized to export oil to the value of $ 2 billion per half-year in order to finance humanitarian aid for its suffering population ?
The Commission is following the steps taken towards implementing resolution 986 of the UN Security Council which permits the sale of petrol in order to allow the purchase of food and humanitarian products .
The implementation of this resolution will require that all conditions , such as establishing purchase programmes and setting up adequate structures , are fulfilled several months in advance .
With this in mind the Commission will maintain its humanitarian aid to Iraq throughout 1996 .
ECU 9m has been allocated in the first budget and the second amount of ECU 14m could be allocated , if needed , depending on the availability of ECHO funds .
When resolution 986 actually comes into effect the Commission will examine the need to revise the programme and Member States and Parliament will be informed .
The question arises of what will happen to the humanitarian aid in that case , Commissioner . Since Iraq will now have far greater sums of money at its disposal , the resources could be made available for other international emergencies .
Or are there plans to take much more specific action , in view of the fact , for example , that the rate of child mortality in Iraq is alarmingly high ?
For the moment the money is not in place and , as I have said , there are quite substantial conditions that have to be fulfilled .
When those conditions have been fulfilled the moment will come to consider re-ordering the programme whether in Iraq or elsewhere .
Question No 30 by Gerard Collins ( H-0560 / 96 )
Subject : Europol
Can the Commission indicate the amount of financial support it is making available to Europol , the amount of funding Europol is receiving from the Member States and when it expects this agency to become fully operational as an information resource on the illegal drugs trade for the national authorities charged with direct responsibility for combatting international drugs smugglers ?
Mr President , neither the Europol Convention nor the joint action on Europol 's extended mandate , which was adopted in March 1995 , provides for financing from the Community budget .
On the contrary , both these documents state explicitly that the expenses of both EDU and Europol must be borne by the Member States , in proportion to their Gross National Product .
The Commission has no information on exactly how much each Member State is paying .
That question must be put to the Council .
The European Parliament has created a special budget item in the 1996 budget for EDU .
The reason for this is that at the Essen summit the Heads of State and of Government expressed the wish that the EDU mandate should be extended to cover not only drugs but also trafficking in human beings , radioactive material and stolen vehicles , plus associated crime .
A decision to this effect was also taken at the Council of Ministers of Home Affairs and Justice which took place on 9 and 10 March 1995 .
The amount that the European Parliament has set aside for EDU 's new areas of responsibility comes to a total of ECU 7.5 million , half assigned to the budget item and half placed in the reserve .
In accordance with the Treaty it is the Council of Ministers that is to decide whether these resources should be used or not .
No such decision has as yet been taken .
I naturally welcome the fact that a solution to the jurisdiction question was found at the Florence summit .
I now hope that the Member States will ensure that the Europol Convention is ratified as quickly as possible , as this will determine how soon Europol will be able to start working seriously .
I thank Commissioner Gradin for her answer .
This clarifies the situation very considerably for me .
Question No 31 by Graham Watson ( H-0397 / 96 )
Subject : Uniform electoral procedure for elections to the European Parliament
What measures is the Commission taking to ensure that the undertaking given by the signatories to the Treaty of Rome on the establishment of a uniform electoral system will at last be honoured ?
In its opinion for the Intergovernmental Conference , the Commission underlined the fact that , in its view , the introduction of a uniform electoral system for the European Parliament was an important matter .
But the procedure laid down in Article 138 of the Treaty is quite clear that it is Parliament and not the Commission that exercises the legislative initiative , and that has been done , as the House knows .
After that , the Council has to take a unanimous decision after receiving the assent of the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , the necessary unanimous agreement in the Council is not at present forthcoming .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his answer .
I realize that the Commission recognizes , firstly , that the current balance in this House is skewed by the operation of the electoral system in just one Member State , so that we do not reflect here the will of the people of Europe when they vote .
I am sure that the Commission also recognizes that we may well go into the next European election with 15 Member States and 16 different electoral systems .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his assurance that he recognizes the de Gucht report as Parliament having exercised its initiative .
Will the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , consider taking action against the Council for its failure to act on this matter ?
I do not necessarily agree with every comment the honourable gentleman has made in the supplementary question , but it is the case that Parliament has exercised its right and functions as prescribed .
I am not persuaded , however , that there is any legal obligation on the part of the Council of Ministers that has not been met .
It has simply failed to reach an agreement by the necessary provision of unanimity .
That is not unique .
If every time the Council failed to have unanimity and a proposition was not agreed to , it was taken to court , we would have to have a hundred courts sitting every day of the week .
I wonder if the Commissioner could clarify what is meant by uniform electoral system .
Is it the intention to have exactly the same system in every Member State , which is clearly neither achievable nor desirable , in which case it will probably be best to amend the Treaty of Rome ?
As for Mr Watson 's point about the balance of the house being skewed by the electoral system in one Member State , would the Commissioner agree that there is no proportionality across the European Union as a whole , nor any intention of having proportionality , because smaller countries get proportionally more seats than bigger countries , in which case the position in the United Kingdom is not the main factor skewing the balance of the House ?
I did not say anything about skewing the balance of the House , I merely said that there was a commitment and belief that there should be a uniform electoral system .
As to what a uniform electoral system is , there may be some room for argument but the Parliament put forward a proposal which certainly we recognize as containing a uniform electoral system .
The question of over-representation or under-representation of particular countries seems to me to be a wholly separate matter .
It does seem to me to be extraordinary that this Parliament , which keeps making a song and dance about having more powers given to it , fails to address the fundamental democratic deficit at its heart , which is that it does not represent properly the political views across the continent of Europe .
I take issue with my colleague there from England , who seems quite complacent about this , and I do trust that the Commission does not share this complacency , that frankly it does not matter very much .
I suspect there are those in the Council of Ministers who do feel that , who feel that the less democratic legitimacy Parliament has the better , and one way of demolishing our democratic claim is to point to the fact that there is not this spread of opinion .
Nor equally in those countries which do not have any kind of territorial aspect of the electoral system is there any fairness built in , because it is quite possible that the French delegation would not contain a single Breton or single Corsican .
It is only now for example that French Guiana has representation in this House because of membership of that list .
I cannot believe that this is in the interest of Parliament , but I would like the Commission 's reassurance that it is not complacent about this democratic deficit .
When electoral matters come to be discussed by parliamentarians the temptation to range wide and far is irresistible and I can certainly plead guilty to not having resisted it on various occasions in the past , but as far as the Commission 's position is concerned , we have not taken up broad positions relating to every aspect of the points that have been raised by the honourable gentleman who has spoken , but have underlined our view that , on the simple question on the introduction of a uniform electoral system , we think that that is desirable .
It does not deal with all the problems that have been raised and it has been difficult enough to get agreement on that one , so let us focus on that and see how we get on , if necessary , in the Intergovernmental Conference .
Question No 32 by Luciano Vecchi ( H-0520 / 96 )
Subject : Revision of the medium-term social action programme
What are the Commission 's plans for revising the medium-term social action programme on an annual basis ?
What form will the action programme take ?
What consultations has the Commission entered into and what procedures have been followed for revising the action programme ?
The process of updating this programme , which was adopted in April 1995 , is currently under way in the Commission .
The Commission welcomes the views of interested parties as contributions to this work .
That includes the views expressed by the other European institutions , for example , in their respective opinions and debates on the programme and of the social partners .
The views of CEEP , ETUC and UNICE in this respect have already been communicated to Commission officials and I understand that contacts on the matter are in progress between my colleague Mr Flynn and the Committee on Social Affairs , Employment and the Working Environment .
The outcome of this process will be published after the summer .
I take it from your laconic reply , Commissioner , that the Commission is not yet in a position to provide a substantive answer to my questions , that only consultations are under way , and therefore no decisions have been taken as yet .
I am sorry if I was laconic .
By some standards I was rather lengthy .
But the position is very simple .
It is exactly as the honourable Member understands it .
We are in the process of taking people 's views for this updating and , when we have heard them and considered them , will come to a conclusion and announce it .
Question No 33 by Juan Colino Salamanca ( H-0517 / 96 )
Subject : Dismissal of a senior Spanish official
Can the Commission explain the reasons for the dismissal of Mr Fernando Mansito , a senior Spanish official ?
Has his dismissal anything to do with the ' mad cow ' crisis ?
A restructuring of the responsibilities of the deputy directors-general in the Agriculture Directorate-General is under discussion .
It is not linked to the current discussions on BSE .
No decision has yet been taken by the Commission on the position of Mr Mansito .
Notwithstanding the Commissioner 's answer , I should simply like to point out that this matter has hit the headlines not just at any time , but precisely when the Standing Veterinary Committee is discussing the ' mad cow ' crisis .
Until his dismissal , Mr Mansito chaired the Standing Veterinary Committee , and now he is being replaced by a new official , without any kind of explanation being given .
Consequently , we cannot avoid connecting Mr Mansito 's dismissal with the ' mad cow ' crisis .
In any event , I welcome the fact that a wide-ranging restructuring of DG VI is under discussion . Naturally , we hope to receive more detailed information in this respect .
The proposed new organigram has been sent to Commissioner Liikanen who is responsible for staff matters .
It has not been finalized .
When this has been done it will be announced in the normal way .
Question No 34 by Irene Crepaz ( H-0567 / 96 )
Subject : WTO
There is some movement on the issue of child labour , in so far as the United States ( see Financial Times of 13 June 1996 ) has now also proposed to extend the rugmark label to sectors in which the problem of child labour continues to exist .
Does the Commission think this should be interpreted as a sign that the United States will take a positive view on discussion of the social clause at the WTO Conference in Singapore ?
The United States is amongst those countries advocating discussion in the WTO framework of this issue and the setting up of a working party .
Their proposals on this point are quite close to the Commission 's ideas , that is to say , the need to promote internationally recognized labour standards in order to bolster every country 's economic performance in the long term and the link between trade liberalization , economic development and social progress , as part of an open and nondiscriminatory trading system .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
I should now like to ask you what form the Commission believes the treatment of social issues at the WTO Conference in Singapore might take , and whether the Commission intends to advocate the establishment of minimum social standards - for example on the question of child labour - within the framework of the WTO agreement .
There is a proposal for a Council directive on a four-year scheme for a generalized system of preferences .
This proposal provides for the possibility of granting preferential treatment to third countries which endeavour to protect workers ' rights , prohibit child labour , and so on .
What measures is the Commission taking to secure acceptance of this social clause at international level , for example in the framework of the WTO ?
The Generalized System of Preferences is , of course , something that we apply autonomously .
The European Union has the right to decide on what principles it will confer preferential treatment of a unilateral kind to developing countries , and the broad principle that account should be taken of their observance of labour standards of that kind is certainly one of the common features of such an arrangement .
Within the WTO , however , what we are talking about is the discussion of a link between trade and the observance of fundamental labour standards .
We do not regard low pay as an unfair trading practice : it is a natural advantage of poorer countries .
But , on the other hand , observance of internationally agreed norms with regard to such matters as child labour is a legitimate subject for discussion in the WTO .
It is a very sensitive question .
The European Union as such has not formulated its position ; it was discussed in the Council of Ministers only this morning .
The Commission will , in due course , put forward its views .
We hope then that the Council of Ministers will adopt them and that that will be the basis for the position taken by the European Union in the Singapore Conference .
Question No 35 by Wolfgang Nubaumer ( H-0570 / 96 )
Subject : Protection of intellectual property
The danger that protection measures for intellectual property will be circumvented persists , particularly in developing countries .
What measures does the Commission have at its disposal to protect the intellectual property of European enterprises ?
What sanctions can the Commission apply to countries which do not respect European intellectual property rights ?
Following signature of the Uruguay Round , how much progress has so far been made in reducing tariff rates and removing non-tariff barriers in the developing countries ?
European industries and enterprises can complain to the Commission pursuant to the trade barriers regulation in relation to alleged obstacles to trade which involve the protection of intellectual property rights .
Then , after investigation , commercial policy measures can be taken vis--vis the third country in question .
Such measures must , of course , be compatible with existing international obligations and procedures , but they may include the suspension or withdrawal of concessions resulting from commercial policy negotiations , the raising of customs duties and the introduction of quantitative restrictions .
Individual problems of European industries can also be brought to the attention of our trading partners during bilateral meetings with the Commission , and we have negotiated cooperation agreements with a substantial number of countries containing special provisions relating to the protection of intellectual property rights .
In the framework of the WTO we can launch formal consultations and request a panel if there has been a breach of the TRIPS agreement .
It should also be underlined that European industries are granted protection of their rights in third countries through the existing network of international conventions .
And , of course , the individual enforcement of property rights as private rights is something which the rightholder himself can undertake by appropriate judicial or other action .
With the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations , developing countries undertook significantly to extend the part of their tariffs subject to bindings and also to reduce duties applied to imports .
The reduction commitments will be implemented by stages over a period of five years , starting from January 1995 .
Two-fifths of the reductions have already been made on non-tariff measures .
Adoption of the results of the Uruguay Round meant that all developing countries adhered to all the codes and became subject to the stricter WTO disciplines , so that the majority of non-tariff measures were addressed .
The position is very simple .
There is no obligation to commence negotiations with regard to agriculture until roughly the turn of the century , and we have no intention of doing anything before then .
On the other hand , it means that we cannot expect other countries to lower their barriers in relation to our industrial products over and above what they have already agreed to in the Uruguay Round unless we are able to make some kind of special arrangement with them in a particular sector which is regarded as mutually beneficial .
I do not think we should exclude that possibility because it might be in our interest to do so .
As far as intellectual property is concerned , China is not a member of the WTO .
We seek to make China a member of the WTO to negotiate that , and then the full obligations will have to be kept .
Nonetheless , China is committed to the protection of intellectual property and at every meeting that I have with the Chinese , whether in Europe or in China , I underline the importance of their complying with the agreements that they have entered into .
In addition to stressing and repeatedly stressing the importance of compliance with what they have agreed , we also have to help them .
I myself signed an agreement giving them technical assistance for complying with intellectual property rights , which is not always easy for developing countries , and I hope that , too , will ease the situation .
If the honourable gentleman has in mind particular complaints with regard to the chemical industry , it may be that those are ones that we are already familiar with .
If by any chance he thinks we may not be , I would very much like to have the details so that we can take the particular complaints up if we have not really done so .
Question No 36 by Magda Aelvoet ( H-0587 / 96 )
Subject : Low-level military flights over the territory of the Innu people in Canada
Various Member States of the European Union - Germany , France , the United Kingdom , Italy , the Netherlands and Belgium - take part in low-level military flying over the territory inhabited by the indigenous Innu people in Labrador , Canada .
In so doing , they cause noise and air pollution that is a serious threat to the way of life of this indigenous people .
Has the Commission ever considered this matter , and have alternatives to low-level flying over this area been sought ?
The Commission has no jurisdiction to deal with this matter .
It is solely for the national authorities concerned .
I was afraid that would be your answer , Commissioner .
However , I would draw your attention to the fact that the EU Treaty clearly provides for protection and respect for human rights to be one of the aims of the common foreign and security policy .
Later this morning , we shall be debating the report by Mr FernndezAlbor , which states - and the entire Committee on Foreign Affairs is in agreement with him - that the Commission is taking far too few measures in this particular field , and I think this is a perfect example of what he means .
Everybody is entitled to their own views , but I find it very difficult to believe that the decisions of individual Member States , as part of their defence arrangements , to engage in flights of this kind over a nonEuropean Union country is something which the Commission has jurisdiction over .
We are not normally accused of being lacking in ambitions to extend our competence , but I think this one really goes beyond what we could be expected to do .
We turn now to questions to Mr Liikanen .
I shall be reasonably indulgent because we are running ahead of time because of the excellent and short answers by Sir Leon .
As the author is not present , Question No 37 lapses .
Question No 38 by MaLou Lindholm ( H-0568 / 96 )
Subject : Equal treatment of men and women
The Union says that it wants to achieve equal treatment of men and women and that the Member States should improve their legislation .
Does the Commission think that the EU 's own institutions , which can take independent decisions , meet the standards that the Commission requires of the Member States in this respect ?
If not , what does it intend to do to improve the situation ?
The Commission regards promoting equality as a very important objective and wishes to promote it in its recruitment policy too .
The situation has not been good as regards the number and position of women officials .
The proportion of women has been particularly low in category A. To remedy this situation , the Commission decided in 1995 to set annual targets for increasing the number of women in category A and particularly in leading positions .
The targets related to both the new and the old Member States .
I am glad to be able to state that since the beginning of last year there has been clear progress .
There were far too few women directors-general . There are still too few of them .
At the beginning of last year , there was only one - now there are three .
At the beginning of 1995 there were five women at director level ( A2 ) , now there are thirteen .
At middle management level , that is heads of department and senior experts , there were around 10 % of women .
The new Member States have brought about a notable improvement in this situation : 41 % of those selected as heads of department and / or central advisers were women , whereas the old Member States only achieved 15 % .
The reason is that the appointments had to be made from those officials who were already serving .
The percentage of women among the applicants was only 10 % .
In the new Member States , on the other hand , it was possible to hold a competition open to all , and in these countries the position has been better than in any of the original Member States .
The position has improved most of all for young officials .
By this I means officials in A7 and A8 positions and it is at this level that recruitment has been busiest .
The proportion of women from three new Member States among the staff recruited was 51 % , more than half .
The proportion in the old Member States was 28 % .
All in all we can say that the trend is clearly in the right direction as regards the recruitment of category A officials , officials in the A grade pay bracket , but it will take some time before the overall figures change because recruitment has of course taken place over several decades .
The Commission will monitor the achievement of the targets closely and will continue to promote equality in its recruitment policy to enable the proportion of men and women in various career brackets to continue to be evenly balanced .
Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner Liikanen for that exhaustive reply .
There has certainly been an improvement in recent years , not least since the accession of the new Member States .
This issue is an old one , however .
Equality has long been a priority issue in the EU .
The question of positive measures to promote equality between women and men was taken up as long ago as the 1980s .
I wonder somewhat whether it is intended that these measures should be more specific and whether there might be some positive discrimination - in the broadest sense - as regards the appointment of women in the future ?
It is our intention , in addition to recruitment , to promote other measures to facilitate women 's recruitment and career development .
I wished to deal only with the recruitment of officials into A grades because I know that the low proportion of women among these officials ( only 15 % ) has been an uncomfortable fact for the Commission and that it is this situation which must be changed first .
We are currently discussing with the staff organizations and in the Equality Committee what special measures would be appropriate to enable equality between women and men to be improved at all levels .
It is also characteristic of the Commission that the proportion of women in C grades - secretaries and auxiliary staff - is 85 % , which is also a negative feature .
We must go on thinking .
We must promote the position of women among officials with a degree , while in the C grades , for which A levels or equivalent , are mostly required , we should try to increase the number of men , so that both sexes are in an equally favourable position in all categories .
I am sure that to support these measures as a whole , the Commission will also have to draft a new equality promotion programme when the last one is finished and that it will wish to find the best means of putting it into practice .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for fighting - despite the Kalanke ruling - for positive measures and firm quotas .
I am also familiar with the figures , and I know of course that for women , the glass ceiling will be reached at some point , and that despite the Commissioner 's efforts , not everything has yet been achieved .
There is another source of bitterness which I would ask the Commissioner to address .
There are age limits for recruitment to the Union 's institutions , and those age limits should undoubtedly be abolished . Considering that the retirement age is being raised from 60 to 65 in virtually every Member State , I believe that we must also eliminate these age limits for recruitment to the Union 's institutions .
The question of age limits is extremely tricky .
The first problem is that when we last arranged a general competition for A grade officials , there were 50 000 applicants in all the Community languages in spite of the age limits , of whom a couple of hundred could be placed on reserve lists .
When the next joint competition is held for 15 Member States there may be even more applicants and even fewer posts available .
We must rethink the whole competition seriously .
I am prepared to reconsider the age limit openly .
It is however notable that there is not necessarily any direct correlation between the age limit and equality between the sexes .
When we looked at the recruitment policies in the new Member States it appeared that slightly less than half of those recruited were under 35 and slightly more than half over 35 .
On examining these figures it appeared that the majority of the under-35 group were women whereas , disregarding the age limit , the majority were men .
This is because in these societies the position of young women is clearly completely equal .
On average , indeed , women are slightly better educated than men .
When we look at the older age groups the social equality situation is not quite the same .
Question No 39 by Lis Jensen ( H-0601 / 96 )
Subject : Relations between the Commission and the Court of Auditors
On 14 November 1995 Commissioner Liikanen made the following comments in Plenary with regard to the Court of Auditors ' annual report : ' .. relations between the auditor and the auditee are never easy .
With the European Union they are particularly sensitive .. the new Commission has made it an immediate priority to improve relations between the two institutions .
Improvements were required in style as much as in substance ' .
Can the Commission explain what is meant specifically by the terms ' style ' and ' substance ' in this context ?
According to a report in the Danish newspaper on 12 March , at a meeting on 11 March 1996 the new President of the Court of Auditors and the Commission apparently agreed a type of code of conduct based on the idea that ' in future the Court of Auditors will write its reports in such a way that the figures cannot be distorted for political ends as at present ' .
Does the Commission not think that its influence on the conduct and report writing of the Court of Auditors is unacceptable both morally and in terms of the Treaty ?
At the beginning of 1995 the Commission and the Court of Auditors agreed on the Court 's initiative , the main substance of which was , as I see it , how to improve the dialogue on the Court 's annual report , known as contentious proceedings ( procdure contradictoire ) between the two institutions .
The objective was to develop an approach based on expertise and impartiality .
For this reason both the form and the content of the Court of Auditors report and the Commission 's reply were examined .
A joint effort was thus made with the aim of giving the authority granting discharge , in this case Parliament , more precise documents concerning the Commission and the Court of Auditors .
The honourable Member also asked in particular what I meant by ' style ' and ' substance ' .
By ' style ' I mean that only two or three years ago there were considerable tensions and perhaps too much sensitivity in the opinions and exchanges of letters between the Commission and the Court of Auditors .
This was not a natural relationship between an authority exercising public power and an external auditor .
We have tried to remove this tension and create a businesslike cooperation .
As regards the substance we tended sometimes in the past to defend everything irrespective of whether it was defensible or not .
Now we have tried to ensure that the failings and shortcomings which have appeared in our activities are acknowledged and we will try to remedy them in future .
If we consider that the Court of Auditors report contains political views , we will defend the Commission 's - and the Parliament 's and the Council 's - right to decide on political guidelines .
These are the changes relating to the substance .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his rather unspecific reply .
I am obliged to ask whether what the Commissioner calls initiative is the same thing as entering into a kind of code of conduct ?
To my mind , that is a central issue .
I would also draw the Commissioner 's attention to Article 188b ( 4 ) of the Treaty , which reads : ' The members of the Court of Auditors shall , in the general interest of the Community , be completely independent in the performance of their duties .
In the performance of these duties , they shall neither seek nor take instruction from any government or from any other body . ' I have to ask the Commissioner if he does not regard the Commission as another body ?
I should like to state that my aim has been to make the Court of Auditors ' position easier .
For example , the Court proposed cooperation in order to obtain all the information it needed in the most appropriate form .
We are prepared to help it in this matter .
The matter is currently under discussion .
Concerning the discussion on procedure held at the beginning of the year I can say that if the Court of Auditors wishes to add its remarks to the preliminary comments and discuss the matter with a Member of the Commission , we will arrange a meeting at which it can put forward urgent questions and additional explanations .
It is up to the Court of Auditors ' what it writes in its own report .
It is of course important that all the facts put forward are accurate and that both sides are heard .
Conversely we are entitled to write what we ourselves see fit by way of comment on the Court of Auditors report .
It is to the advantage of both sides that there should be no errors of fact either in the report or in the comments .
Such errors can be avoided by holding this kind of discussion .
I can assure the honourable Member that the President and Members of the Court of Auditors are sufficiently independent and reliable that we cannot influence their reports .
They decide what they write , but it is of course important to them to be able to avoid errors of fact in advance .
Question No 40 by Vassilis Ephremidis ( H-0426 / 96 )
Subject : Funding of an unplanned conference centre in Liberty Park ( Parko Eleftherias ) , Athens
The Commission intends to fund an ' Athens Conference Centre ' under measure 7 of the culture and tourism programme of the second Community support framework , with the Organismos Megarou Musikis as the organization responsible .
The measure includes the construction of a multi-purpose hall for conferences and ancillary rooms to support conferences , etc . The aim is to upgrade conference tourism with an attendance of 190 000 delegates a year .
Is the Commission aware that the last Presidential Decree on the subject ( Official Journal 1061 / 95 ) does not make provision for the conference centre in question and the Greek authority responsible for tourism policy ( EOT ) has not received any application to fund or approve the operation of a conference centre in Liberty Park ( as also stated in parliamentary answers on the subject made by competent ministers ) ?
Does the Commission intend to fund a project which is not envisaged , whose creation and operation has not been approved , for which the source of national funding is unknown and which , as local organizations and inhabitants complain , will have a catastrophic impact on the environment and congestion in the centre of Athens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission confirms that it intends to co-finance the building of the cultural centre referred to in the Presidential Decree mentioned by the honourable Member , within the framework of the culture and tourism operational programme .
The Commission 's contribution will serve exclusively to fund the equipment and facilities necessary for the holding of conferences .
This function is explicitly provided for in the Greek law on the founding of the ' Athens Concert Hall ' organization .
According to our information , the approval of the EOT is not necessary .
Greece 's financial contribution to the project , moreover , will be funded from the budget of the Ministry of Culture , and not from the budget of the Greek authority responsible for tourism policy .
With regard to the project 's environmental compatibility , it should be said that the relevant Community provisions are being applied .
Furthermore , the underground car park that is currently under construction will contribute to relieving traffic congestion in Athens city centre .
Madam Commissioner , you have said that the Commission confirms the funding of this project .
When we speak of co-financing we have to be sure that there is a source of national funding for you to co-finance with .
In my question I say , and I will say it again in case you have not fully understood , that over the course of these developments two competent ministers have stated categorically in the Greek parliament that they are unable to lodge any document on the matter because there is no provision for the creation and operation of this project and that there is absolutely no funding .
I request you to give a precise answer to this question : are you planning to fund a project for which Greek legislation makes no provision ? For which the relevant decrees make no provision and for which there is no national funding ?
Moreover , when the project has provoked great resentment in the specific area of Athens because it will destroy ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) ... give a precise answer because the whole of Athens is up in arms about it .
I should like to make two comments on the honourable Member 's remarks .
Firstly , Greece 's financial contribution will be funded from the budget of the Ministry of Culture .
The honourable Member did not say if the Greek Minister of Culture has stated otherwise .
If that is the case , we shall have to investigate the matter - and I shall see to that .
Secondly , with regard to the question of traffic problems , I have already indicated that the co-financing of the construction of an underground car park will undoubtedly help to resolve some of these problems .
Question No 41 by Hugh McMahon ( H-0539 / 96 )
Subject : Delays in agreement of the URBAN initiative
With the exception of Northern Ireland no URBAN projects have been agreed for the UK .
Can the Commission inform Parliament when agreement will be reached ? What advice does it give to local authorities which are awaiting URBAN funding , in order to implement community projects for the long-term unemployed and socially excluded in many cities and large towns ?
Will the Commissioner seek on urgent meeting with Minister David Curry in an attempt to ensure that local authorities are not impeded in implementing projects by Eurosceptic attitudes within the UK administration ?
Mr President , there have indeed been certain delays in the approval of the URBAN initiative in the United Kingdom .
Initially , this was because the British authorities had to decide which towns and cities should be chosen for the initiative , and what funding those towns and cities should receive .
In the subsequent negotiations on the individual programmes , the Commission sought to ensure above all that the latter would concentrate on the needs of the disadvantaged towns and cities themselves .
We therefore endeavoured to make sure that the local authorities concerned would themselves be able to decide on the use of funds .
The Commission and the British authorities are at present discussing the establishment of administrative rules that will make possible both a new approach to decision-making and adequate control of the spending mechanisms .
The Commission is endeavouring to secure an agreement on these rules , so that all the URBAN programmes can be signed as soon as possible .
I thank the Commissioner for her answer .
I think the Commission is being very leisurely in this .
After all , given that the final discussions , between the Commission and the Scottish Office were in November 1995 and they were perfectly satisfied with the scheme , and as I understand the Welsh Office are also satisfied with the Swansea scheme , would the Commission be in favour of allowing those schemes where there has been agreement between the local authorities and the civil servants to go ahead ?
Scotland and Wales should not be dragging behind because in certain areas of England there have been problems between the UK Government and the Commission .
Would the Commission treat this matter with some urgency , given that Parliament did increase the amount of money for Community initiatives at a recent plenary session in Brussels .
Mr McMahon , the problem lies in the fact that we must of course also reach agreement with the British Government , and there was indeed an extended exchange of letters on this subject , during which , in the interest of the inclusion of the local authorities , amongst other things , the Commission requested changes .
On 22 April , the Commission once again made its position clear .
At the end of July , further discussions took place , and we hope that the British Government will now give a swift answer , so that the programmes can finally be approved .
Nevertheless , I would ask the honourable Members to appreciate the fact that we also wish to ensure that the local and regional authorities and local partners are included in the implementation of these programmes as far as possible .
I too want to thank the Commissioner for the work that she has done in this area .
Indeed I think other Members of this House , if there were any here , might want to know whether there is a fundamental cultural problem with the UK Government 's attitude to structural funds and regional policy ?
Is this another aspect of the policy of non-cooperation ?
I think it is very difficult for many people in our inner city areas to understand why they cannot get access to money - over 120 million pounds - which is very badly needed .
I have just come from a committee meeting where we voted on the principle of partnership and involving local partners .
I would like to encourage the Commissioner in her work in this area , but of course the reality is that in inner-city areas it is the voluntary sector , the community groups which are taking the strain of the government 's lack of commitment to urban areas .
For us it is not just the principle of involving the local partners - it actually makes good sense because they know the issues on the ground .
So I would like to encourage the Commissioner to ensure that we get a speedy agreement .
I also think it is rather bizarre that last week the DTI produced a press release celebrating the massive amount of funding they would be getting from Objective 2 - a bumper share of funds - when in fact they seem incapable of spending it .
This kind of behaviour in spending funds strains subsidiarity to the limit and , because of the inaction of Member States , inner cities are not benefiting from funds .
It strains my belief in the principle of subsidiarity .
I can only express my thanks for the support for our position .
I do not believe that this has anything to do with the general political climate , but that we have problems agreeing on a procedure which will include local representatives in such a way as to ensure that they are able to promote their main interests in the implementation of the programmes , whilst guaranteeing , above all , that the neediest sections of the population and the urban areas gain the greatest benefit from the programmes .
We shall continue with our efforts in this respect .
Taking up what the Commissioner has said in the last few moments , the problem seems to be not so much with the Scottish or Welsh Offices which have both agreed to the projects submitted .
On the other hand she mentioned that in the interests of the local bodies , the Commission would be asking for changes .
I would hope there would be no request for changes with the Swansea or the Scottish submissions .
In other words it is an English responsibility .
I am unable to give a direct answer to your specific question at present .
However , we shall look into the matter and , in keeping with the views expressed by the honourable Members today , continue to seek a reasonable settlement . I hope that we can achieve such a settlement in the near future .
Question No 42 by Jos Apolinrio ( H-0540 / 96 )
Subject : Bureaucratic delays on the part of the Commission in transferring Community funds to Portugal
In the first few months of 1996 there was an intolerable delay in transferring Community funds to Portugal , for bureaucratic reasons .
One of the most badly affected programmes / initiatives was INTERREG .
What is going on ?
How does the Commission justify this situation ?
Mr President , generally speaking , this criticism does not hold good for Portugal .
On 15 July 1996 , Portugal was the chief beneficiary in the commitment of funds for Objective I regions , and in the front rank in terms of payments .
Hence the payments to be arranged by DG XVI alone amount to more than ECU 1 billion .
That is a considerable sum , in my view .
However , the transfer of funds is subject to numerous requirements .
As far as INTERREG II is concerned , the amounts indicated in the requests for payment submitted by the Portuguese authorities are not yet sufficient for the 1995 tranche of the programme to be opened and for payment of the first and second advances for 1995 to be effected .
For these payments to be made , spending for the programme as a whole - and this means for Portugal and Spain - must reach the amount required in the current regulations .
In general terms , the Commission is currently examining the possibility of speeding up its internal checking procedures , so that in cases where all the requirements are met , payments can be made more quickly .
This forms part of our joint efforts in the context of SEM 2000 - although it is also a general matter of concern , since we naturally wish all funds to be transferred as swiftly as possible , once all the checks have been carried out .
Madam Commissioner , thank you very much for your reply but we should look here at three political points .
First of all , there are delays in transferring Community funds to Portugal .
In respect of the second Community support framework the processes should be unblocked after two months and at this moment in time there are processes involving around 109 million ECU , in other words 21 billion escudos , processes which have been pending before the Commission since July 1995 .
Secondly , and again in respect of the first Community support framework , there are at this moment in time processes still pending worth around 35 million ECU and that first Community support framework was concluded in 1993 - yet the process for presenting some of them was meant to be completed in 1994 or 1995 .
I acknowledge the efforts made by the Commissioner and her departments in speeding things up but I think that the Commissioner must understand that unless there is a further speeding up of processes in DG XX , the Commission will have to be responsible for the lesser use of Community funds and the lower rates of execution in the second Community support framework .
I hope that we can manage to resolve the problems which exist without engaging in mutual recriminations .
During Mr Cravinho 's last visit , we explained when the next payments could be expected .
However , I must ask the honourable Member to appreciate that in managing the enormous amounts of money involved in the Structural Funds , we give priority not only to flexibility and speed , but also to rigorous financial control .
The Commission and Parliament cannot , on the one hand , constantly attach importance to the necessary checks being carried out with the utmost care and , on the other , complain about those checks when amounts are owing .
We are endeavouring to speed up our procedures but , unfortunately , careful checks sometimes take longer than we would wish .
We acknowledge the problem , and we have discussed the outstanding difficulties with the Portuguese Government . In these talks , moreover , I had the impression that there is complete understanding for our position .
Question No 43 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0546 / 96 )
Subject : Diversion of the River Acheloos
The diversion of the River Acheloos is one of the ' major projects ' which will be financed in Greece from Community funds .
In response to a number of questions I have tabled over the last seven years regarding the environmental compatibility and economic usefulness of this project , the Commission has systematically postponed giving a definite answer , stating that its assessment would depend on the findings of successive studies , ongoing negotiations with the Greek Government and even the final form of the project which is sometimes presented as an irrigation project , sometimes as an energy project and sometimes as a water supply project .
It has been announced over the last few days that the Greek Government is at the last stage of the decision-taking process concerning the final approval of the project .

Can the Commission say whether it considers that all the legal procedures concerning the drawing-up and approval of the project and the awarding of the construction contract have been respected , what this project consists of exactly and what ( sustainable ... ) development strategy it forms part of , whether the overall assessment of its environmental consequences is positive and , finally , whether its economic profitability is ensured , both at national level and as regards the development of the regions concerned ?
Mr President , I am afraid that I must disappoint you once again , Mr Papayannakis , since the Commission still does not have a complete file on this subject , and therefore cannot make a definitive statement on the possible co-financing of the River Acheloos project under the second Community support framework for Greece .
This concerns in particular the results of the comprehensive environmental impact assessment commissioned by the Greek Government and a cost-benefit analysis of the project .
I must ask for your understanding , therefore , since these are first and foremost matters which the Greek Government has to clarify .
Then the Commission can adopt a position , and not the other way round .
You say , Madam Commissioner , that you have absolutely nothing to hand which permits you to judge the project . I take note of that , but just for your information I can tell you that in Greece we are hearing that everything is ready and that the project will shortly be presented to the Greek parliament for approval .
It is one of the major projects . I should like to ask you whether , in view of the fact that the amounts provided for in the older plans for the Acheloos which were discussed with the Commission are enormous and roughly equal to the amounts that the Greek Government is unable to find for completion of all of the major projects of the Community support framework , you would agree that it would be a good thing to abandon this project , for which no one wishes to assume responsibility , so that a healthier level of funding can be provided for the other major projects ?

Mr President , it is indeed true that there are a host of unanswered questions with regard to this issue . And I am quite unable to say when those questions will be answered , let alone whether the answers will be satisfactory .
That is why we have asked the Greek Government to reconsider the priorities for the second Community support framework .
I would underline the fact , however - and this is the point the honourable Member is making - that the Community support framework is , in any case , at present totally oversubscribed .
This means that , one way or another , we shall have to reconsider which projects are most important and must definitely be carried out .
The honourable Member will be aware that the two major motorway projects - Pathe and Via Egnatia , as well as certain others - are still unresolved . Consequently , I believe that the right approach is to establish the priorities and determine what can be funded successfully up to the end of the support period , and what needs such careful clarification that it is perhaps no longer feasible .
We are currently engaged in such discussions with the Greek Government .
Question No 44 by Sren Wibe ( H-0550 / 96 )
Subject : Changing regional support arrangements
Administering the structural funds and Community initiatives will require considerable changes in Sweden 's regional policy arrangements .
The fragmentation of structural fund programmes , among three funds and one financial instrument ( fisheries ) , has led to a corresponding fragmentation between various authorities at Swedish national level .
These authorities have yet to achieve the coordination of their activities .
It is to take place at regional level ( county authorities ) .
This however brings its own complications , as our objective areas do not coincide with administrative borders .
At the same time we are attempting to avoid creating new administrative structures .
I believe that the EU 's regional policy arrangements are far too complicated .
Would it not be simpler if the Member States were granted a sum of money allocated on the basis of per capita GNP , taking account of levels of unemployment , population density and climatic conditions ?
It would then be for the Member States to apportion it among what they regarded as the most appropriate purposes and regions .
Would this not be a much simpler arrangement than the present muddle ?
Mr President , administering the Structural Funds is undoubtedly far from easy : firstly , the Structural Fund system has developed over a period of time ; secondly , what are sometimes very different problems in the various Member States have to be addressed by means of the Funds ; and thirdly , the Structural Fund regulations represent a political compromise and must be adopted unanimously by the Council .
The aim of Community structural policy is to promote sustainable regional development .
This requires an analysis of the economic situation of the different regions and their endogenous development potential , as well as concerted action on the part of the European , national and regional authorities .
That is why the Commission attaches such great importance to the participation of local and regional players and the representatives of the social partners in the planning and implementation of structural measures in the advisory committees .
Simply equalizing the budget , as advocated in the honourable Member 's question , would not achieve this aim and is not wished for either by the Commission or Parliament .
Furthermore , the legislation in force would not permit it .
In the new Member States , moreover - and this is also true of Sweden - the Commission 's structural policy experiences have been absorbed in a very positive way : they have been felt to enrich national regional policies and transposed to local conditions - although creating appropriate national and regional structures for this purpose has certainly given rise to problems on occasion .
However , I am convinced that it is in our common interest to simplify the administration of the Structural Funds .
The Commission is currently trying to simplify and speed up its own procedures .
We should all be aware , however , that in view of the large amounts of money involved in the implementation of structural policy , there is a fine line to tread between simplification , transparency and flexibility on the one hand , and optimum financial management , efficient control and effective evaluation on the other .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for her answer .
I must say that the Commissioner 's answer was both concise and to the point .
I am not really used to that but I consider it a good thing in this context .
There were two considerations which gave rise to my question .
Firstly , I have seen at close quarters how the Structural Funds are operating in my country and have thus witnessed the enormous administrative burden imposed on our authorities .
I believe in fact that the administrative costs could amount to a large percentage of the support received by Sweden .
Secondly , there is the analysis of the effectiveness of the Structural Funds which was recently presented in the Committee on Regional Policy , which concluded that their effectiveness was exceptionally poor ; with the exception of Objective 1 , the resources involved did not to any great extent go to regions of high unemployment or regions with a low per-capita income .
I believe the funds need to be reformed and I also consider that they should be reformed in the manner that I have suggested , that is to say that they should be brought closer to those who manage the money .
My question to the Commissioner is thus the following : should the simplification which you are now talking about and which you are endeavouring to achieve not go in the direction I have outlined , that is to say ensure that those most directly involved in decisions are given a greater say in how resources are used ?
In the first place , the Structural Fund regulations are valid until 1999 .
They were approved by all the Member States and cannot by changed by a stroke of the pen from the Commission .
Secondly , the new Structural Fund regulations have been in force since 1994 : in other words , they only recently came into full effect , after a difficult period of approval .
I believe that is important to gather experiences first , before making changes on the grounds of initial difficulties or problems of adaptation .
Thirdly , it is indeed our aim to integrate the local and regional levels into structural policy to a greater extent .
In this respect , however , there are problems within Sweden which we cannot resolve , but which can only be sorted out by the Swedish Government , in partnership with the local players .
As far as any administrative muddle is concerned , we must always bear in mind that there are two kinds of muddle : that caused by the Commission , which we are now trying to clear up within the framework of the regulations currently in force ; and the muddle at national level .
After all , nowhere is it stipulated that , for example , four ministries must be involved in managing a Structural Funds project .
There is clearly room for simplification at national level in this context too .
Thank you , Commissioner .
That was certainly a specific and convincing reply , but there is a minor sticking-point in this respect : there is the tendency of the Member States to work out precisely what each of them can get - and this is circulated in the form of lists - and act as if it were their share of the money .
Would it not be appropriate to take a further step in this direction and , after 1999 , to develop the principle of partnership in such a way as to introduce direct cooperation between the Commission and the regions concerned , without the various Member States setting up yet another special intermediate body ?
That is possible in theory . In practice , however , I doubt that the majority of Member States would allow structural policies to be agreed between the Commission and the regional or local authorities alone .
The interpretation of the subsidiarity principle hitherto has , of course , principally concerned subsidiarity between the Commission and the Member States .
However , we have always laid great stress - admittedly , not always with success - on the need to extend application of the subsidiarity principle from the level of central government to the lower levels , and to establish a genuine , practical partnership in the implementation of the Structural Funds .
And this is not because the Commission is interested in bypassing anyone , but because our experience has shown that the more the people on the ground for whom these policies are devised become involved , can contribute their ideas and also help to monitor efficiency , then the more success we achieve .
Question No 45 by Edgar Schiedermeier ( H-0551 / 96 )
Subject : Future of the Structural Funds
What are the prospects of support from the structural funds for the post-1999 period ?
Mr President , I wondered whether I should say that we had a very intensive discussion on this matter at the last meeting of the Committee on Regional Policy , since this is indeed an issue which would warrant a statement of at least an hour .
Leaving aside the discussion in the Committee on Regional Policy , however , I would simply say that the Commission 's proposals for the future of the Structural Funds can certainly not be expected before the end of 1997 or early 1998 .
Naturally , this applies to the financial issues as well as demarcation of the assisted areas .
For the moment , the Commission will produce its report on economic and social cohesion in the European Union in late autumn of this year , thereby creating a basis for further discussions at national and Community level .
I am sure that we shall debate this report extensively in the Committee on Regional Policy - and possibly also in plenary - and that we shall be able to take the necessary elements from these debates and incorporate them into structural policy for the period after 1999 .
Mr President , I readily admit that I enjoy listening to the charming Commissioner , as well as seeing her here .
When I tabled this question , however , I was unaware that she would be speaking on this subject in the Committee on Regional Policy .
I should like to put a very specific supplementary question : will the Commissioner seek to ensure that , when the Structural Funds are reorganized , the Objective 1 regions lose some of their spare fat ?
I come from an Objective 5b region , and I am concerned that those regions sometimes lose out because all the other regions insist on keeping what they have .

Mr Schiedermeier , if by the ' spare fat ' of the Objective 1 regions you mean support for achieving or surpassing the goal of having a GDP which is 75 % of the Union 's average , then I believe that we must examine very carefully how we are dealing with these regions . Indeed , the aim of structural policy is clearly to help the disadvantaged regions - and one way in which we define being disadvantaged is in terms of a percentage of the Union 's average GDP .
If this criterion is to be retained in future , then we must draw the necessary conclusions .
I believe that we must have a far wider-ranging debate on this subject .
This is one element of that debate , and we shall have to discuss it further .
Question No 46 by Joan Vallv ( H-0563 / 96 )
Subject : Cohesion funds and public deficits
The failure by Member States to comply with the convergence criterion laid down in the Maastricht Treaty concerning public deficits as a percentage of GDP will entail a suspension of Cohesion Fund aid as a means of mitigating the adverse effects thereof .
How does the Commission intend to introduce this measure ?
Will it temporarily halt the aid which comes under this fund until the criterion is complied with once again ?
Mr President , the legal situation is clear .
Pursuant to Article 6 of Regulation 1164 / 94 , decisions on the continuation , suspension or resumption of Cohesion Fund payments are taken on the basis of the yearly targets for public deficits recommended by the Council under Article 104c ( 7 ) .
It should be pointed out that the Council addressed corresponding recommendations for 1995 to the governments of Greece , Portugal and Spain .
The Commission examined the budgetary situation for 1995 in the Member States concerned , and established that the public deficits of all three lay within the targets for 1995 recommended by the Council .
Consequently , the Commission is continuing to authorize new Cohesion Fund projects or project phases in Greece , Portugal and Spain .
A new assessment of the public deficits of the Member States concerned will be made in autumn 1996 , and subsequently every six months .
I thank you for your answer , Commissioner , but my question went a little further than that .
It did not refer so much to the legal situation as to the criteria which the Commission is currently applying for the suspension of Cohesion Fund aid , if Member States fail to comply with the criteria for convergence .
Mr Vallv , the payments will only be suspended if the reference values laid down by the Council in its recommendations are exceeded .
For 1995 , those values were - as a ratio of public deficit to GDP - 10.7 % for Greece , 5.8 % for Portugal and 5.9 % for Spain .
All three Member States stayed below their respective reference values , and it was therefore not necessary to block the funds .
However , the Cohesion Fund regulations do contain an element of conditionality , and so we have no choice but to act accordingly if the reference values are exceeded .
The Commission has no other decision-making options .
Question No 47 by James Nicholson ( H-0574 / 96 )
Subject : Special support programme for peace and reconciliation
Is the Commission satisfied with the progress of the Peace and Reconciliation Programme for Northern Ireland ?
Is it satisfied with the financial controls and monitoring of the programme ?
Mr President , the Commission takes the view that the progress of the Peace and Reconciliation Programme for Northern Ireland has been satisfactory .
Unfortunately , the same cannot be said of the political aspect of the peace process .
It is true that the programme approved by the Commission on 28 July did not give rise to a great deal of expenditure in 1995 .
This slow start was mainly due to the fact that a network of decentralized bodies had to be set up to distribute the funds .
Not until December 1995 was the Commission able to sign the corresponding contracts with the intermediate financing institutions and , as the honourable Member will be aware , agreeing on the composition of the partnership committee for Northern Ireland and the regional partnerships was also far from easy .
According to our estimates , ECU 70 million of the total ECU 240 m of Community funding for the programme for Northern Ireland should be disbursed in 1996 .
A further ECU 28 m out of a total ECU 60 m should be disbursed in the Irish border regions .
So we believe that almost a third of the total funding for the programme will be committed by the end of the year .
Apart from the figures for expenditure effected , the Commission is satisfied with the progress of the programme 's implementation on the ground .
Thus the progress made with regard to the 26 partnerships is particularly encouraging , in the sense that people who were previously unaccustomed to discussing and taking joint decisions on the future development of their region are now working together in this context .
With regard to the financing , I would underline the fact that the bodies appointed to run the programme have carried out numerous financial controls .
The quality of these controls has been satisfactory .
The ability to carry out adequate financial management was , moreover , a key criterion in the selection of these bodies .
The Commission and the relevant governmental departments are providing those who are less familiar with the Union 's financing methods - the intermediate financing institutions and the partnerships , for example - with technical assistance where necessary .
I wish to thank the Commissioner for a very full response on this particular fund .
Of course , when I tabled the question a number of weeks ago , Commissioner , times were different .
However , I would prefer to deal with this at this moment of time .
You would probably agree with me that it has taken a long time to get the fund up and running and for it to be seen as real finance that is coming into the province .
It also seems to me that there is excessive officialdom and red tape .
Some of that is the responsibility of the United Kingdom Government , but some of it is also the responsibility of Brussels .
There appears to be a difficulty in arriving at a meeting of minds which leads to a tremendous degree of confusion , and projects are slowed down as a result .
Will you ensure , as the Commissioner , that European officials - which is your responsibility and my responsibility - do not make unrealistic demands on projects , ultimately rendering them useless ?
Is the Commissioner further aware that substantial amounts of the funds are going to consultants to prepare glossy brochures and reports ?
Surely this is not the aim and object of the exercise ?
Mr Nicholson , you will be aware that I personally have been pressing strongly for swift action , and that I also take great pains to ensure that we actually decide on projects .
I therefore regularly ask to see the lists of approved projects , which then lead to corresponding payments .
When I look at the host of activities that are now being initiated - and I asked to see a schedule of the decisions once again today - my feeling is that we have been making considerable efforts . I would even go so far as to say that we are acting more swiftly in the case of Northern Ireland than in the case of other regions .
A short while ago , we were discussing the implementation of the URBAN initiative in United Kingdom , where the approval and implementation of the programme for Belfast , for example , is viewed with some envy . You will see , therefore , that there is a considerable difference between the normal procedures and the efforts being made to implement the programme for Northern Ireland .
Nevertheless , I shall continue my endeavours , and I should be grateful to the honourable Member for any specific indications as to where snags may be occurring .
And if he thinks that these snags are the fault of the Commission , then he must let me know directly .
With regard to the question of consultants , we are , of course , frequently faced with the problem that those who do not know their way around so well depend on the help of consultants .
I would stress , however , that enlisting technical help does not necessarily mean employing consultants and spending part of the funds on consultancies and similar bodies . On the contrary , the local partnerships and community groups , for example , can use the technical assistance which is available to help them draw up their proposals .
I listened to the Commissioner with interest and of course to Mr Nicholson beforehand .
Today like other Members I received a copy of the priorities for the Irish presidency .
There are chapters in this entitled ' A Europe based on Equity and Tolerance ' and ' A Europe contributing to International Peace , Security and Solidarity ' .
Like Mr Nicholson 's question , this was written before the recent developments .
Does the Commissioner feel that greater priority ought to be put into the peace initiatives in Northern Ireland by the Irish presidency than hitherto and will the Commission lend its support to specific programmes to assist the situation in Ireland as a whole ?
Mr Evans , you will be aware that the Commission 's programme for peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland and the border regions of Ireland is geared to rapid help and support for the peace process .
We know that the people of the region want that process , and that with the help , amongst other things , of the Commission 's programme , they are learning to cooperate with one another .
And even if it has sometimes taken rather a long time for the funds to become available on the ground , the process of bringing together groups from different religious and cultural backgrounds to engage in joint discussions has already helped to create a substantial part of the structures which the funds are designed to support .
I shall therefore greatly welcome it if the Irish presidency - and , in view of the events of last week , I am sure that it will do so - places a new , additional emphasis on these initiatives and gives them its full political support .
Question No 48 by Mara Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0579 / 96 )
Subject : Specific support and advice for human resources projects for women in disadvantaged regions
Although there is a clear will to extend the application of the equal opportunities principle , women in disadvantaged regions in practice receive less favourable treatment with regard to benefiting from regional support policies ; a lack of entrepreneurial tradition , a climate of social precariousness and a lack of knowledge of complex procedures between different administrations are some of the major obstacles which make it difficult or impossible for many European women from disadvantaged areas to benefit from these support measures .
Would it therefore be possible to provide specific technical support , direct advice services and simpler administrative procedures ?
What action could be taken ?
Mr President , access to information and services is indeed very difficult for undertakings in the Union 's disadvantaged regions , which are the priority target of Structural Fund assistance .
In these regions , women as a whole participate in working life to a lesser extent than in other parts of the Union .
In rural areas , moreover , they are included to a lesser extent in agricultural groupings and professional associations .
In Spain , for example , the supply of financial services and services for undertakings is particularly limited in rural areas .
However , the entrepreneurial tradition is not necessarily less pronounced in the countries of southern Europe than in the north .
The proportion of self-employed women in the southern Member States - Spain , Greece , Portugal and Italy - in the agricultural and services sectors is actually higher than the Community average .
In Denmark , for example , only 3 % of working women are self-employed , compared to 21 % in Portugal , 20 % in Greece , 18 % in Italy and 16 % in Spain .
So with a view to incorporating the equal opportunities dimension into all Community policies , Structural Fund assistance must be geared to harnessing this potential , by encouraging and helping women to set up businesses or become self-employed .
The support measures in favour of women are aimed at bolstering their entrepreneurial spirit and providing incentives for business initiatives .
Hence in the regional development programmes , as well as at inter-regional level , there is provision for specific measures to facilitate women 's access to information .
In certain countries of the Union - for example , Sweden - this is already more or less a reality .
Experience with such advice centres in Sweden - as well as in Ireland and Spain - has shown that specific advice is especially important in the startup phase , and that the dissemination of positive experiences has an encouraging and motivating effect .
The Commission is endeavouring to identify and encourage practices whose effectiveness is proven .
It therefore recently published , for the first time , a brochure on women as players in regional development , so as to demonstrate what can be successfully achieved in the various countries and regions of the Community .
The Commission 's guidelines for the new Objective 2 period refer for the first time to equal opportunities as one of four key goals of support policy .
Furthermore , in the context of pilot projects , the Commission will promote the setting-up and expansion of regional information and business centres for women .
In the URBAN pilot projects , under Article 10 , there is provision for specific measures to promote equal opportunities through the strengthening of partnerships and involvement of the public .
The URBAN II Community initiative includes support measures for the promotion of equal opportunities and the creation of jobs for women .
And although equal opportunities are not specifically referred to in the pilot projects under Article 10 in terms of regional planning , I have instructed my services to take this criterion into account in the process of selection and evaluation .
In future , consideration could also be given to promoting , through the Euro-partnerships , the development of commercial cooperation between undertakings owned or run by women , and placing particular emphasis on these businesses in the list drawn up for such arrangements .
I believe that over the last few months , we have demonstrated that we are not simply using the concept of ' mainstreaming ' as an embellishment for our policies , but also wish to translate it into practice .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for her positive answer to my question .
Indeed , the problem with which we are faced is how to make this support for women a reality .
I agree with what the Commissioner said , but I should like to draw attention to something else : in these very disadvantaged regions - those covered by Objective 1 - there is a prevailing culture of ' machismo ' .
The situation of women in these regions cannot be compared to those of women in Denmark or the other Nordic countries , where ' machismo ' is less pronounced . Furthermore , they live in the poorest regions of the poorest Member States .
Everything is stacked against these women , who are in need of this support .
So I believe that the Commissioner 's answer will pave the way for a joint effort - an effort which , as far as the regional aspects are concerned , the women of Andalusia must carry out jointly with the Commission .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your positive reply , which makes clear your readiness to promote the situation of women .
I should like to make one specific comment : the extent to which a region is disadvantaged is naturally taken into account in deciding the amount of Structural Fund aid to be provided , and Andalusia - which the honourable Member mentioned at the end of her speech - therefore rightly receives a large proportion of the support funds .
If I see things correctly , however , there are many very enterprising women in Andalusia - not least at the political level - and I have come to the conclusion that it cannot , in general , be said that the women of the southern Member States are less active in certain fields than those of the northern Member States .
I believe that in terms of the Union 's support policy in this area , the important thing is to create networks so that women can learn from one another .
This also facilitates exchanges of experience as regards successful projects and the ways in which the activities of women in quite different situations in both rural and urban areas can be supported .
If the honourable Member looks at the brochure to which I referred , she will see that it contains some good examples not only from the northern , but also from the southern Member States , and we shall continue to take advantage of this situation to promote these policies and support women in their endeavours .
Question No 49 by Inger Schrling ( H-0598 / 96 )
Subject : Support for businesswomen
In connection with Commissioner Wulf-Mathies ' visit to Sweden , there have recently been reports in the Swedish press of a promise of fresh support for businesswomen .
The scheme was to be set up this autumn and the aid paid direct to women 's networks by the Commission .
What form will this support take ?
Who can apply , and what amounts will be involved ?
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her reply .
Unfortunately , I was unable to attend the conference in Lule but I understand that a great many exciting issues were discussed there .
As I wrote in my question , various reports have appeared in Swedish newspapers concerning the promised support .
As a parliamentarian and former advisor to small businesses and cooperatives and to businesswomen and women 's networks I receive many questions concerning what kind of support exists and now of course also about this new support .
I have been unable to provide any correct answers as to what support exists .
I must therefore have a clear answer : is there new support ?
Has new money been made available or has ' old money ' been reallocated and turned into a new form of support ?
If so , should this money be paid out directly by the Commission and not through the Member States ?
The funds for the specific pilot projects to which I referred are resources which are at the Commission 's disposal in the context of Community initiatives and pilot projects .
They represent new resources for the Member States in that they have not been distributed hitherto , but have been released in tranches .
However , in view of the fact that we have at our disposal around ECU 170 billion for the period 1994 to 1999 for the Union 's structural policies overall , they do not represent new resources as such .
In any event , they do not form part of the established programmes for the Member States ; the Commission will publish invitations to tender for these resources in the Official Journal of the European Communities , which will then make it possible to apply directly to the Commission .
Biology and medicine ( Bioethics Convention ) ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0190 / 96 ) by Mr Pelttari , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Draft Convention on the protection of human rights and the dignity of the human being , with regard to the application of biology and medicine ( Bioethics Convention ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , some people have questioned whether the European Parliament should become involved with the draft Bioethics Convention on which the Council of Europe has been working for so many years .
Some people have also said that we could save ourselves a great deal of time and unnecessary work , since the convention will , in any event , have no legal force .
Both these views are wrong .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights did not undertake to produce this report lightly .
On the contrary , despite our different experiences of life and our different political standpoints , we all agreed that Parliament has a certain responsibility in this area .
The Bioethics Convention establishes certain pointers and guidelines in important scientific and medical fields .
Many people have placed great hopes in these fields , so we must ensure that the pointers and guidelines are the right ones .
As the only directly elected representatives of 370 million people in the European Union , it is our duty to say what we think about protecting human rights and human dignity in applying biology and medicine , and to try to influence what a convention like this actually says .
This is why this detailed report by Mr Pelttari is so important .
My group will be voting for the report , provided one thing is clear : that human dignity is paramount .
It will not do to leave fundamental questions open .
It would be criminal if we allowed for even the possibility of unscrupulous human testing .
Consider the question of tests on people who are unable to give their consent .
They could be sick , disabled or young children .
Let me give you an example from the past .
In my home town in Germany , there is a children 's home run by the Church .
At the beginning of the 1940s , 50 gypsy children living there were tested to identify any special racial characteristics .
When the doctors were satisfied with their results , the children were taken to a concentration camp and killed .
There are various points in the Council of Europe 's draft Bioethics Convention where the possibility is not entirely ruled out that such terrible things might be repeated , and Mr Pelttari has not come down on these points heavily enough .
Some of the amendments he proposes even take a more moderate line , and the Group of the Party of European Socialists refuses to go along with this .
We have tabled amendments with three basic objectives .
We wish to see unconditional protection for human dignity ; we wish to prevent life in any form from being treated as a commodity ; and we want a public debate on forward-looking ethical issues in the fields of biology and medicine .
What does unconditional protection for human dignity mean in practice ?
It means , for example , that we will spare people terrible pain if it is of no benefit to them .
It is therefore right that we should allow medical tests to be carried out on those who cannot give their consent only in certain clearly defined and exceptional cases , as specified quite clearly in paragraph 12.1 .
Parliament must make it quite clear to the Council of Europe that there can be no way round this .
Next , what do we mean exactly when we say that human life must not be allowed to be treated as a commodity ?
I am thinking here , for example , of in vitro fertilization , which places an enormous physical and psychological strain on women .
This is where we need to tighten up Mr Pelttari 's proposals .
We must make it quite clear that the embryos produced are only to be used for the treatment of the individual woman concerned .
This should not mean , however , that a woman has to go through the whole medical procedure every time she wants to attempt an in vitro fertilization , which is why it must be possible for as many embryos to be created as are necessary to complete the woman 's treatment .
If we do not specify this , there is a risk that any embryos left over will be used for tests , so we must make it clear that this is not allowed .
The third of my group 's demands is for a public debate on the Bioethics Convention .
The people of Europe must be allowed to have their say on matters of such importance .
The secrecy which has surrounded the work on this convention in recent years is extremely suspicious , and we , as the elected representatives of the citizens of the European Union , must make this point quite clear .
There will then be a good chance that the Bioethics Convention produced will be one to which the European Union is prepared to accede later .
My group has proposed amendments to clarify the commendable work already done by Mr Pelttari , and I would ask you to support them .
Mr President , it is important that the Council of Europe is drawing up a convention on the protection of human rights and human dignity in the application of biotechnology .
It is also good that the European Parliament is taking up a position on this matter .
Biotechnology is an up and coming area of science , research and industry .
We must support its development in the interests of increasing Europe 's competitiveness in its fight for markets with Japan and the United States .
In this connection it is important to take account of the common European ethical viewpoints and the respect of human dignity , because biotechnology combines both ethical and economic interests .
I should like in this connection to thank Mr Pelttari for his very good report and for the amendments which he has made .
This reflects the Finnish ethical view which quite unambiguous and transcends party boundaries .
At the same time it also generally reflects the views of my own EPP Group .
The Council of Europe 's conventions acquire the force of law when the States have ratified them .
They create guidelines for worldwide activity and in my opinion they have an important role in laying down the foundations and the framework for the way in which legislation in this area should develop .
The European Union cannot accede to this convention as a legal entity , but this could still be changed , for example at the IGC .
In my opinion the Parliament should stress this possibility , as Mr Pelttari mentioned in his speech today .
The drafting of legislation on biotechnology is currently a topical and indeed urgent subject , because the applications of biotechnology are arising at an ever increasing rate both in medicine and in other areas of research which make use of biotechnology .
Similarly in many countries , including Finland , legislation is currently being drafted on this subject .
Applications of biotechnology , for example genetic technology , are used in medicine to help people , e.g. cancer patients .
One of the best known applications is in-vitro fertilization or artificial fertilization outside the womb .
It has helped many childless families to overcome their problem .
Biotechnology has also opened up many new prospects for the early diagnosis of particular diseases at the embryo stage and for treatment at the same stage .
This possibility must not be overlooked .
Biotechnology , when used in accordance with legal and ethical standards , is a great boon to humanity , and benefits mankind in many ways .
Used in the wrong way it presents many threats , which at worst could lead even to the manipulation of the human genome .
This gives rise to fears among the general public and must be prevented without delay .
We know that , in accordance with the Hippocratic oath , doctors on the whole have high moral and ethical standards and accept their duty to protect human life and promote health by all possible means .
But there are those working in biotechnology who are not bound by that oath .
That being so , common standards must be created .
The Council of Europe 's convention and the opinion being drafted by Parliament are founded on an ethically and morally sustainable basis in contemporary form .
However , they do not go so far as to hinder , for example , the applications of genetic engineering from being used to prevent and treat diseases .
That being so , from a medical point of view , this proposal provides a basis inter alia for the work of doctors and at the same time it protects patients and society from the abuses they fear .
In my opinion , this reflects the opinion of the EPP and public opinion in Finland .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , I too should like to congratulate Mr Pelttari on his work in conjunction with this report on the Bioethics Convention .
In committee , we voted in favour of this report , because we believe that certain crucial aspects of it deserve our full support .
I shall mention some of these : trading in human embryos , foetuses or foetal tissue must be forbidden by law , as must research into human embryos and production of them for the purposes of research ; only as many embryos should be produced as are required for transplanting , and not more than three ; the preservation of embryos by deep freezing should be permitted only in exceptional circumstances for medical reasons ; intervention in the human genome for the purpose of changing , or bringing about a change in , the germ line must be forbidden by law ; any transmission of the findings of genetic tests should be prohibited ; predictive tests should only be authorized for life-threatening conditions for which effective treatment is currently possible ; research on persons who do not have the capacity to consent should only be permitted in exceptional circumstances , if the legal representative has given his assent freely and in full knowledge of the facts , if the person concerned does not object , if the research is closely linked to the subject 's illness , if the research cannot be carried out on persons able to give consent and if the research is likely to benefit the health of the person concerned .
Further , the protection of the dignity and rights of individuals is of absolute priority as compared with any social or third-party interest , and the results of human genome research work must be freely available .
Finally , as the report states , it is desirable to establish publicly accessible data bases containing details of the legal texts and revealing the existence of research .
My group fully agrees with all these points ; therefore , just as it did in committee , it intends to vote in favour of these principles in plenary too .
Naturally , much will depend on which amendments are adopted : in fact , our group disagrees with some of these .
In conclusion , I would commend the rapporteur once again and thank him on behalf of the Union for Europe Group for all his hard work .
Mr President , I should firstly like to say that the Confederal Group of the European United Left-Nordic Green Left supports this report in principle , provided certain amendments which seek to safeguard human dignity and the right of women to decide for themselves with regard to this issue are adopted .
Secondly , we believe that this report represents a step forward .
However , two sets of considerations have to be balanced : on the one hand , the interests of the biotechnology industry , which wishes to patent genes and a whole series of processes - and here we can set an example to the United States as regards respect for human dignity , taking the United Nations as a reference point ; and on the other , the need to safeguard the right of women , of human beings , to decide their own future , without being subjected to tyranny of any kind .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is worth reminding ourselves that we are discussing an own-initiative report , and hence a resolution with no legal value whatsoever .
In other words , there is no legislative procedure under way ; this House is not commenting on a proposal from the Commission .
No , this is merely an opinion offered by the European Parliament to the Council of Europe , which is drawing up a convention on bioethics .
What prompted Parliament to express its views ?
Was it perhaps to encourage the Council to conclude its work without delay , in order to have the convention as soon as possible ?
Unfortunately not .
If one reads the text approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs , despite the dissenting votes of the PSE Group - to which I have the honour of belonging - the Greens and the United Left , and the abstention of the ELDR Group , including the rapporteur , the spirit of this resolution becomes crystal clear .
The intention is to place a series of restrictions on scientific research , focusing in particular on artificial insemination : limitations and restrictions inspired by a moral code which not all of us share .
The Council of Europe will follow its own course ; it will , in its wisdom , leave in the protocols anything which cannot easily be accommodated in the convention itself . The convention will be approved - as soon as possible , we hope - and , like all conventions , it will undergo the usual signatures and ratification by various Member States .
In the meantime , what purpose will this resolution have served ?
Unfortunately , if it is approved , and especially if drafted as at present , it will merely serve to lend weight to attitudes which I do not hesitate to describe as reactionary , and to die-hard attempts to reopen the debate in our countries regarding legislation on abortion - for which women have fought long and hard - and to limit access to artificial insemination .
If that is the case , with the greatest respect and esteem for the rapporteur , Mr Pelttari , and above all for the commitment and passion of Mrs Gebhardt , it will be far better if this resolution , especially in its present form , is not adopted .
Mr President , the Pelttari report is a good one : it is just as rigorous and thorough as the European Parliament 's previous resolution of 16 March 1989 .
In this field as no other , ladies and gentlemen , the texts of the European Parliament and the Council of Europe are taken as guidelines for national legislation .
In fact , the sensitivity and difficulty of the subject , scientific uncertainty , the unprecedented nature of the moral questions confronting us all , and the risk of restricting and sacrificing research , confer on the two European parliamentary assemblies an extra degree of responsibility and trust , for the very reason that they are broadly representative of different cultures , diverse sensibilities and the richest , widest-ranging ethical values .
Mr Pelttari 's report has the merit of not avoiding the most insidious question : might not this convention and its protocols place too narrow a strait-jacket on medical research , in view of the purpose of such research , which after all is beneficial to mankind ?
The answer is no .
The age in which we live , so rich in achievements in every field , confronts us with an alarming discrepancy between what is technically possible and what is ethically acceptable - namely what does not damage human dignity , rightly defined by the rapporteur as indivisible .
There is of course no intention to halt scientific progress , just as science was not halted by the Nuremberg Code or the Helsinki Declaration .
It is a question not of pitting ethics against progress , but of preventing the misuse of technical potential from rebounding against mankind .
That is why , in most countries , ethics committees are drawing up what are real ethical protocols and - as in Italy within the past few days - a legal statute of the embryo , which at last is no longer ambiguous , setting out the need for the legal protection of embryos , equal to that for each and every one of us .
We know that a parallel humanity exists in refrigerators the world over , which is waiting to be welcomed into our midst .
It is difficult to come to terms with an entity so tiny and complete as an embryo .
But only if we acknowledge the human wholeness of the embryo , a purely scientific and thus objective concept , will we be able to define its human dignity , the legal protection to which it is entitled and , ultimately , the respect which it deserves from all of us , including researchers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is the human embryo a fully-fledged human being ?
The Italian bioethics committee has declared that the embryo is one of us .
So there we have it : it is a form of life and deserves protection , rights and respect .
The committee has produced and published a document entitled ' Identity and statute of the human embryo ' , and for the first time , we in Italy can state decisively that the embryo - or the female egg fertilized by male sperm - is not a thing , but forms part of humankind , and that its personal identity exists from the moment of fertilization , in other words as from conception .
As always , the question arises : when does an embryo start to be one of us , a European citizen in fact , and in what ways can it be used ?
Once again , the committee repeats that a human being becomes one at the moment of conception , and allows science to work only with dead embryos .
Although many people think that an embryo is human as from the fourteenth day , the document drawn up by this Italian committee of experts states that the various nuclei of life which precede the formation of the single embryo are themselves already individuals and are therefore untouchable ; right from the moment of conception , that is to say .
I think that the Pelttari report merits a good deal of attention : in a very responsible and capable way , it outlines the arguments for life and the need to protect the embryo ; for my part , I shall vote in favour of it as it stands .
Nevertheless , we have to catch and run with this ball once and for all , go beyond the bounds of this report , and resolve to draw up a statute and a law designed exclusively to protect the embryo .
Again and again , of course , we are confronted by the problems of industry which , in championing the cause of human health and our right to treatment , urges us to come out in favour of the directive which would make it possible to patent living and non-living beings , including man , by enticing us with arguments about increased employment and raising the spectre of an invasion , in the field of biotechnology , by American and Japanese multinationals .
Yet again , however , the European Parliament is refusing to face the facts , namely that in the UK 9000 embryos - 9000 human beings - are soon to be slaughtered like mad cows , if no one comes to their rescue .
I did ask for an urgent resolution on the subject at this part-session , but my request was completely ignored .
What is certain is that we must come to a final decision , in all consciousness , as responsible citizens .
Certainly , once we decide that embryos are human beings , we shall have to revise our attitude to abortion and - why not - begin to clamp down on all moves towards euthanasia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Pelttari report looks , amongst other things , at the dilemma of freedom of research and the ethical restrictions imposed on it .
The question remains as to whether everything that is technically possible in biological terms is also desirable , both from the point of view of protection and the rights of the individual .
The report contains two points , paragraphs 12.5 and 12.10 , from the opinion of the Committee on Research and Technology , both of which place the rights of the human embryo above those of the individual , in other words the genetic parents .
In my view and that of the Liberal Group , this is going too far .
Paragraph 12.5 states that the preservation of embryos by deep freezing should be permitted only in exceptional circumstances , and only on medical grounds .
This means that women will be forced to undergo further painful medical treatment unnecessarily even where multiple fertilization has occurred .
A clear case of male morality .
If we approve biomedical techniques such as in vitro fertilization , then we also have to accept the consequences and give parents the right to self-determination when it comes to the preservation of embryos .
Paragraph 12.10 denies future parents the right to have genetic tests to detect serious congenital defects , and we have to wonder whether this is really in the interests of the unborn child .
Mr President , the idea of establishing a regulatory framework for biomedical research applications which will ensure that , as they are developed , the rights and dignity of persons are taken into account , undoubtedly represents a step forward .
The aim of the convention which is the subject of this report is to remove from the discretion of the major pharmaceutical and health industries the ability to set the limits of those applications , on the grounds that they may be tempted to do so on the basis of their own interests .
However , there are still some loose ends , to which attention should be drawn : for example , the encouragement of technological research and development is not made totally subordinate to the need to protect the rights , independence and freedom of choice of persons .
Certain amendments would severely restrict that freedom of choice - and especially the freedom of choice of women - as regards the ability to benefit from scientific progress .
Moreover , not enough consideration is given to the harm which may be caused by genetic engineering , and this concern cannot be dismissed with the argument that technological backwardness which is damaging to industry must be avoided .
Science is a means , and not an end .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking in my personal capacity , but reflecting on a very intense discussion of this report within the delegation of the Partito Democratico della Sinistra to the Socialist Group .
I must confess that I feel a deep sense of unease .
It is my impression that we , the European Parliament , have embarked on a road which could lead to a hasty and inadequate result , and which with no doubt at all will bring us face to face with a complex set of issues and questions which are in all our minds .
As I see it , at least , these are issues and questions which do not and cannot have any immediate , easily identifiable , clear-cut political or legal value .
One cannot discuss these matters without bearing in mind , in general terms , the current state of scientific research , without taking account of the moral dimension , of religious and philosophical beliefs , and of our culturally determined , intrinsic sensibilities and points of view , which caution us all to be circumspect and respectful in a Europe made up of religions , sensibilities and points of view , and which has not one but many cultures , many outlooks , to cherish and protect .
I wonder , then , if it might have been more worthwhile to await finalization of the draft currently being drawn up by the Council of Europe , and then to subject it to careful appraisal .
Is it a good idea to become involved here and now , on the basis of a draft which has not yet gone before the Assembly ?
Is this a good idea , given that a Parliament might take - or believe that it has taken - highly complex decisions on the basis of political alignments or votes , cast perhaps without full knowledge of the facts , or in any event in ways which leave inadequate scope for personal conviction ?
I believe that full freedom of conscience should be allowed in the vote on the report which is before us , bearing in mind - as far as the so-called statute of the embryo is concerned - that nothing can be done while some claim that embryos are mere clusters of cells , to be produced and used at will , and others recognize them to all intents and purposes as persons , with a statute and rights equal in all respects to those of fully-formed individuals .
In any case , we must be aware that our vote will not put an end to this debate , which will remain open and which is above all a matter for cool and reasoned appraisal .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow draftsman for the PPE Group in the Committee on Research , I should like to comment on some of the amendments which secured a majority .
The Bioethics Convention is the first international agreement to give a clear definition of the limits of research and medical intervention in humans and to confirm the rights of the individual in relation to science .
It also guarantees that medical and scientific ethics are respected .
But although every country might be calling for a proper balance between human rights and scientific progress , the different philosophical and cultural sensitivities involved make it very difficult to produce rules which are universally acceptable .
This is evident from the very fact that the title of the convention has been changed to the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine .
Biomedical research is not an end in itself , it is for the benefit of mankind .
The preservation of health and the reduction of suffering are high ethical values which form worthy objectives .
It should be made clear that these ethical values are being upheld .
Biomedical research on humans is normally carried out only on those who have been clearly informed about what is involved and have expressly given their consent .
Only in exceptional cases does research have to be carried out on those who are unable to give their consent , mainly in paediatrics , psychiatry , neurology , and in the case of research into age-related diseases .
In such instances , it is often not possible to use people who are able to give their consent , so the tests must be carried out on those who cannot .
If we want to help those suffering from Alzheimer 's or Parkinson 's disease in the future , for example , we need to be able to do tests on patients with these diseases .
They may be just blood tests , a computer tomography or simple psychological tests , and these really should be allowed .
The problem here is how to distinguish between ethically justifiable tests and improper tests in a legal document which is necessarily very general and inflexible .
Would it not be better for the wording of the convention to be more liberal , and to have implementing provisions which go into possible abuses in detail , rather than for the convention alone to be formulated so inflexibly ?
These are considerations which I have covered in my amendments .
On in vitro fertilization , the motion for a resolution says that no more than three embryos should be implanted into a woman in a single menstrual cycle , and that the preservation of embryos should be permitted only in exceptional circumstances if the planned implantation within the cycle is not possible for medical reasons .
This is the same wording as is used in Germany 's Embryo Protection Law of December 1990 , which Germans have found entirely acceptable .
I would also stress in this context that only research which is for the direct benefit of the embryos concerned is justified , and that consumptive research of any kind using living embryos should be totally prohibited .
We support Mr Pelttari 's report and his motion for a resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to have the opportunity to say a few words on a subject as important as bioethics .
In particular , I should like to thank Mr Pelttari and Mr Tannert for having raised the issue on which I addressed the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights at the end of April .
This subject calls for reflection on our part as the scope of biological technology is extended .
These new technologies are already bringing us - and promise to bring in the future - many new products in the health and agri-food sectors .
As a result of advanced research , our industries are already having a decisive influence on the quality of life of European citizens .
Together with the advent of information technology , the developments in this sector are amongst the most important of the late twentieth century .
We must take account of all their implications in order to keep abreast of them and control them effectively .
In particular , this means considering the ethical questions which they raise and monitoring them continuously .
The European Parliament has always devoted the utmost attention to these difficult issues .
When required to do so , it has also helped the Commission and the Council to take account of this aspect of our society .
The fact that there have been several initiatives by the Union in this field is largely due to Parliament 's prompting .

There are two main points I should like to make in respect of your motion for a resolution on the forthcoming Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine of the Council of Europe , first of all on the accession of the Community to the convention and , secondly , on the way in which the Commission always seeks to incorporate the demands and basic principles of bioethics in its measures .
As its title clearly states , the draft Council of Europe convention primarily deals with human rights .
At present , however , the Community does not have the competence to accede to the Convention on Human Rights .
The Court of Justice has just reminded us of this quite clearly in its opinion of 28 March 1996 .
However , your motion for a resolution asks us to state our position on the possibility of accession .
All I can say today is that the issue is currently being examined by the Commission 's legal service .
The delay caused by this essential move will not interfere with the timetable , however , since the draft convention still has to be approved by the Council of Europe 's parliamentary assembly .
I would add that the Intergovernmental Conference may also cause some changes to be made to the Treaty .
I shall move straight on to my second point .
There is no need for formal accession to the convention for the Union and the Commission to be guided by the important principles it contains .
This has been their practice for several years , particularly where scientific research is concerned .
I would remind the House that the framework programme and the specific programmes on biotechnology and biomedicine are explicitly required to respect the provisions adopted internationally in these fields .
To make the situation quite clear , any research aimed at changing the germ line or on the cloning of embryos is specifically forbidden .
All the research programmes in life science and technology under the fourth framework programme allocate a substantial portion of their resources to the ethical , social and legal issues to which they give rise .
The same concerns are also reflected in the Union 's regulatory measures , which are increasingly taking account of the main principles of bioethics .
Before leaving the subject , I would stress that , since 1991 , the institutions have been able to seek the opinion of the group of ethical advisers set up by the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , bioethics-related issues are both very important and complex .
Their complexity increases as one tries to deal with them on a Europe-wide basis .
We have to take account of cultural differences which can result in different approaches to the problems .
Consequently , our perceptions are not always the same .
For all these reasons , the draft convention of the Council of Europe certainly represents progress from which we should all benefit .
It should enable us to establish common reference points which we are currently lacking in certain areas .
I therefore congratulate the European Parliament for having organized this debate , and would end by thanking you for inviting the Commission to take part in it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Annex I of the Rules of Procedure - Lobbying
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0177 / 96 by Mr Nordmann , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the amendment of Annex I to the Rules of Procedure concerning transparency and Members ' financial interests ; -A4-0200 / 96 by Mr Ford , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on lobbying in the European Parliament .
Mr President , here we are , or rather , here we are again , since this is in fact the second report of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , following my request last January for referral back to committee because of the problems raised by Mr Ford 's report .
Since January , work has been done : a working party made up of representatives of the various political groups and chaired by Mr Cot , whom I should like to thank , drew up guidelines for our committee .
In fact , a broad consensus is what is required for this kind of discussion , since we shall only be able to reform our Rules of Procedure and introduce greater transparency if we obtain 314 votes tomorrow !
We therefore need the support of the groups and , to make the point quite clearly , the support of the two large groups whose vote will determine this majority .
The Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities has carried out its work with this end in view and on the basis of the guidelines that were presented to us .
I think I can safely say that it has respected the guidelines drawn up by the working party and even improved their wording , since some of them were rather obscure in places , not to say contradictory .
This has led us to make the following proposals .
Firstly , the scope of the declaration should be extended , not only to cover professional activities , but also any support from which Members might benefit , whether financial or in terms of staff or material , provided by third parties not belonging to the institution ; both the support and its origin should be disclosed . Secondly , there should be a ban on accepting other gifts or benefits .
Thirdly , the declarations should be entered in a public register ; and , finally , national legislation should be complied with as regards declarations of assets .
These are the essential ingredients of this report and its conclusions .
I am aware that these proposals present difficulties for some people , particularly as regards the ban on accepting gifts other than declared income .
Some of them , whose opinion I respect , wonder if it would be appropriate to establish a threshold above which the ban would take effect .
We did not wish to become involved in a debate that has been the source of Mr Ford 's difficulties , and we have therefore settled on a more general form of words .
Yesterday , during the kind of mini-debate which marked the reintroduction of my report , some people called for the Bureau to be responsible for resolving any difficulties .
To this effect , I have tabled a proposed form of words which could extend the powers of the Bureau provided for in our report .
That proposal is now on the table , its only purpose being to secure the support of the two major groups .
In Rules 162 and 163 , provision has been made not only for changes , but also for ways of applying and interpreting the Rules should anyone try to reduce the proposals to absurdity , for example by evoking the famous case of the cup of coffee that it would no longer possible to offer one 's visitors .
But let us not go into that tonight .
While our proposals are too tame for some people , for others they go too far .
No doubt they strike a happy medium .
I would therefore appeal to the House 's sense of collective responsibility .
If we fail to achieve a positive result , Parliament 's image will be seriously tarnished .
That is why I hope we can forget ulterior motives and wrangling between political groups .
Above all , I hope that in tomorrow 's vote each Member will at least have the courage not to abstain !
Mr President , as my partner in crime , Mr Nordmann , said , the Ford and Nordmann reports are back !
They have returned to this House after Parliament shied away from making a decision in January .
This time Parliament generally is agreed that we cannot afford to fail again .
We are now under the scrutiny - and rightly so - of the media and , more importantly , through the media , of the people of Europe who expect us not only to have a House that works properly , but one that is seen to work properly .
Let me make it clear that we do not need these reports because there are any great scandals in this House .
There are no problems , like in the United Kingdom , of cash-for-questions or anything else .
Maybe there is the odd resolution for a trip , but the worst you can say here is that 98 % and more of the Members conduct themselves in a perfectly fit and proper manner .
But what we have seen is this institution evolve from the first direct elections back in 1979 , when the argument that it was a talking shop had some merit , to become a legislative arm of the European Union that actually helps and assists the Commission and the Council in preparing legislation .
The Single European Act and the Maastricht Treaty have given Parliament real power in a number of areas : single market legislation , environment , research and social affairs .
As we well know , the Commission accepts the majority , 80 % I have been told , of our amendments , in whole or in part .
As a result of Parliament 's growing influence we have become the focus of increasingly intensive lobbying .
It is not our intention to stop this process .
After all , it is our job as Members of the European Parliament to listen , to engage in dialogue with representatives of consumers and producers , employers and employees , environmental and public interest groups .
We are here to give an ear to those people .
But what we must do is to make sure that this process is open and transparent and that dialogue is not in any danger of turning into ownership .
My report is very simple indeed now .
It is essentially a framework document that establishes a public register of lobbyists .
It is founded on the elements agreed by this House in January - because most of my report , as you will recall , was voted and a large number of elements were accepted .
In my view , Parliament should have no difficulty in approving it .
If Parliament does not bring itself to approve my report and that of Mr Nordmann , we are in danger of bringing the whole House into disrepute .
For without it the follow-up reports already demanded of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities by the Conference of Presidents , will be meaningless .
As members of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure are aware , we are already committed to further reports on intergroups , where we will lay down , I presume , appropriate criteria for recognition .
These should include a public list of Members and an annual report on resources and finances received from outside this House .
There should be a report on assistants to make a distinction between those who devote their full-time work to a Parliamentarian or Parliamentarians and those supernumary assistants - collaborators maybe - who combine Parliamentary work with working for lobbying organizations , in my wide definition of the term , ranging from professional bodies through to voluntary bodies .
Then the other report that has not yet been started on a code of conduct for lobbyists will have to be undertaken .
This I hope will stop the coldcalling on Members ' doors , as if you are canvassing in a British by-election , going down the street and knocking on doors one-byone , and the harassment by organizations like the Iranian National Resistance , who appear to be unable to take no for an answer .
With respect to the Nordmann report , it has our support .
Firstly it makes it clear that this will be a public document with no hidden codicils , that there will be no declaration of assets in sealed envelopes , and that what is not declared is fundamentally not acceptable .
Things will be open and public .
In addition , it enables the Bureau of Parliament to interpret any points of contention .
We hope that tomorrow we will have the support of the vast majority of the House , not only for my report but for the Nordmann report as well .
If this institution wants to be taken seriously , if it wants to have more power - I am very much in favour of that - then we not only have to do things properly , they have to be seen to be done properly .
Mr President , in an opinion which was unanimously adopted , the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment declares itself in favour of the regulation of the activities of pressure or lobby groups , on the basis of the following points .
It should be stressed that these groups enhance the fundamental role of mediation and political representation played by the political parties , by providing Members with information and helping to bring Europe 's citizens and the European Parliament closer together .
Consequently , the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment does not a have a negative attitude towards these groups , which contribute to the dialogue to which Mr Ford has referred .
However , it wishes to underline the fact that increasing the transparency of the activities of these groups is essential to ensuring that their contribution is a genuinely positive one .
By the same token , our committee emphasizes the need to facilitate the activities of non-profit-making lobby groups , not only for reasons of equal opportunities , but because it is right that these groups should be able to operate in this House .
It recommends a gradual approach to the issue - starting , that is , with the establishment of certain basic rules regarding conduct , identification and movement , which will make it easier for the activities of Parliament , its Members and officials to be carried out and ensure that the lobbies themselves behave responsibly .
This is the approach advocated in the report submitted today by Mr Ford , whom I would congratulate on achieving a result that will enable the first steps to be taken down a long road : namely , establishing a register of natural and legal persons who wish to have permanent access to the premises of the European Parliament in order to provide Members with information , and making those persons subject to a code of conduct .
The Committee on the Rules of Procedure is asked to draw up that code , so that it enters into force at the same time as this new text .
In this way , the activities of the lobby groups will be made subject to serious and responsible rules .
The Committee on Social Affairs and Employment likewise supports Mr Nordmann 's report on transparency and Members ' financial interests , which is also being debated in plenary for the second time today .
Both reports must be adopted , since they adequately reflect our committee 's views , which I have expressed as draftsman in the firm belief that the European Parliament must take this step towards increased openness and transparency .
Furthermore , this decision cannot be postponed .
We have all made a great effort to achieve formulas which are capable of securing a broad consensus .
Now those formulas must be applied .
Time will tell if they are suitable or if they have to be improved .
Like all rules , they will probably need to be supplemented - as indicated by Mr Ford a few moments ago - and improved and adapted .
But that is not the main point .
The main point , Mr President , is to begin taking steps down the road that will ensure Parliament 's credibility and moral authority .
Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , I would point out that in recent years there has been an enormous increase in lobbying of the European institutions , with some 3000 to 10 000 lobbyists now said to be working around the European institutions in Brussels .
Clearly , if there are no rules , this kind of thing is bound to mushroom , and that is why my committee feels that regulation is urgently needed .
On behalf of the committee , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ford , for the solutions he has put forward and all the hard work he has done .
His second report meets all the objectives our committee had in mind and takes account of criteria we felt should be met .
Lobbyists must now be entered in a public register , follow a certain code of conduct and carry a personal pass .
There are three comments I should like to make here .
Firstly , the cornerstone of this entire set of rules is , of course , the code of conduct , which needs to be drawn up as quickly as possible , otherwise none of the rules can be put into practice .
I therefore think we must aim to reach a decision on this by the end of 1996 .
Secondly , if these rules are to work they must be applicable and enforceable in practice , and there must be checks on how they are applied .
These are three aspects that are going to have to be organized here in the House .
Thirdly , it is absolutely essential that parliamentary assistants should be given a proper status , but the question is whether this should be extended to include lobbyists .
I think this is something else we shall have to look at very carefully .
I should like to turn now to the Nordmann report .
The proposed amendment to the Rules of Procedure concerning transparency and Members ' financial interests is , I think , a successful compromise , on which I should like to congratulate Mr Nordmann .
I wholeheartedly support this compromise .
I feel it is essential that there should be total clarity as regards the professional activities and all other paid functions of Members of the European Parliament .
Secondly , Members must also refrain from accepting gifts or other benefits in the performance of their duties .
And thirdly , it is absolutely vital that a careful record should be kept of all these details in a register .
Then there is the declaration of assets .
Pending the introduction of a uniform statute for all Members of the European Parliament , we have , I think , no choice but to go on declaring our assets in accordance with the national rules .
It should be pointed out here that the Belgian Council of State has taken a different view of this matter , but I hope that the Belgian legislation currently in the pipeline will make this possible .
Speaking for myself , I shall certainly be making my declaration of assets in accordance with this forthcoming legislation .
Like earlier speakers , I too would point out that this is the moment of truth for the European Parliament .
We cannot afford a second postponement .
This is our chance to let the people of Europe see that we want nothing to do with corrupt practices , and that as Members of Parliament we wish to stand up for the general interest , not for the interests of pressure groups .
Some people have said that there are still details to be worked out , but this is no reason to vote against the proposal .
There may not be rules covering bunches of flowers or bottles of wine , but the most important thing is that these reports we are discussing today lay down rules on everything else .
Mr President , it is finally beginning to look as if we are at long last going to have an official register of lobbyists and a code of conduct for them , seven years after I first proposed this to the Bureau .
As it stands , however , the Ford report does not provide very much more than a framework .
The code of conduct needs to be spelled out in detail in another report , but this is not such a great problem , since we can carry on using the unofficial register and code of conduct that the quaestors have introduced for the time being .
The next report needs to tighten up the existing code and establish a legal basis for it .
In my view , it should cover at least what is desirable and what is unacceptable behaviour for lobbyists , with an absolute ban on the use of excessive pressure , with or without material inducements .
Lobbyists should also be required to submit an annual report in order to have their passes renewed , giving details of who they have lobbied , on whose behalf and using what financial or other means .
Although there is to be another special report on parliamentary assistants and intergroups , certain rules already apply here too .
Registered assistants are required to declare at least any secondary activities they carry out , such as lobbying , and other assistants will be classified as lobbyists and must be registered as such and agree to respect the code of conduct .
Unfortunately , this is a very relevant requirement , since it appears that untold numbers of assistants are being paid by interest groups .
I myself do not think that this is a very desirable development , but introducing transparency could at least help to restrict such practices .
As regards the intergroups , the group chairmen have already ordered that each intergroup must declare whether it has external sources of funding , and which Members from at least three groups are its sponsors .
This should shed some useful light on the situation , since intergroups are currently degenerating into a kind of institutionalized lobby within Parliament .
Unfortunately , the register is not yet working exactly as the group chairmen agreed , and needs to be improved .
We are quite happy with the Nordmann report as it stands .
Firstly , the register of Members ' interests is to be public , without any appendices which then undermine the public nature of the information it contains .
Secondly , it is to be updated annually , rather than letting the information become outdated .
But the most important thing is , of course , what the register contains , since all paid functions and activities and any financial , personal or material support from third parties will have to be declared .
Finally , all other gifts or benefits are prohibited , and thus , in one fell swoop , the European Parliament is exchanging a set of weak and unsatisfactory rules on Members ' interests for the most far-reaching rules of any parliament .
This seems to me to be a sound basis on which to clean up our image and to tighten up the rules governing assistants and other third parties .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the two rapporteurs , not merely on the excellence of their reports but on the patience and tenacity with which they have gone about their work .
I sometimes have the impression that in certain delicate matters such as that which we are discussing today the European Parliament provides 626 rapporteurs for reports coming from the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
While contributions from outside are always very enriching and welcome it makes the coming to consensus a little more difficult .
But I am quite confident that tomorrow we will have come to the end of this particular long road and I think it will be to the great credit of all involved .
I should like to begin by referring to Mr Ford 's report and I am sure he will not be offended if I describe it as the less controversial of the two .
It is , as he has said , little more than a recapitulation of elements that were already voted earlier in this year and that is the basis on which they will be coming forward tomorrow .
We in the EPP have some residual doubts about the appropriateness of referring to assistants in this particular report .
But in the interest of bringing the matter to a successful conclusion we will be voting for the totality of Mr Ford 's report .
We point out that Mr Janssen van Raay will be producing a separate report for the Rules Committee precisely on the question of assistants .
We look forward to that very much .

Turning to Mr Nordmann 's report I should begin by underlining that as Mr Nordmann himself said , he has faithfully and honourably transposed and implemented the conclusions of the working group set up by the Conference of Presidents .
For that reason , if for no other , his report would have the greatest possible claim to be voted tomorrow .
I personally will be voting for it even without amendment though I did put down an amendment .
I wish to speak briefly about the reasoning behind that .
What has worried me and a number of colleagues in the EPP and other groups as well has been the particular phraseology of Mr Nordmann 's report : ' that Members of Parliament shall refrain from accepting any other gift or benefit in the performance of their duties ' .
I am worried about the possible vagueness and difference of interpretation that such phraseology can provoke . I have spoken to a number of individual colleagues and in some cases they might regard a book given to a Member who has spoken in the constituency of another Member as being a gift and therefore potentially unacceptable .
Others would say ' No , it is not a gift .
It is simply a courtesy which is offered to a friend within the European Parliament . '
I regard that as being potentially undesirable .
I have had put to me two possible ways of tackling this problem , one of which has been referred to by Mr Nordmann already : a compromise amendment which would ask the Bureau to set down guidelines as to how this particular proscription is to be interpreted .
If that receives a lot of support then I will happily withdraw the amendment which I put forward , which went more in the sense of saying that only those gifts that could potentially compromise the independence of the Member should be regarded as unacceptable : two ways of getting to the same goal .
I repeat , even without either of these amendments , I shall personally be voting for the Nordmann report tomorrow but I think it would be a little clearer and a little more precise if we could find some way of making more exact what the Nordmann report has in mind .
In conclusion , let me say a word about transparency .
I agree very much with Mr Ford that the enormous majority of colleagues in this House behave honourably , conscientiously , and that what is important is to convince the European electorate that is the case .
I do not regard there as being enormous skeletons in the closet , terrible secrets to be uncovered .
But we rightly in this European Parliament demand transparency of the Council .
We regard the Council as having the obligation to be seen to be acting fairly and constructively .
In demanding more transparency of the Council we are not accusing the Council of corruption .
We are merely saying that that is something which all the electors of Europe have a right to see and to have firmly established .
What is right for the Council , it seems , is right for the European Parliament .
That is why I and my group support the general underlying philosophy of the Nordmann report .
One final thought , if I may .
Oscar Wilde once said that when two people had the same opinion , one at least of them is superfluous .
In agreeing with the philosophy and opinions of Mr Nordmann , I hope very much that I will render neither him nor myself superfluous , but I wish him all the best of luck for tomorrow and I am quite confident he will get the majority he deserves .
Mr President , we have never concealed the fact that we thought the consensus that was reached on transparency , which proved later to be a far from general consensus , was wholly inadequate .
We felt that if you want to exercise political control to ensure that political office is not used for personal enrichment , you basically need to know two things : firstly , what other income the Member receives from other functions or activities apart from his parliamentary income and , secondly , exactly what assets he possesses .
In the report as it now stands , the activities , functions and so on have to be declared , but not how much the Member earns from them .
For declarations of assets , reference is made to national legislation , but we know that thirteen of the fifteen Member States do not have any rules as regards Members of the European Parliament declaring their assets , so in other words the whole thing will be shelved and nothing will happen .
With regard to gifts and benefits , the original text says that these are automatically banned , and I hope that this remains the case and that the PPE amendment is rejected .
However , alongside the prohibited gifts and benefits , this second version of the Nordmann report creates a new category of income not provided for in the earlier version , namely financial , staff or material support granted by third parties in connection with a Member 's political activities .
How can you tell the difference between a gift and financial support ?
In our opinion , this is deliberately designed to blur the issue so as to make it possible to receive financial , staff or material support from third parties , which is totally unacceptable .
The Ford report as it stands is clearly simply a framework which outlines relations between lobbyists and Parliament in general .
We agree that it should be supported , since it specifically states that a code of conduct for lobbyists must be adopted in the current parliamentary term ; Parliament may not exactly be helping things along , but it would be disgraceful if we could not draft the code of conduct during this parliamentary term .
Secondly , we can see from the statements made by various Members - just as was the case in committee - that the political will exists to introduce rules for assistants and the intergroups .
If all these things are to be sorted out in this parliamentary term , the Ford report is the launching pad , and we are happy to give it our support .
Mr President , the Europe of Nations Group will vote in favour of the Ford report , which regulates the activities of persons and groups from outside Parliament and does not present any special problem .
On the other hand , the Nordmann report , which deals with Members themselves , seems to us to be clearly inadequate , for two reasons .
The first is that our group takes the view that , under their mandate , MEPs cannot accept gifts , nor financial support , whether in terms of material or staff .
How can one remain independent or claim to be combating corruption if , at the same time , one is in receipt of largesse , obviously with strings attached ?
It is a question of ethics which , for us , is a fundamental issue . We cannot accept that certain gifts or benefits may be permissible , nor financial support allowed .
The second reason for our dissatisfaction is the complete lack of any real obligation concerning the declaration of assets .
Amendment No 3 states that while we are waiting for a statute for MEPs to be introduced - which has now been postponed indefinitely - Members are subject to the obligations imposed on them by the legislation of the Member State in which they were elected as regards the declaration of assets .
Admittedly , my group , which has frequently had cause to state that national identity must not be ignored in the building of Europe , might , just this once , be content to say that it was now up to national governments to do something constructive .
But how , in all honesty , can one fail to denounce the hypocrisy of a proposal which shows such a blatant lack of courage ?
Given the wording , it might as well not have been written at all .
In this particular case , our own Rules could have gone further than the provisions in force in individual Member States .
As has been quite rightly stated on page 19 of the annex to the second Nordmann report , the thinking behind the arrangements in the Member States is aimed at enabling the situation of MPs in terms of assets to be judged from the time when they begin their parliamentary duties to the time their mandate expires , in order to ensure that , while they are in office , they do not make excessive profits as a result of the positions which they hold .
That is the approach we should be adopting .
We should be guided by the same thinking that produced the first Nordmann report and inspired the working group .
Mr President , we often make anodyne statements , but seldom take decisive action .
This new debate on financial interests presents a challenge , which the Nordmann report in its present uncontroversial form does not meet .
Our group , however , is ready to do so .
Mr President , broadly speaking , the amendments to the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure proposed in the two reports under discussion today are designed to guarantee the necessary transparency in the activities both of Members and of people interacting with them , in other words lobbyists and assistants .
As far as Members of Parliament are concerned - as other colleagues have already said - they will , in essence , be obliged to declare any sources of funding of their political activities , and must refrain from accepting any gifts that could potentially influence their actions or positions .
As for lobbyists , their names must be entered in an appropriate register , they must abide by a code of conduct and must identify themselves by means of a pass , to be worn visibly at all times on Parliament premises .
Such is the matter under discussion .
Two questions need to be asked in this context : are these new rules a positive move , yes or no ? And , secondly , are they adequate , yes or no ?
I would not hesitate to answer the first question in the affirmative .
Despite the difficulties caused by the coexistence of differing penal and fiscal legislation in the various Member States , the European Parliament is taking the lead in establishing rules on transparency by laying down moral provisions such as the ban on the acceptance of gifts , so as to increase the citizens ' trust in their elected representatives .
In my view , however , these new rules cannot be regarded as adequate , but merely as a first step towards a more comprehensive and coherent set of provisions in this area .
We are aware that opposition from certain parliamentary groups prevented the introduction of more restrictive rules , especially with regard to the provisions governing lobbyists and Members .
Unfortunately , we must take account of this and try to remedy the situation in future ; to that end , however , those measures capable of obtaining the necessary qualified majority of Members must be approved now .

In our opinion , the reports by Mr Ford and Mr Nordmann , as approved by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , represent a framework which , in the circumstances , is sufficient and satisfactory ; I therefore believe that this House would be well advised , tomorrow , to reject all the amendments seeking to alter or distort these two sets of rules , which can now be approved at last , sending out an important signal both within this House and , above all , to our electorate and to public opinion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Austria is to hold its first direct elections to the European Parliament on 13 October , and there is currently a great deal of debate as regards what Parliament can achieve , what individual Members can achieve , and who are the winners and losers in the European Union .

There is also some discussion in Austria of how Members are paid and who pays them , both of which are , in my opinion - and let me make this quite clear - entirely legitimate topics .
He who pays the piper calls the tune , as the old saying rightly has it .
So financial transparency is an important issue when people come to consider who is best able to defend their interests .
Both the reports before the House today suggest ways of guaranteeing our citizens the financial transparency that is required .
They both have a lengthy history , which has already been discussed .
I would simply say here that there were important and objective reasons for the problems that have arisen in drawing them up .
The different legal traditions in the fifteen Member States have made it almost impossible to persuade the necessary number of Members to commit themselves to a common solution .
Now , however , we have found a common solution , but I have to say that it is far from perfect , not because the main ideas present any difficulties , but because there are still certain side-issues concerning problems of definition .
We hope that the compromise will produce sound , workable and transparent solutions for the future .
We also hope that over the coming weeks and months in Austria and Finland - where elections are also to be held - and indeed throughout the Union , people will judge the work done by Members of the House not just on financial criteria , but also on other issues , such as the central question of who best represents their interests .
Mr President , after so much reluctance on the part of so many Members , the Nordmann and Ford reports , determining rules of conduct and further improving the work and the role of MEPs , have finally reached the plenary .
I endorse these reports , the aim of which is to achieve clarity and transparency in the way politicians perform their duties ; I believe that they should be supported , and perhaps amended to make them more explicit .
I am in favour of the proposal to establish a public register listing assets , and I think that what is said in certain dubious amendments - that this instrument of transparency could be exploited by illintentioned people - is not a good premise for demonstrating to public opinion our good will and the propriety of our procedures .
For all too long , our citizens have been waiting for us , the politicians , to make a move ; for our part , these minor disciplines will allow us thoroughly to rebuild our image as upright politicians , an image all too often tarnished by corrupt or ill-intentioned colleagues in this Parliament or other institutions .
I believe that the additions to Rule 9 and to the provisions governing its application must be as clear as possible , and that these reports do in fact serve this aim .
But that is not sufficient ; I would emphasize the need for us to equip ourselves as soon as possible with a detailed statute of the MEP .
Obviously , in view of the time taken to bring these two reports before the House , I do not harbour too many illusions that such a statute could be drawn up within the near future .
If we wish future generations to consider that Members of Parliament perform a socially useful role , worthy of emulation , let us set an example now by voting in favour of these reports .
I fully subscribe to my group 's recommendation to express a favourable opinion by roll-call vote .
Mr President , basically , the issue we are now debating concerns our credibility as parliamentarians .
We are elected to represent those who voted for us .
It is vital that we act always in the interests of the voters , using political programmes and our own views as tools .
If we allow others to affect or guide our actions , we offend against the spirit of the task we have undertaken .
The same can be said if our own economic interests guide what we do .
Two things are needed for us to retain our credibility here : the first is openness .
Our financial conditions must be accounted for openly .
The lobbyists who try to influence us must also act openly .
The second requirement is that gifts from lobbyists , to us , towards our equipment or to our staff , cannot be accepted .
Bearing this in mind the draft reports from Mr Ford and Mr Nordmann are a disappointment .
The Ford report does not mention the important issue of gifts from lobbyists .
This is not good .
It should be established here that in order to obtain access to Parliament lobbyists must undertake not to offer gifts .
We have submitted an amendment to this effect .
The Nordmann report also has serious flaws .
It proposes in practice that the payment of parliamentarians ' staff and payments for their equipment by lobbyists should be legalised .
This is unacceptable and incompatible with our independence as parliamentarians .
Moreover , we already receive generous allowances for precisely those expenses .
The amendment by the PPE Group , which would make it perfectly acceptable to make gifts to parliamentarians but maintains that this does not affect how they vote , is still more unreasonable .
It is of course precisely in order to affect votes that such gifts are given .
In order to put right these flaws we have submitted amendments to oblige Members not to accept gifts , whether they are personal gifts or gifts to their offices .
We have also proposed that expenses payments should be public , in order to avoid any misuse of travel allowances .
If the proposals are not amended in the manner suggested by us it will be impossible for me and for many others to vote for them .
Mr President , it will be really very difficult for us to carry out our work as Members of Parliament if we do not exercise transparency regarding our economic interests .
Moreover , it is a very serious problem if Parliament is happy to talk about openness and demands it from other Institutions but has a blind spot in this respect .
The worst problem about Mr Nordmann 's new report is that it merely increases the range of possible interpretations of the proposals .
This leads us to conclude that these proposals are unlikely to be realised even to the extent stated .
For example , the report proposes a distinction whereby gifts and services are divided artificially into different categories but whereby financial support obtained in connection with political activities is in a category of its own .
This is an artificial distinction and makes monitoring more difficult .
On the other hand there is clearly no prospect of any European Parliament rules permitting the notification of MEPs ' property .
In this connection Mrs Aelvoet already said that only in two Member States are there rules of this nature on the notification of property and Mr Nordmann 's report is quite insignificant in this respect .
Mr President - and fellow countryman - being elected by the people is a position of trust , not one of providing services which are for sale to the highest bidder .
Those elected by the people should be paid by them as well .
We are here because people have put a cross against our names , and we must live up to this trust and work in an open and transparent way , so that the voters can judge whether they have chosen well or need to make a better choice next time .
By standing for election , we have declared ourselves ready to work for the remuneration offered by the state , and if we have other sources of income , those earnings should be declared , so that the voters can see what they are getting for their money and what other interests we might represent .
Gifts from firms and interest groups are not compatible with positions of public trust .
And it should create a scandal everywhere that gifts are now being legalized by the proposal to amend the Rules of Procedure which the majority in the House is recommending should be adopted .
On the other hand , it is nevertheless a step forward that openness is being introduced as regards this unacceptable practice , and we are requesting a separate vote so that we can vote in favour of openness and against accepting gifts .
It is particularly interesting that the Christian Democrats are able to distinguish between those gifts which have an effect on votes and those which do not .
With gifts of alcohol , it may be possible to measure the effect , but how can one decide whether 14 days on a Turkish beach has an effect on votes on torture in Turkish prisons ?
Perhaps 14 days in a Turkish prison would make a stronger impression , but that can hardly be called a gift .
The June Movement is proposing that gifts should be prohibited , and that a copy of every approach from lobbyists should be supplied to the library , so that there is openness as regards approaches to elected representatives .
It is all very well for the tobacco industry to argue in favour of smoking , but the arguments must be accessible to those campaigning against cancer , so that they can provide evidence of the further damage to heath which can be caused by allowing tobacco advertising .
Lobbying and closed doors are a dangerous mixture , whilst openness and lobbying from different quarters is a basis for well thought-out legislation .
Mr President , the reports we are now considering concerning the regulation of lobbying and of MEP 's economic interests are aiming at a legislation which should be self evident .
Lobbying should be open and susceptible of monitoring .
At the same time it is appropriate that any economic connections MEPs may have should be listed .
It is equally natural that we should start from the assumption that Members should not receive gifts or services for performing their duties .
I earnestly hope that Parliament can adopt the Ford and Nordmann reports as they stand .
If either report were rejected this would be a regrettable commentary on our inability to draw up common rules .
At the same time it would cast a shadow on those Members of Parliament for whom no such regulations are needed .
I believe that the vast majority of the Members of the European Parliament perform their duty in a morally unexceptionable manner .
Questions relating to the rules and openness of politics are important for the functioning of democracy .
What is just as important is the way in which we are able to hold a sensible discussion with our countries ' nationals in the complicated conditions which exist at present .
Our nationals have a right to know what view of the world their representative holds and how he or she aims to find solutions to its central problems .
The world has changed , and the fact that a person belongs to a particular political party does not , for example , tell us everything about his political philosophy .
The boundaries on many important issues cut across party lines .
Since we are now hopefully going to get the question of interest groups and Members ' economic interests off our hands , at least for a time , we may perhaps be able to go on to consider how we can develop a genuine national dialogue in Europe .
I would wish to include in this discussion the media who are now closely following the discussion of the Ford and Nordmann reports .
Mr President , it is obviously no easy matter to fight your way through issues like this , and I hope and have every confidence that we shall still reach a successful conclusion tomorrow .
The solution found for the lobbyists is a reasonable one , provided that the code of conduct is sound , that it is introduced quickly , and that the lobbyists keep to it .
The only mistake , as far as I can see , is to include assistants in a report on interest groups , and the assistants ' association has rightly asked for this passage to be dropped from the Ford report .
Assistants are our personal aids , and are entitled to have rules of their own .
As far as our ethics are concerned , I shall be happy with any solution which guarantees transparency , legal security and privacy .
If Amendment No 3 is adopted , I would repeat what I said in January : that Members who are not subject to the same requirements as their national counterparts must themselves ensure that they do not slip through the net , and must voluntarily agree to respect the same rules as their national colleagues .
This is still the case for Members from my own country .
Mr President , public confidence in the work of Parliament is completely dependent on the system being open and democratic .
This applies equally to the relationship of parliamentarians with individual interest groups which wish to influence the decisions of Parliament .
The proposals in the Ford report are good , as far as they go .
Lobbying must be regulated , partly to prevent improper influence through gifts and financial advantages but not least in order that all individuals and interest groups should have the same opportunities to influence the work of parliament , irrespective of their size and financial strength .
Verifiable passcards which facilitate registration and checks based on the principle of public accountability constitute the only system which meets the requirements of openness , democracy and equal conditions for all .
This is particularly important for organisations concerned with issues of principle , which must be given the same conditions as industry and interest groups with considerable financial resources .
The proposal does not go far enough , however .
There is no need for lists in which donations of money or in kind to Members can be published .
Such donations and gifts should quite simply not be allowed over and above a purely token level .
There is also some ambiguity concerning the access the general public may have to the lobby register .
The solution is just as clear as with the previous point : the register should be open to the public and anyone who so wishes should have access to it .
The Nordmann report is much the same .
Strict rules for gifts and other inducements are absolutely necessary if public mistrust of the EU and the advantages enjoyed by MEPs is to be transformed into increased confidence .
The Nordmann report too points in the right direction but does not go far enough .
It ought , for example to be self-evident that industry and organisations should not be able to offer financial advantage to MEPs indirectly by appointing staff formally to positions within the company or organisation who are in reality carrying our work for individual MEPs .
My conclusion is thus that we have two proposals which are a step in the right direction but do not go far enough .
The proposals should nevertheless be supported as an initial measure .
Mr President , a good many people in this House have been angry with the Greens for criticizing Members ' undeclared income and the lack of clear rules governing their expenses , and people have been quick to accuse us of currying favour with the public .
However , I think that if there had not been criticism from within the House , it would soon have come from outside and would have weakened Parliament 's standing .
How can we try to explain why there has been this endless tug-of-war about banning the acceptance of gifts ?
How can we explain why Members make up to 50 % profit on their travel expenses ?
How can we explain why travel expenses are paid even if Members have not made the journey and even if they live in Brussels anyway ?
How can we explain that some people claim allowances for attending meetings of committees of which they are not even members , that meetings are deliberately extended to the following day so that Members can claim a second day 's allowance , and that Members employ their relatives as assistants ?
I could easily go on with this list of abuses , and only my lack of speaking time prevents me from doing so !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the previous speaker spoke with a great deal of passion , and I have to say that I agree with him .
If the provisions of the Nordmann report are applied - and I say if they are applied - we will see that there are three types of Members in this House : those whose parliamentary activities are their only source of income , those who also have another profession or paid job , and those for whom none of this is enough and who feel they need sponsorship as well .
This last category should actually not be allowed .
People in the Member States are having to work harder , partly as a result of the Maastricht Treaty , yet we allow those who are already handsomely paid for their political activities to receive money from third parties .
That is why we should support amendments which aim to ban these kinds of perks , but even if those amendments fail , the proposals put forward by the rapporteur , Mr Nordmann , still represent a step forward , because at least we shall now know who receives what and from whom .
Moving on to the Ford report , Parliament should stand up for its Members ' assistants .
There have been various calls for general rules to be introduced for aids and assistants , but since neither Parliament nor the national governments have managed to draw up rules for themselves , rules on assistants may be a long time in coming .
They are currently required to declare their incomes , and rightly so .
But if you impose certain obligations on them , then you could also consider giving them certain rights , such as that they should be properly employed in accordance with all the social security and tax rules , and that Members should give them a pass or at least some proof that their social security and tax position is in order .
Mr President - and fellow countryman , as I can say like Mr Bonde - there are many lobbyists in the European Parliament .
They form a natural part of our work and contribute views and information .
They probably cannot be dispensed with , but we should have rules governing their activities .
The Ford report is a good attempt to create a set of rules which are workable .
I should have liked to see the rules made stricter - everything which a business gives a Member ought to be registered , but I appreciate that there is a balance to be struck here , and that it was not politically possible to achieve more , because the right wing in Parliament would not go along with it .
The most important thing is that now , for the first time ever , we have rules on the activities of lobbyists , and we can always make them tighter in the future .
I welcome the fact that in line with my own amendments , Members will have to declare in a register what financial interests they have apart from representing Europe 's citizens .
It should be a matter of course that there is public access to this register , in keeping with our idea of openness .
We hope that these rules will make the lobbying firms more transparent , but let us be under no illusions .
Even the new rules can be got round .
If a Member wishes to cheat , that can always be done , but we must hope that the new rules bring into focus the relationship between Members and lobbyists , and that they will also serve as moral guidance for Members .
The new rules say to Members that it is wrong to use one 's status as a Member for personal financial gain , whether by letting oneself be bribed by lobbyists or by selling information .
Openness should prevail .
We have waited a long time for these rules .
Today we can take a step in the right direction , and I really do hope that the right wing will therefore change its mind and that we simply declare what we are now concealing .
Why will they not go along with this ?
The reason could of course be a guilty conscience .
I hope that that is not the case .
Mr President , I did not wish to speak as rapporteur , I was replacing Mr Wijsenbeek , but that was indeed rather ambitious .
I think I have three minutes in which to say that the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party approves the two reports whose preparation it has been closely involved with .
It also gives me an opportunity to offer my personal congratulations to Mr Ford for having come up with some provisions which , though they may not go far enough for some people here , nevertheless allow the process of clarification to begin on a sound footing .
In the case of both reports , the Liberal Group is all the more pleased to lend its support because they provide for a general approach of transparency based on trust , rather than on distrust .
We do not need procedures for officiously inquiring into anyone 's affairs , we need instead to encourage a spirit of openness and confidence .
That explains why subparagraph ( b ) of Article 2 ( 1 ) is phrased so economically .
We are well aware that financial support or support in terms of staff or material additional to that provided by the institutions is sometimes given .
Some of our colleagues are supported by their political party , especially parties which have been institutionalized at European level by the Maastricht Treaty .
It would therefore be extremely hypocritical to claim that the only material support is provided by Parliament and its budget .
We in the Liberal Group believe that although this is only a small step , it is not one without significance . We are therefore concerned that those who are calling for a more radical text may be trying to alter or delay the introduction of measures to increase transparency because these might bring to light some means of support which they themselves are currently enjoying .
The best is the enemy of the good . This maxim is especially true where a spirit of moderation is required .
The Liberal Group therefore commends the moderate nature of this compromise .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Restructuring in the steel industry
The next item is the report ( A4-0213 / 96 ) by Mr Caudron , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament ' Fresh impetus for restructuring the steel industry in the Community ' ( COM ( 94 ) 0265 - C40060 / 94 ) .
During the 1950s , the steel industry together with the ECSC were the basic elements in the process of European integration .
Twenty years later , as a result of the drastic restructuring programmes and their terrible social cost in the 1970s and 1980s , it almost caused the downfall of this same Union .
We should be aware that in many areas and for many of our fellow citizens , the damage is irreversible . They have lost heart .
As a Member from northern France , a traditional industrial area , I speak from first-hand experience .
May I remind you that in less than 20 years , the number of jobs in the steel industry has fallen from 850 000 to 350 000 .
Fortunately , the situation today is somewhat better : the market for steel is quite good , even if it is still unstable and continually at the mercy of crises in other sectors - armaments , automobiles , and so on .
Nevertheless , the European steel industry is a net exporter and makes a profit .
But is this a reason for doing nothing , for allowing the markets carte blanche , for crossing our fingers and hoping that all will be well ?
This is what some industrialists would have us do , and sometimes they tell us so in no uncertain terms .
For our part , we do not think so , and I refuse to sit back and do nothing .
On the contrary , we must take advantage of this respite to plan for the future , to maintain the performance of our steel industry and thus avoid further traumas . That is how we shall be able to cope intelligently and humanely with future changes .
That is the approach I have pursued with my colleagues from different groups for nearly a year , and my thanks to all of them .
I have also sought the advice of all the economic players , businesses and trade unions .
In my report , I go on to make many specific proposals affecting four main areas .
Firstly , the competitiveness of the European steel industry must be strengthened by developing new products and markets , and giving ourselves the means to do this .
In a restricted market , Europe 's share must not be allowed to contract .
It must therefore be expanded .
To ensure that the necessary restructuring measures are carried out in a totally transparent way , we must not penalize those who have worked hard , nor excuse those who have been late in meeting their obligations .
More money will have to be spent on research to ensure that our industry remains competitive on the global market . That is an absolute precondition .
Secondly , social policy in this sector needs to be improved .
A qualified workforce is of prime importance to the European steel industry .
We should definitely rid ourselves of the idea that it is a burden . On the contrary , it is an asset !
We should therefore reassure our workers in order to avoid further traumas .
The effects of future changes should also be managed from within , and it is important to convince the workers of this fact !
Thirdly , as regards relations with third countries , we should remain firm in our dealings with the United States , but be very cooperative in our relations with the countries of Eastern Europe , in order to facilitate their essential restructuring and transition processes .
Most of them will be in the Union one day , and now is the time for them to be preparing for accession .
Finally , our industry must remain or become large enough to compete worldwide , and we must give ourselves the means to achieve this , including regroupings .
We must stop burdening ourselves with constraints that our competitors do not have .
Lastly , we should already be preparing for the post-ECSC era in 2002 in order to ensure a smooth transition , in particular by incorporating measures and mechanisms into the Treaties during the IGC .
Such mechanisms are needed to ensure greater transparency in the markets and in state aids and other types of aid , as well as to step up research , with active and intelligent social policies designed to bring about increased productivity and with a long-term commitment to avoid jeopardizing the future for the sake of short-term gains .
Finally , the European steel industry was the driving force behind the Union before turning into one of its worst disasters .
Today it is in a good state of health , and with this in mind , we should be planning for the future .
That is the essence of my report .
I hope it will receive overwhelming support , and also that it will raise awareness and lead to rapid measures so that it can be of lasting value .
Mr President , after all the painful restructuring of the last 20 years and after the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs , the steel industry is still a sector with a future .
That is the message which the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , wishes to convey to us .
I commend him for having treated the steel issue with the sensitivity of someone who comes from one of the many areas stricken by unemployment , and for having put forward practical proposals that avoid the pitfalls of unfettered liberalism and sterile economic intervention .
He has come up with a whole series of interesting proposals .
I should like to highlight one or two of them .
The first advocates an offensive strategy for steel consisting of greater product diversity , a broader range of uses , particularly in construction and public works projects , as well as naturally stepping up research in various areas .
Of course , such a strategy will only work if competition is not distorted .
State aids , whether open or concealed , are therefore placed under scrutiny .
On these issues , I am in agreement with the rapporteur , who defends the code on aid and the policy instruments , but who is opposed to state aid for individual businesses . He does , however , make an exception for regional aid in special circumstances .
Secondly , where restructuring has been carried out , in other words where there has been a dramatic fall in the number of jobs , we must stop the haemorrhaging once and for all . Often , in the wake of the rationalization and the frenetic attempts to increase productivity of recent years , labour has been casualized in various ways .
Our industrial policy must safeguard stable jobs , a task always met by long-term renewal through the employment of young people .
Finally , I should like to say a word about the ECSC Treaty , which expires in the year 2002 .
The crisis in the steel industry showed the value of the instruments it contains . These include the aid code , the statistical system for monitoring market development , the Consultative Committee - of paramount importance for social dialogue in this sector - and the research carried out by using the funds available .
We now recognize that this Treaty has a more pronounced social spirit than those which followed .
Like the rapporteur , I too believe that in making the transition , we should preserve this spirit as well as the more positive elements in the ECSC Treaty , whilst adapting it to suit recent economic and social developments .
In particular , I should like to support the establishment of a structure to accommodate the ECSC reserves , which could be used for joint technological and social research .
In conclusion , Mr President , my group broadly approves this report , which lays down guidelines for a competitive steel industry in the future .
Mr President , we began with a rather weak communication from the Commission , but Parliament and Mr Caudron have transformed it into a vision of the future , a proper industrial policy for the steel industry .
I think Mr Caudron deserves our warmest congratulations , and his report should be adopted as it stands .
Everyone knows that as well as making a major contribution to the economies of the Member States , the steel industry is also an extremely important source of employment , both direct and indirect .
There is often a misunderstanding here .
Businesses do not create jobs , and have only one choice : to operate as efficiently and cost-effectively as possible against cut-throat international competition .
In our western society , cost control almost inevitably means job losses .
The steel industry has always depended heavily on the regions around it , and I therefore greatly regret that a programme such as RESIDER , designed to help the regions diversify , is drying up .
The steel industry is still in the act of developing into much smaller but more widely distributed units , and halting this trend will only harm the industry 's competitiveness .
The fact is that , internationally , the price competition is absolutely ruthless .
There are a few extremely important elements that need to be included in our industrial policy for the steel industry after the ECSC expires .
This is the first report that actually looks beyond that point .
First of all , the new aid operations under Article 95 will need to be strictly monitored .
Every case of aid under Article 95 is by definition a distortion of competition , in my opinion , and the industry itself has also come round to this point of view .
Some Members have already tabled amendments which take quite a different line , and I only hope that Mr Fayot is trying to keep his group in check as I am with mine .
Secondly , the 1997 revisions must introduce more rapid and transparent inquiry procedures , so that effective sanctions can be imposed where the support rules are infringed .
Thirdly , it is vital that European trade statistics should be made available more quickly .
Full American trade statistics on volume and average import prices are available within two months , whereas the European figures take eight to twelve months .
This completely stymies our dumping policy , since the WTO insists that complaints about dumping must be based on official trade statistics .
This is certainly a more important priority than encouraging mergers , which are in any case contrary to the current trend .
Fourthly , the steel industry also feels that it is very important to have a research fund based on the ECSC model for the period after the ECSC expires , in order to promote the dissemination of technological innovations .
And , last but not least , I think the Commission should work hard with the Americans to try to reach a multilateral steel agreement or MSA .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are considering today deals with measures designed to relaunch the restructuring process after the ECSC Treaty has expired in 2002 . The aim is to strengthen the competitiveness of the industry , its social policy and its relations with third countries , and to ensure the retention of certain mechanisms contained in the Treaty which is to disappear .
It should also be borne in mind that the future of the Treaty and its financial role are due to be examined under the Irish presidency , and that we are expecting a draft text from the Commission towards the beginning of September .
In addition , a discussion is currently taking place on the draft aid code for 1997-2002 , with a view to a decision being taken by the Council of Industry Ministers in November .
Mr Caudron 's excellent report will be endorsed by all our group .
It deals with recent developments in the European steel industry and considers its future as effectively as is possible at the present time .
A wider definition of steel products put forward in the resolution , such as the declassification of scrap metal as waste , and attempting to reach a bilateral compromise with the United States , with a view to a multilateral agreement , are both moves in the right direction .
Lastly , like the resolution , we too would welcome the creation of a structure to accommodate the ECSC reserves .
Clearly , however , these reserves , together with the interest accruing on them , should be used to finance Community steel research programmes and be subject to adequate controls , once the levies on the steel industry have been ended .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we too would like to congratulate Mr Caudron .
His report deserves our support , but it also requires some modification , since there are obviously two sides to the ECSC .
On the one hand , it is an example of a robust industrial policy with its own research and social arm , whose carefully regulated and focused long-term strategy has , broadly speaking , succeeded in bringing structural change to the sector .
On the other hand , it is also a prime example of an industrial model which we all know started to give us problems a long time ago .
It is highly monopolized , with cartels and a die-hard aristocracy among the workers .
It pursues an aggressive external trade policy .
These are the less favourable aspects which the Community cannot afford to allow to continue in the longer term .
So what we need to do is to carry on with the positive side of the ECSC while at the same time making it more open and less privileged .
The ECSC reserves , for example , cannot be treated as some sort of private fund for the coal and steel industries .
Raw materials and energy are more general issues , and we are going to have to discuss exactly how we want them to be used .
Mr President , although the European steel industry is relatively healthy at the present time , let us not forget the debilitating effect of the loss of nearly 600 000 jobs over the last few years .
In 20 years , jobs in the steel industry have been cut by two thirds . As a trade union official at the time of the major restructuring programme in France , I witnessed the havoc which this caused .
Whole regions were ruined , and families torn apart . But there were also fiercely determined battles , in spite of everything , to save an industry of which several generations of steelworkers were justly proud .
Today , the steel industry has been modernized . And , if we are to be honest , the increased productivity has largely been due to new technology and new production methods which , in turn , have led to massive lay-offs .
Whereas in 1986 , it took five hours to produce a ton of steel , nowadays it takes only three .
It goes without saying that the competitiveness of European steel depends to a large extent on our capacity for research and technological innovation .
New procedures have been introduced which allow for greater flexibility , both in terms of diversity of supply and production volume .
Links between producers of steel products and downstream users have been strengthened , and joint research and marketing ventures have been established .
But I wonder how much further this process can go - even though it is one that all modern industries undoubtedly require - without resulting in further massive job losses , unless it is accompanied by a reduction in working hours and by new working methods ?
Research in the steel industry will also be a campaign which it is essential for us to wage .
The expiry of the ECSC Treaty and the integration of steel research into the fifth framework programme of research and technological development present a serious problem .
We should indeed therefore be considering the creation of a structure to accommodate the ECSC reserves , the interest on which would be used to encourage technological innovation and to develop a social policy covering training and working methods .
On a more general note , Mr Caudron , whom I should like to congratulate , has stressed that when the ECSC Treaty expires , there must be no systematic abandonment of a sectoral industrial policy .
Yet this is what may well happen .
Lastly , the future of the European steel industry is linked to the development of other industrial sectors such as construction , automobiles , and so on .
As we know , these are experiencing severe problems , mainly because of restrictive policies imposed by the convergence criteria .
I am afraid that such a policy may well force us to sacrifice our Community industry , unless we are on our guard .
Mr President , I shall conclude my speech by highlighting a similar need for vigilance with regard to the United States and its anti-dumping measures .
However , I am confident that , in this respect , the Commission will protect the interests of the Community steel industry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Caudron 's interesting report has two themes .
It examines the restructuring of the Community steel industry , and outlines the course the industry must take to safeguard its future .
As emphasized in the report , the future of the steel industry already depends and will continue to depend on global competition .
Today , 320 000 people in the Union are employed in this sector .
We entirely support the guidelines set out in this report for giving the industry a lasting chance of success .
To this end , everyone , including our competitors , must abide by the following rules .
State aid must never be used as a subsidy to artificially revive uncompetitive producers .
The Union must not allow unfair trade practices , such as any kind of dumping , not least on the part of the countries of Eastern Europe .
The same applies in the case of unilateral protectionist measures taken by some non-Union countries against the latter 's products .
The most vital element in the future of the steel industry is research .
We must ensure that it is adequately financed after the expiry of the ECSC Treaty in 2002 .
Another element is innovation - hence the overwhelming importance of research .
Only on this basis will we forge a future for ourselves in the third millennium .
Mr President , it has already been pointed out today , and it is something I would like to emphasize , that the steel industry is undoubtedly a symbol of the construction of Europe .
I think any follow-up to the ECSC Treaty needs to focus on two things : technology and a proper social policy .
The problem of how to ensure that the European steel industry remains competitive in future will be difficult to resolve .
We have to realize that just producing iron and steel will not be enough , and that the survival of the entire steel industry in Europe will depend on things like integrated plant construction and the further development of iron and steel products .
Let me give you an example from my home state . More than 40 000 jobs were lost at Voest Alpine , but since privatization the firm is now back in profit and is certain to ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , like many others here , I should like to congratulate Mr Caudron on his excellent report , which draws attention to the suffering and concern of those regions and peoples that are heavily dependent on steelmaking .
They are concerned because in the year 2002 , they see the only industrial policy currently in force in the European Union coming to an end . That policy stemmed from a Treaty which was one of the models for the European Community and which has scarcely been replaced .
Hence there is a danger that it will be overwhelmed by the policy of unregulated competition governing the single market , with consequences similar to those experienced in other sectors .
And there is concern too because some workers are being discriminated against , as often happens in public-sector industries .
The Forges de Clabecq in Belgium , which is currently being subjected to an inquisition by the Commission , is a good example of such discrimination .
On this point , I would add that Mr Caudron 's report has not completely escaped the liberal influence of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , since it acknowledges the crucial importance of the codes on state aids .
Whilst we share this view , we question the indulgence that is shown towards currency drift and the laxity of fiscal dumping .
In short , we are facing a situation that will affect the future of sectors where employment levels are still high .
I therefore await with considerable impatience the Commission 's forthcoming proposals on industry , as well as on research , where there is a lack of consistency as regards the wealth of ideas and initiatives .
Mr President , thank you for your report on the European steel industry , Mr Caudron .
This is an industry which has undergone a tough restructuring process and suffered the loss of half a million jobs over the last twenty years .
In this restructuring process , the amount of state aid received has been unequal , and this is something which should also be borne in mind for the future .
By way of example , the steel industries of some Member States have closed down up to 30 % of production capacity , whilst receiving less state aid than the industries of other Member States , some of which - curiously - are now protesting vehemently against state aid .
This effort has had , and is continuing to have , a considerable social cost .
The most recent restructuring operations should be carried out in the best possible social conditions , using the available financial resources and the ECSC reserves to finance not only R & D programmes , but also social measures , such as early retirement schemes and compensation for redundancy .
Let us not deceive ourselves with the euphemism ' funding for social research ' , which accounts for no more than 1 % of overall research in this sector .
It is not social research which needs funding , but the necessary social measures connected with the large-scale reductions in production capacity .
State aid regimes must be rigorously applied , but no more rigorously than they are for productive sectors which are competing with the steel industry .
Hence the Community framework for R & D support must be equally valid for the steel sector .
We cannot penalize this sector in relation to the others .
One final comment , Mr President : imports from third countries - especially those from the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , which frequently take place in conditions of dumping , and above all those which enter the Union via countries which are not subject to quotas - must be controlled .
The controls must be strict , since otherwise Europe 's steel industry will be harmed . And , lest anyone should think that permissiveness with regard to dumping by third countries is somehow connected to internal competition in the Community steel industry , I would add that the steel sectors of some Member States will be harmed more than those of others .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , who has drawn up a very complete report which addresses all the scientific and social aspects of competition policy in this area .
I am sure that he will forgive me , however , for raising three objections to his excellent report .
We would hope to see these three objections resolved when it comes to the vote , although I appreciate that the rapporteur himself is willing to accept some of these points .
I also welcome the fact that Mr Bangemann is present , since I should like to put a question to him .
These painful restructuring operations have been carried out throughout the length and breadth of the European Union .
Hundreds of thousands of jobs have been lost , not only in northern , but also in southern Europe .
The countries of northern Europe began the restructuring process before those in the south , because the former joined the European Community and benefited from the ECSC approach before the latter did so . The latecomers began their restructuring process in the 1970s , without the help of the Community aid provided through the ECSC .
Consequently , I do not think that anyone is lagging behind .
Everyone has done their duty and made the painful cut-backs , which have also meant reductions in capacity : from the United Kingdom to the new German Lnder , and from north to south .
And all with the help of state aid - and massive state aid , as Mr Imaz pointed out .
Let us therefore stop beating about the bush and talk about state aid .
The ECSC Treaty is expiring , with all its advantages and disadvantages . We fail to understand , however , why one industrial sector will be penalized in relation to the others .
Consequently , the code on state aid must be brought into line with the general system of the industry 's competitors .
Finally , Mr President , let us not forget that the adjustments and the need for social measures will continue everywhere .
Mr President , as in many other cases here in Parliament , we are in a situation today where we are good at identifying areas where there are problems , but may well disagree strongly on how to solve them .
Several speakers have said how the steel industry has been through a major upheaval .
The decision taken by the Council in 1993 on structural change , reorganization and the adjustment of capacity was then backed by a number of initiatives from the Commission .
We often judge matters on the basis of our own home areas .
Earlier today , I spoke on the trans-European networks .
I feel like saying the same things again now .
We are in a situation where we need to see ourselves in relation to worldwide , not just internal competition .
We have often used a good deal of energy discussing how we are applying state aids within the Union , how we may be cheating one another , rather than using our efforts to see how we can make some impact on the world market , so that we can cope with competition in the future .
Many good things have been said about the future .
I would stress that research and product development are vital , as I see it .
We talk about adjusting to the market ; we could also talk about expanding the market .
All in all , international trade agreements are crucial for us .
One point which I would highlight in Mr Caudron 's excellent report is the situation after 2002 .
There is a need for strict controls on what takes place internally , so that we can pursue a common policy and not devote our energies to investigating whether we are cheating one another .
The proposals from the committee are good ones , but the Commission should perhaps not ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Mr Caudron has given us a very accurate description of the current situation and has made a number of very useful proposals on how to meet the challenges of the next few years .
We are fortunate in being able to hold this discussion at a time when the situation in the steel industry has , generally speaking , stabilized , though it is quite true that there have been job losses in the steel industry , just as in other primary industries which are having to face up to both technological change and increasingly strong competition .
However , the steps taken by the Commission and the steel industry itself in recent years have at least brought us to a point where prices are fairly reasonable and the jobs that remain are fairly secure , even though the modernization process is , of course , still ongoing .
Our main achievement , and one which should not be underestimated , has been privatization , which , particularly in those Member States where the industry was previously almost entirely nationalized , has meant that every firm can now think and work for itself in order to remain competitive .
This is absolutely crucial , because competition is set to become increasingly globalized .
We are going to have to compete more with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , and this is why it is vital that we should not go back to needing state aid to compensate for poor competitiveness .
I have to tell Mr Desama that his comments this evening are hardly helpful to either Clabecq or the steel industry in general , and nor is that the way to solve the problem .
We have not begun an inquisition there , but we have to do what the law requires .
If we want to protect jobs in the steel industry , we have to ensure that competition is not distorted by the payment of illegal state aid .
Jobs throughout the entire steel industry are at stake , so no one should make wild claims that the Commission is conducting an inquisition .
The expression really is one which I refute .
We are simply doing our duty , and if you do not believe me , the people from Clabecq have asked Mr Gandois to produce a report on how to make the company competitive again , and there is only one way of doing this , which is to invest in modernization .
If it does invest in modernization , then Clabecq can be expected to recover its competitive position .
But you have to ask , of course , whether anyone is likely to do this if they cannot be sure of ending up with a viable company ?
This is the six million dollar question .
We cannot simply carry on as before , when aid was paid out and healthy firms went to the wall because unhealthy firms put up unfair competition .
I would ask you to try and be a little more realistic before you make such statements , Mr Desama .
The same applies to the claims that the ECSC Treaty is the only possible policy for the industry .
I am very sorry to have to say it , but this is totally wrong .
As an industrial policy , it is terribly outdated .
It is an interventionist policy based on quotas , price controls , controls on trade flows and so on , and when we applied it in earlier steel crises , it never solved anything .
Only when we applied the modern industrial policy which the Commission has been successfully promoting for a number of years were we able to find reasonable solutions , and we are now able to adopt a more relaxed approach when new problems arise .
I cannot give you any further details of the transition from the ECSC Treaty to the general rules .
It is absolutely certain that we will not be extending the Treaty , though we shall carry over some of the mechanisms which fit in with our modern industrial policy .
We have yet to decide what to do with the reserves , in other words the money raised by the industry .
The Member States seem to be quite keen to pocket this money , but they are forgetting that it has come from the industry itself .
We should try to find a solution which will enable at least some , if not all , of the money to be ploughed back into the steel industry , such as for modernization or research .
The Member States have other ideas here , but I hope that with Parliament 's support we can find a sensible solution .
I also hope we can resolve our problem with the USA .
We are , of course , all in favour of a multilateral agreement as the only way to solve such trade disputes , and we still have our sights on this once the elections in the USA are over .
We have entered a new phase in the restructuring process and are more or less back to normal , with an industry that is once again competitive and now only needs to maintain its position .
We do not need a completely new set of rules , we simply have to ensure that we remain competitive in the years to come .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Trans-European telecommunications networks
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0222 / 96 ) from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position established by the Council ( C40225 / 96-95 / 0124 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision on a series of guidelines for trans-European telecommunications networks ( rapporteur : Mr Hoppenstedt ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I once again have the good fortune , as I had at the last plenary , to be speaking to you shortly before midnight .
I must say I feel really sorry for those who cannot be with us , and who are sitting out on those hard chairs in bar gardens drinking chilled beer and wine .
We are really much better off here .
But we are not here to talk about that , we are here to talk about the trans-European telecommunications networks .
We are here to deliver our opinion at second reading and to look at the common position and the amendments which the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has unanimously adopted .
For those who are not familiar with the subject , I would point out once again that in a single market without frontiers , there has to be free movement of goods , people , capital and services .
The Community measures already adopted and others still in the pipeline will require considerable amounts of information to be exchanged between individuals , economic operators and public administrations , and work is already being done on this .
The trans-European telecommunications networks are the way to ensure that this exchange of information takes place .
Article 129d of the EC Treaty lays down guidelines covering the objectives , priorities and broad lines of measures envisaged in the sphere of trans-European networks .
These guidelines provide for projects of common interest .
And the trans-European telecommunications networks cover the three levels that are involved : applications , basic services and basic networks .
The common position supports the linking of networks within the telecommunications infrastructure and the development of interoperable services and applications and access to them , in order to facilitate the transition to the information society , improve industrial competitiveness and consolidate the Community 's economic and social cohesion .
One way to achieve these objectives is to select projects of common interest , and it is a priority in our amendments - and one which we insist on keeping - that an order of precedence should be established .
Other priorities include educating the public about the advantages of using the trans-European networks and transEuropean telecommunications services , promoting joint initiatives to organize projects on trans-European telecommunications networks , providing funding for applications , particularly those of common interest , promoting partnerships in the public and private sectors , and promoting the supply and use of services and applications among SMEs .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has identified Articles 3 , 6 and 7 as being in particular need of amendment .
What we really want to see is a trans-European telecommunications network that will guarantee the development of the information society .
But our amendments and list of priorities are also designed to take special account of the man in the street and his concerns , such as common interfaces or the weaknesses of the system .
I think it is important that we should have not just information highways in future , but also information walkways and information pedestrian areas .
We also feel that transfrontier , inter-regional initiatives are particularly important , as is linking up with telecommunications networks in the Mediterranean basin , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , the CIS and Latin America .
All of these are important aspects which we underline in our amendments .
I feel it is absolutely vital that the Council should accept our opinion and the decisions we reach at second reading without delay , because we feel that there is huge employment potential just waiting to be exploited in the steel industry and in information technologies .
There would not be any additional jobs , but there would be new ones , and I think we need to do everything we can to take advantage of this .
It is not enough simply to produce white papers and take weighty decisions about securing existing jobs or creating new ones . We really need structures which are specifically able to provide support for employment .
We must put an end once and for all to this endless talking and get down to work and do something .
I think the approach the Commission has proposed in the common position before us provides some extremely good opportunities .
The information society will develop on its own anyway , but if we fail to act as I have suggested , the man in the street is probably going to be left behind , and this is something we must not allow to happen .
I therefore commend the proposals of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy to the House , and I am confident that they will be adopted more or less unanimously .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to remind you that the proposal before us , the legal basis for which is Title XII of the Treaty , requires the Union to establish guidelines , objectives , priorities and broad lines of measures envisaged to help implement projects connected with the trans-European telecommunications networks .
In particular , the aim is to compile a list of sectors in which calls for tenders will be issued with a view to eliciting projects , some of which will be designated as being of ' common interest ' and hence eligible for financial support from the Community .
In February of this year , Parliament delivered its opinion at first reading with a number of amendments , some of which were not accepted by the Council .
Mr Hoppenstedt 's report , which we are discussing today , includes a good many amendments that our group will be unable to approve .
I would draw particular attention to the problems of comitology and the division of responsibilities between Parliament , the Council and the Commission , the definition of suitable projects , the joint adoption of the work programme with Parliament , and the transformation of the management committee into a mere advisory committee .
As regards the selection of projects , Parliament 's proposed amendments would mean that decisions would be made jointly by the Council and Parliament .
We cannot , however , agree to this .
Likewise , we are also against the compulsory transnational element in the identification of projects , firstly because it is not a Treaty obligation and , secondly , because we feel that projects listed under the heading ' information superhighways ' in the call for tenders could not be developed on a European basis .
Lastly , in addition to the points I have just mentioned , no account has been taken of the principle of subsidiarity , nor of the new requirements concerning selection priorities and deadlines for implementing projects .
Moreover , new priorities have been included which do not seem to us to have been legitimized by any earlier decision .
Our group therefore reserves the right to vote as it thinks fit tomorrow with regard to certain amendments .
Mr President , the amount of information in society is increasing to an inconceivable level .
Having the right information or knowing how to obtain information is an important skill for most people who will work in the labour market of the future .
Two essential tasks stand out if the information society is to develop positively .
The first concerns democracy and the right of all to participate in and benefit from the opportunities offered by the information society .
The second is a question of exploiting technology in the right way and coordinating networks to make the best possible use of their operation , that is to say putting the needs of users , consumers , first .
The present report is primarily concerned with the latter .
It is after all important that as representatives of the public we always take into account aspects such as democracy , and fair and equal conditions , when we are discussing technical issues too .
Effective coordination of telecommunications networks facilitates the transition to the information society .
Coordination of networks is also important for the implementation of various Community programmes concerning research and technological development and support for small and medium-sized businesses , which include programmes particularly concerned with information , such as INFO 2000 and MEDIA II .
Allow me to mention some other aspects which are important in this connection .
Applications should make use of local languages .
They should also take into account the special needs of sections of the population who will perhaps not initially use systems .
These may include women , uneducated people , people in sparsely populated areas or disabled people .
Steps must be taken to ensure that these groups have the same access to and opportunities to use the financial and technical networks and systems .
As regards the construction of masts and design of telephones and other equipment , it is also important that use is made of the best possible environmental technology for recovery and recycling and to ensure that damage is not caused by the use of systems .
Attention should also be devoted to the social consequences and applications and to the use of telecommunications technology and networks .
The important areas of application for telecommunications in the future include education ( e.g. distance learning ) , generally improved communications in both the public and the private sphere , the use of smart-cards of various kinds , electronic means of payment , electronic mail and video services .
In the somewhat longer term I can also see that undreamt of possibilities will emerge for the use of trans-European telecommunications networks for general and commercial services and the simplification of routine procedures in such sectors as transport , procurement , purchasing , invoicing and the postal , banking and insurance industries , which will be to the benefit of us all .
The opportunities for improved telecommunications involving sound and pictures will also facilitate decentralisation , with the spread of employment to new regions .
Properly used , Mr President , this could yield benefits to society through a reduction in environmental damage .
Finally , I should like to express my satisfaction at the unanimity of the committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , the second reading of this common position , prepared by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , raises the question of comitology , requiring that the European Parliament should have a greater role and more say in decision-making when it comes to selecting projects for the trans-European telecommunications networks .
How could I fail to agree , in principle , to making the European institutions more democratic ?
As regards the telematic networks , however , let me stress the need for rapid and flexible decision-making procedures ; it is precisely because of this need that I find Amendments Nos 8 , 9 , 10 and 11 inappropriate , even though the underlying principle is fair .
We are faced with a phenomenon - the information society - which is growing and developing continuously .
I would refer to just three points from a speech by Mr Hundt , President of the Federal Communication Commission , which I heard as a member of the European Union / United States parliamentary delegation : over the past three years , the FCC has done nothing less than deregulate the US market in telecom services , causing it to grow exponentially ; the FCC has engaged in the somewhat novel policy of auctioning off the spectrum , earning the sum of USD 20 billion , effortlessly and without any loss to the taxpayer ; and USD 1 bn , or 5 % of the proceeds , is to be invested in a project to connect all secondary schools in the United States to the Internet .
This pragmatic approach is well suited to a sector undergoing continuous change , in which technological progress is unstoppable and investment cycles often very short .
Even though , according to some , the American example should not necessarily be followed - if it were , we would have to concern ourselves more with installing the infrastructure and less with applications - I am nonetheless inclined to believe that the success of the Internet is based to a large extent on the investment by the Department of Defense in the DARPA network , just as - by analogy - the Global Positioning System , or GPS , is an offshoot of the ' Star Wars ' programme , the SDI .
In conclusion , misgivings are justified in one respect : by dwelling on the defence of linguistic pluralism in Europe , or on procedures for the selection of our preferred applications , we are wasting valuable time in the race for new opportunities : I therefore hope that the views of Parliament and the Commission will soon be reconciled and , at the same time , that measures to promote the information society will be introduced without delay .

Mr President , Mr Hoppenstedt and all the other speakers are well aware that these are more or less the same amendments that Parliament proposed at first reading , which were rejected by the Council and have now been tabled again .
They basically concern the question of Parliament 's involvement , and this is really what today 's debate is all about .
I can understand Parliament 's position , but I can tell you here and now that the Council will not accept it , and you will then be faced with the problem of deciding in the conciliation procedure whether you are prepared to retreat at least partly from your position , or whether you intend to delay this entire programme , which is rightly regarded as being of vital importance .
I am sorry to say that this is the situation in which Parliament finds itself .
We will help you as much as we can , but I do not think you will be able to persuade the Council to accept everything you decide tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Pressure equipment
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0217 / 96 ) from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position established by the Council ( C40226 / 96-00 / 0462 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States concerning pressure equipment ( rapporteur : Mr Meier ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the certification and testing procedures for pressure equipment in the Member States still vary , so that gas cylinders , for example , cannot yet be transported and used throughout the Community .
However , the internal market is an area without frontiers , and free trade should not be restricted by such differences .
Harmonization eliminates restrictions , and that is what this directive is designed to achieve .
It is , of course , not yet complete , and covers only equipment with a pressure of over 0.5 bars .
Simple pressure vessels are covered by Directive 87 / 104 .
The transport of dangerous goods is currently regulated by international agreements , and military equipment , equipment for use in nuclear plants , oil pipelines and underground oil and gas storage vessels are also excluded from the scope of the directive .

This does not mean , however , that the dangers associated with these sectors have not been recognized : on the contrary , they call for especially detailed regulations and test procedures , and were only excluded from this report because of their special requirements .
The current legal provisions therefore still do not cover certain areas , but this new directive is intended to improve conditions on the internal market without reducing the existing safety standards in the Member States .
The basic requirements regarding safety , health protection and hygiene for human beings and safety for animals also need to be given strong consideration .
The pressure equipment sector in Europe always has been and will continue to be a major market , ensuring jobs and , with its stringent safety standards , successfully matching up to competition on the world market .
This report deals with the following points , on which we have also tabled amendments .
We need to examine how effective this directive will be in practice , and we should also consider whether Directive 87 / 404 on simple pressure vessels could not be incorporated at some later date .
We should look at the areas currently excluded to see whether they need to be regulated at Union level .
It would be advisable to include technical experts in the Commission 's standing committee .
We lay particular emphasis on the safety aspects , which are the main concern of many European standards organizations , consumers and users and those working with pressure equipment .
Safety must be guaranteed by testing at official centres , recognized independent test centres and operators ' test centres .
We also consider the advantages of CE marking .
In order to highlight the safety element - and no one can actually be against safety - I would also recommend the adoption of Amendments Nos 10 and 12 .
Equivalent overall safety standards should also apply to new materials to which harmonized standards cannot be applied .
I would point out that we have specifically proposed that there should be cooperation between the Member States and the relevant authorities here , because we feel this is extremely important .
Regarding the last amendment concerning the diagram , I would point out that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy failed to reach a compromise on this , and it should therefore not be adopted so as to maintain the overall compromise in the committee .
I therefore commend this report to the House for its approval , together with the comments I made at the start about the need for further development and the exclusion of certain specific types of pressure equipment until further directives appear necessary , .
Thank you for your attention at this late hour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this directive on pressure equipment is intended to harmonize the national regulations in this field which have been in force up to now .
The very scope of the directive - from fire extinguishers , pressure vessels and valves to entire chemical plants - indicates the wide range of subjects to be covered .
It is in our economic interests to have a harmonized system of European rules providing a high degree of safety , and that is what this common position gives us .
The directive covers only products which present a high potential risk of danger , and I think this is the only sensible approach here .
I would point out that any alteration to the directive could jeopardize the compromise which it has taken two and a half years of hard bargaining to reach , and I therefore feel it is vital that we should exercise some restraint when it comes to proposing amendments .
At the same time , I think we have to take another look at Annex I , section 7 , which is simply a list of technical numerical values .
The PPE Group feels that this departs from the agreed line , which was that annexes containing only technical figures should be avoided in this kind of directive .
We therefore intend to ask for a separate vote on this tomorrow , in order to ensure that the directive can at least be discussed again through the conciliation procedure .
I hope that the PSE Group will be able to support this move , so that we can at least go to conciliation .
One further point in the directive which I feel I should mention is the aim of giving manufacturers more responsibility in risk evaluation , which I know the technical monitoring institutes are not happy about .
We feel , however , that it should be one of the manufacturers ' responsibilities to identify any risks associated with the manufacturing of equipment and to take these risks into account in the design and assembly processes .
We therefore feel that this directive both increases responsibility and helps towards deregulation , which is something that the PPE Group welcomes .

Mr President , I should like to offer Mr Meier my sincere thanks for his report on what is a most difficult and complicated subject , which the Council has also taken a long time to deal with .
I looked into this and discovered that the Commission took its first decision on the matter in mid1993 .
Not that I am blaming the Council , but it shows just how complicated the subject is , particularly when you consider the modern procedures we wish to use to guarantee safety .
That is , after all , the aim of the directive : to identify procedures which ensure a high degree of safety , while at the same time avoiding imposing an unnecessary burden of bureaucracy on the industry concerned .
Mr Konrad did indeed refer to one of these conflicts of interests .
Some of the amendments improve and clarify the text .
This applies to Amendments Nos 1 to 7 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 14 and 15 , which we therefore accept .
We cannot accept the remaining amendments , Nos 8 , 10 , 13 and 17 .
Amendment No 8 calls for the product inspection in the higher categories to be carried out in all cases by an independent third party .
This conflicts with other provisions in the directive and with the Council decision on the conformity assessment procedure , which provides for the use of quality assurance systems as an alternative to such procedures .
This decision has been successfully applied for some time , and we do not wish to depart from it .
Amendment No 10 calls for the promotion of the application of harmonized standards .
Since this is already guaranteed in principle by the new system , there is no need for the additional special report required by this amendment , which we feel would not improve safety , but simply add to the bureaucratic burden .

I hope that we can now make faster progress than before , because as Mr Meier and Mr Konrad rightly pointed out , this is a most important directive which affects a large section of the internal market and should have been introduced years ago .
Now we have it within our grasp .
I have made an effort , for the sake of both the House and , in particular , the interpreters , not to let my speech go on after midnight .
I have indeed left the President a minute to spare so that he can close the proceedings .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Tribute
Ladies and gentlemen , on 23 June 1996 Andreas Papandreou died .
Five months previously , his chronic illness had forced him to resign as Prime Minister of Greece in the middle of his third term of office .
For ten years he had set his seal on Greek policy as Prime Minister and during that time had established his country 's place in the European Union .
He was not an easy partner to deal with - not even for his friends - but there again he was not the Prime Minister of an easy country either .
The positions he adopted did not always meet with approval .
That has to do with his country 's difficult neighbours and with a history full of disruptions and antitheses .
But as President of the European Council he was also able to achieve integration at crucial moments , thereby helping the Community to make vital progress : in 1988 , when the Council adopted the financial package that was needed to achieve the aim of the Single European Act , and in 1994 , when the last remaining institutional questions were resolved to pave the way for the accession of Austria , Finland and Sweden to the European Union .
Andreas Papandreou heightened our awareness of the significance of Greece and of the Mediterranean region , with its great strategic importance to Europe .
Andreas Papandreou played a vital part in restoring freedom and democracy in Greece after the dark years of military rule .
He was one of the fathers of democratic Greece , who led it into the community and solidarity of the European democracies and irreversibly embedded it there .
Andreas Papandreou had a gift that few people possess , namely the ability to captivate others through his personality , his life and his work .
For Greece and its people he was greater than the sum of his numerous public offices and political achievements .
The overwhelming grief of the many thousands of people who paid their last respects to him on the day of his funeral reflected the esteem in which he was held .
We sense the loss felt by his country at his death .
Our sympathy goes out to his family , his party and his people .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence . )
You have risen to honour the memory of Andreas Papandreou .
I thank you .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I am asking for the floor pursuant to Rule 108 in order to make a personal statement .
At the end of yesterday evening 's debate on the transEuropean networks there occurred what I must say was a deplorable incident .
I had called into question - in terms which I freely admit were colourful - the behaviour of the Commission during the last two weeks of this affair , both as regards its docility in dealing with the Council and as regards its duplicity in dealing with Parliament .
In his reply , Commissioner Kinnock , instead of arguing his case on the facts , saw fit to make me the target of a volley of insults which even his Welsh origins cannot fully excuse .
Having described me as ' ponderous and immature ' , he went on to describe my intervention as ' empty ' .
As for being ponderous , ladies and gentlemen , I might be inclined to overlook the remark , since my weight makes it impossible for me to deny the Commissioner 's charge .
As for being immature , I might again take a forgiving view , because the description comes from a man who for his part clearly suffers from something of an excess of maturity .
As for the last point , I think that what Mr Kinnock can charge me with is not having made an empty intervention , as he said , but an excessively dense intervention , because I explained , following on from my colleague Mr Dell 'Alba , that between the letter of 1 July sent by Mr Kinnock to President Cornelissen and his subsequent letter of 12 July to Mr Simpson , the Commission had in fact performed a perfect U turn , since the first letter explained that the Essen list could not be modified without codecision and the second demonstrated that it had been .
I do not want to blow this incident up out of proportion , but since President Santer is with us today I suggest , Mr President , that you ask him whether he finds it normal that every time a member of the Commission is caught in flagrante delicto contradicting himself , he prefers to make a personal attack on the honourable Member who points out his error rather than offering a reasoned answer .
Mr Bourlanges , that was a personal statement under Rule 108 .
We shall , of course , communicate its content to the Commissioner ; that goes without saying .
Besides , let me say that this entire House consists only of mature persons !
( Laughter , applause )
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Programme of the Irish presidency
The next item is the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the programme of the Irish presidency .
It gives me great pleasure to welcome Mr Spring , Tnaiste and President-in-Office , to make a statement on the Irish presidency .
The Irish presidency faces formidable tasks , but it has been well prepared .
We , in the European Parliament , are looking forward to active cooperation with you and your colleagues throughout the next six months .
But , allow me to add , we in the European Parliament are deeply aware of your preoccupation with the concerns of all the Irish people at the latest developments in Northern Ireland .
The peace process , which was initiated two years ago , thanks to the courage and resolution of the Irish and British Governments and of leaders of the community in Northern Ireland , has suffered severe setbacks in the last few weeks .
We , in this House , have already placed on record our abhorrence at the recent resumption of terrorist activity by the IRA and we do so today once more .
In the last few days rioting and violence have returned to the streets of Northern Ireland ; sectarian confrontation has jeopardized the onward march of peace .
We , in this Parliament , remain steadfast in our support for you and all those like you in your efforts for peace and reconciliation .
We strongly urge all the democratic forces , the two governments and community leaders , to redouble their efforts and give a new signal of hope for the peace process through the all-party talks .
Last week two of our Member States , France and Britain , welcomed Nelson Mandela on a state visit .
The huge public outpouring of affection and respect for the South African President was , of course , to salute his role as an architect of a new democratic and free country , but it was also recognition of the reconciliation that he has brought to his country .
After years of persecution and violence and discrimination he preaches peace and friendship and forgiveness .
He does not - he cannot - forget the past but he is building for the future .
It is the most powerful message of reconciliation and hope ; it is a message that we in Europe must not ignore ; it is a message that the whole community in Northern Ireland must hear .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before I begin my statement on Ireland 's presidency of the Council , I should like to thank you for your words of support in relation to Northern Ireland .
This is a matter of the utmost concern to me not only as Foreign Minister of Ireland but also as Presidentin-Office of the Council in which capacity I address you today .
As Members are aware , events have taken place over the last ten days which have led to serious instability in Northern Ireland and have placed in peril the substantial achievements of the peace process over the last two years .
The origins of the recent disturbances are deeply rooted in the fundamental divisions which exist within Northern Ireland and which must be addressed by achieving a new beginning for relationships within Northern Ireland , within the island of Ireland and between the peoples of Britain and Ireland and by agreeing new institutions and structures to take account of the totality of relationships .
Nothing can excuse the widespread violence and intimidation of the last ten days .
Violence may be an outlet for frustration but it can only worsen an already bad situation and will not solve the problems which lie at its root .
Solutions will be found exclusively through dialogue , negotiation and compromise .
It is essential that the supremacy of politics over street violence should be quickly re-asserted , the rule of law must be seen to prevail and to be effectively policed in an impartial manner .
A solution must be found to the issue of contentious parades which serve to provoke the recent unrest .
The Irish and British Governments have agreed to hold a special meeting of the Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference tomorrow at which recent events and the parades issue , including the review announced by the British Government , will be discussed .
The two governments will continue their joint efforts to bring about a comprehensive political settlement based on a lasting peace and to build on the foundations of the Anglo-Irish Agreement , the Joint Declaration and the framework document .
The multi-party negotiations launched by the two governments on 10 June offer an unprecedented opportunity to achieve such an agreement .
The Council urges the parties to the negotiations to negotiate in good faith on the basis of exclusively peaceful means and the rejection of violence .
It calls on all those involved to open their minds to the building of new relationships based on equality of treatment , parity of esteem and the accommodation of the rights and traditions of all .
May I conclude these brief remarks by expressing the hope that the inspiration which sustained the founding fathers of the European Union , their determination to build peace in diversity and to banish for ever the violent divisions of the past may also serve to inspire the peoples of Northern Ireland and the British and Irish Governments in the challenges which now confront us .
The Irish presidency of the Council of Ministers of the European Union began on 1 July .
However , no presidency has really begun until its programme of priorities has been launched before the European Parliament .
I come here today to launch the priorities of the Irish presidency .
And I come here today to commend these priorities to you , which I know you share .
The Irish presidency takes place at a time when the European Union faces exceptional challenges .
We must translate growth into jobs .
We must tackle the challenges of globalisation and ensure we are prepared for these challenges .
We must address the concerns of citizens as to their personal security .
We must manage the move to Economic and Monetary Union .
We must prepare for enlargement .
We must advance the work of the Intergovernmental Conference .
And , most fundamentally , we must maintain and reinforce the enormous achievement that the European Union represents .
The European Parliament will have a significant role to play in the task of ensuring that the Union can meet the challenges it faces over the next decade and more .
In our programme of priorities for the next six months we emphasise the concerns of citizens .
As politicians elected by the people you know what these concerns are .
You know that our constituents are entitled to secure employment .
You know that our constituents are entitled to safer streets .
You know that our constituents are entitled to sound management of their money .
And most fundamentally , you know that our voters want a peaceful Europe .
You know what our people want and are entitled to .
And on the most fundamental question the European Union has delivered .
Europe is at peace .
It has been at peace for 50 years now .
As I look around this room from left to right I know that it is inconceivable that Europe should ever be at war with itself again .
The European Union , therefore , passes the first and basic test .
It has set itself additional goals .
The Single Market has reinforced the logic of Economic and Monetary Union .
1 January 1999 has been confirmed as the start of the third stage of EMU .
The benefit of currency stability has been seen in low interest rates .
The message that sound money has a huge impact on creating a sound economy is accepted .
What we must do now is translate these benefits into secure jobs and put more resources into creating safer streets .
The Irish presidency will place great emphasis on employment .
Employment is in the first place a matter for national action .
However , acting together we can achieve a significant reinforcement of national efforts .
This is especially the case in an increasingly global economy , as the conclusions of the G-7 Summit attest .
The European Union provides an ever wider field where Member States can cooperate , coordinate their efforts and learn from each other 's experience .
Job creation is the overriding challenge for all of our Governments .
It is the single greatest concern of our electors , as you will be well aware .
The Commission 's White Paper on Growth , Competitiveness and Employment sets the guidelines .
Successive European Council meetings at Essen , Cannes , Madrid and Florence have provided the framework .
We will prepare the second joint report on employment for the Dublin European Council in December .
We will emphasise , in particular , the needs of the excluded : of young people , the long-term unemployed and unemployed women .
The Irish presidency will also develop the ideas in the Pact of Confidence on Employment initiated by President Santer .
We will draw on our own national experience in the local employment area .
We want to see the adoption of the multi-annual programme for small and medium-sized enterprises .
We will actively promote competitiveness in industry and promote adaptation to the information society .
Organised crime is the scourge of modern societies .
The drug trade is one of its worst manifestations .
This was brought home to us in Ireland very recently with the shooting dead of a brave journalist who fearlessly investigated criminal wrongdoing .
Veronica Guerin 's murder is a testimony to the power of words and truth .
She uncovered evil .
Evil people murdered her .
The expressions of grief in Ireland and beyond at her murder bring home the need to pursue with ever greater vigour the evil people who perpetrate these deeds .
Justice and home affairs issues remain largely within the national competence of Member States .
Nevertheless we need to ensure that the Union adds to the efforts taken at national level to counter crime and especially the trade in drugs .
We must ensure that the four freedoms of the Single Market are not abused by criminal elements and that they do not become freedoms from law .
We must ensure that the instruments available to us nationally , internationally and at the level of the European Union are used and coordinated to the full .
The Irish presidency will focus on a number of activities over the next six months .
For example , we want to see the Europol Convention completed , the Extradition Convention signed ; we want more cooperation between national forensic laboratories ; more cooperation in the external borders area ; we want serious drug trafficking offences to carry penalties within the highest range available in each Member State ; we want greater cooperation between police and customs services and we want enhanced cooperation between customs services and the private sector .
We have every confidence that the European Parliament will play its part also in a determined European level response to the drug problem .
In particular , I hope it will expedite its consideration of the Community Programme on Drug Dependence so that it can come into effect quickly .
On other justice and home affairs issues the Irish presidency will seek to improve collaboration between the Member States in such areas as policing , customs , immigration , asylum policy and judicial cooperation .
In response , in particular , to the concerns expressed by the European Parliament , the presidency will build on the conclusions and recommendations of the Conference on Trafficking in Women held in Vienna in June 1996 .
We will continue work on the Action Programme on Immigration and Asylum .
And in both the drugs and the other justice and home affairs areas we will look closely at the funding arrangements available .
Both drugs and employment issues are of great and immediate concern to everyone in Europe .
But the European Union is also playing its part in ensuring an equitable , tolerant and inclusive society , a society that cherishes its weakest members including people with disabilities .
It has responsibilities in the areas of public health , social affairs and cultural cooperation .
It also has responsibilities in the education , youth and research sectors .
We will seek progress in all of these .
The Union 's role in the environment policy is effective and worthwhile .
My own country has benefited substantially from the development of the Union 's activities in this area .
Standards have been raised .
Awareness has grown .
Citizens have a better grasp of their rights and obligations .
The environment is therefore an area of particular concern to our presidency .
Economic and Monetary Union is on course .
The Irish presidency will aim to show further substantive progress by the end of its term .
The maintenance of stability in the Third Stage and the exchange rate relationship between the Euro and the other EU currencies will be the main focus of attention .
We aim to complete the technical preparatory work on the legal framework of the Euro before the end of 1996 .
And the Dublin European Council will reconfirm 1 January , 1999 as the beginning of the Third Stage of EMU .
The Single Market is one of the great success stories of the European Union .
The White Paper programme has been practically finalised .
But the Single Market is not complete .
To consolidate growth and employment we must remove the remaining areas of divergence in our economies .
The Santer Pact of Confidence on Employment has emphasised the need for internal market consolidation to create jobs .
To this end the Irish presidency will seek to expedite the adoption of the statute for a European Company and the legal framework for biotechnological inventions .
We will also advance work on the internal market in electricity and in the gas and telecommunications sectors .
The Union must ensure strict implementation of the policies of the Union to ensure fair competition by preventing the granting of illegal state aid and preventing monopolies from developing .
Work arising from the Commission 's report on the effectiveness of the Internal Market will be pursued actively as will the Citizens First Initiative .
The Common Agricultural Policy remains a keystone of the Union and we have a considerable agenda to pursue here .
The restoration of confidence in the beef sector will be a major focus of attention during our presidency .
My country exports 85 % of its beef production .
Consequently we realise the importance of the establishment at Florence of a route map for the resolution of the BSE crisis .
The successful management of this issue will require cooperation and solidarity from all Member States .
We will seek to ensure that the issue is dealt with according to scientific criteria outside the political realm .
Since the last Irish presidency in 1990 , the context in which the European Union operates has changed dramatically .
The Union has enlarged to fifteen Member States .
It has received applications for membership from an additional twelve States .
The external challenges and responsibilities which the Union has had to address have also become more complex and demanding .
The Union has sought to respond primarily by engaging in building relationships of partnership and mutual respect with its neighbours in Europe and other regions .
The establishment of a Common Foreign and Security Policy by the Treaty on European Union represented a significant step forward in equipping the Union with the capacity to pursue these objectives more effectively .
While the tasks which Ireland now inherits as presidency in the external relations area have become more daunting , we draw inspiration from the work carried out by preceding presidencies and by the role played by the European Parliament .
It is our aim as presidency to foster the development of a Europe that is open to the world and actively contributing to international peace , security and solidarity .
Advancing the CFSP 's objectives in relation to the promotion of democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights will be important in this regard .
One of our major priorities is to pursue the Union 's active support for the full implementation of the peace initiatives in former Yugoslavia and to contribute to efforts to prevent a return to the tragic circumstances which have shattered that region in recent years .
Crucial issues will include the holding of free and fair elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina under OSCE auspices , economic reconstruction , creating conditions for the return of refugees and ensuring full respect for human and minority rights .
We will seek to develop political dialogue with partners in the security area .
We will also pursue the continuing and effective development of EU-WEU cooperation on the basis of the Treaty on European Union .
At its summit in Lisbon in December , we will work to strengthen the role of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe as a pan-European security forum .
Fundamental to our system of global security is a reformed and financially secure United Nations system .
Nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament , reinforcing prohibitions on chemical and biological weapons and highlighting conventional arms issues will remain areas of priority for the Union during our presidency .
To the maximum extent possible , we will also seek to develop the international momentum in support of the elimination of anti-personnel landmines .
In the light of the Union 's support for the reform process , we will give priority to developing further the Union 's relations with Russia and to assisting in its political and economic transformation .
The situation in Chechnya will continue to be monitored closely .
We will also devote attention to the Ukraine , given its pivotal position in the region .
We will give high priority to continuing the EU 's efforts in support of the Middle East Peace Process , in close cooperation with the co-sponsors of the process .
The EU 's role in this area should be commensurate with the scale of the economic resources which the Union is committing in support of the peace process .
We will also seek to advance the Euro-Mediterranean partnership which offers opportunities for wide-ranging dialogue and cooperation with countries of the Mediterranean region .
Transatlantic relations are of fundamental importance to both the EU and US and for peace and prosperity worldwide .
Consequently , we will attach particular importance to the effective implementation of the EU-US Agenda and Action Plan .
We will seek to ensure enhanced cooperation on a range of foreign policy issues .
The multilateral trading system is of vital importance to all of us .
We will work closely with the US to strengthen the system - especially in the context of the First WTO Ministerial Conference .
And we will cooperate with the US on a range of other areas including the fight against crime .
We will work to continue to strengthen and develop relations with Canada .
Preparation for the first Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation in Singapore next December will be a major responsibility for us .
We need to consolidate and develop the multilateral trade system .
The European Union must make its contribution towards that end .
Conflict prevention and the development of our institutional relationship with regional organisations such as the Organisation of African Unity and Southern Africa Development Community will be the major focus of our efforts in respect of Africa .
We will also attach importance to strengthening the Union 's economic and political relations with Asia , to developing closer relations with the countries of Latin America and Australasia and to continuing efforts to narrow the gap between rich and poor on the basis of sustainable development .
Enlargement is a historic opportunity for peace and prosperity in Europe .
The European Union has demonstrated its willingness to seize this opportunity .
The process of preparing for enlargement is now underway .
The Madrid European Council , building on Copenhagen and Essen , took a series of decisions of the first importance .
The Commission was requested to expedite preparation of its Opinions on the membership applications .
The Commission was requested to embark on the preparation of a composite paper on enlargement .
And the Commission was requested to deepen its evaluation of the effects of enlargement on the common policies and to undertake a detailed analysis of the Union 's financing system post-1999 .
The principle that applicant countries be treated on an equal basis was set out at the Madrid European Council .
As presidency , we will give every support and encouragement to the Commission in its work in these areas .
We look forward to the Commission 's report on work-in-progress at the Dublin European Council in December .
Meanwhile , we will use to the full the opportunities offered by the Union 's pre-accession strategy and in particular the structured dialogue mechanisms .
We will ensure that the applicant countries continue to play an important role in discussions on matters of mutual interest and common concern .
I come now to the Intergovernmental Conference .
Our presidency is not just about managing the Union as it is but also about helping to shape the Union of the future .
The Florence European Council set a challenging mandate for the Intergovernmental Conference during the Irish presidency .
In line with Florence , our aim will be to bring forward to the Dublin European Council in December a general outline for a draft revision of the Treaties .
The general aims of the IGC are :
to bring the Union closer to the citizen ; -to strengthen and enlarge the scope of the Union 's Common Foreign and Security Policy , and-to assure the effective functioning of the institutions while respecting their balance , and the efficiency of the decision-making process.The Irish presidency will work ambitiously to achieve these aims building on the good work of the Italian presidency .
We depend , of course , on the commitment of all partners .
What we want is to enter right away the stage of substantive negotiations .
Indeed this process has already started and we are seeking already to focus discussion where possible on draft Treaty texts .
I know that the European Parliament fully supports the aims of the IGC .
I know that the European Parliament supports the presidency 's approach of moving now into the negotiating phase with a view to an ambitious outcome of the IGC which will serve the interests of the European Union as a whole .
I should emphasise our appreciation of the contribution to the IGC which is being made by the European Parliament .
The Irish presidency looks forward to working closely with the European Parliament during its term .
The need for transparency in the IGC and in other areas of the Union 's activities remains a major focus of attention .
The Irish presidency will do everything in its power to ensure the maximum openness and transparency .
We now face the task of explaining to our citizens the outcome of the IGC and the implications of enlargement .
We must also ensure that EMU is fully understood .
As politicians we know that communication is vital if citizens are to accept the many changes which will come about in the Union between now and the end of the century .
The Irish presidency agenda is complex and multifaceted .
Amid all the complexities , however , we must realise that we are a Union of fifteen Member States each contributing in its own way to the overall progress of the common enterprise .
It is very much in that spirit that the Irish presidency will carry out its responsibilities .
For the next six months Ireland has the challenge and the privilege of being a presidency of the Council of Ministers for the fifteen Member States .
The European Parliament is a Parliament for people throughout the European Union , for the people of all the Member States .
Together , you Parliament and we the Council of Ministers , represent the common interest and the interests of all .
We must work together to achieve the common end of defending the interests of our citizens .
The European Union rightly looks forward to the prospect of a membership of twenty seven or more Member States .
As part of the preparation for enlargement , we are engaged in the IGC process .
Enlargement and the IGC are the appropriate focus of the European Union 's attention .
They are the focus for a community of Member States .
We must not lose sight of the spirit of what we are and what we will be .
We must continue to recognize our shared interests .
We must together move towards our common goals .
We must work with each other cooperatively and in the interests of all , and in the interests of those who want to join us .
If we lose sight of this spirit of common endeavour now , how can we hope to create a community or Union of twenty seven or more Member States ?
The strength of this Union of ours has been our willingness to listen and to learn , to urge and to accommodate , to share and to support .
Without these attributes the European Union - with however many Member States - will have little future .
I have set out for you our priorities for the next six months .
These priorities represent the priorities of the European Union as a whole .
I know that the European Parliament shares the common goals which have been set and towards which we will aim during the next six months .
In setting the priorities , we have consulted widely with the institutions of the European Union .
We have striven to ensure that the views of the Commission and of European Parliament are taken into account .
We will work closely with the European Parliament .
We will continue to ensure that the European Parliament 's crucial role is acknowledged .
As presidency of the Council of Ministers of the European Union , I also ask you in the European Parliament to help us to ensure that the agenda of the Union is advanced during the next six months .
We cannot achieve the goals we have set ourselves without you .
We seek your continued support and assistance to achieve our mutual goal : a Europe that works for all .
D 'fhs agus d 'fhorbair an tAontas Eorpach n mbun-smaoineamh ' Comhphobal ' .
 na caogaid anuas , rugadh agus tgadh fs na hEorpa le spriorad na meithle , s sin le r , tortha mra agus beaga ag comhoibri le chile mar dlth-chomharsana .
T promh-aidhmeanna Uachtarnacht na hireann socraithe agam do na s mh at le teacht ; danfaimid r ndcheall i dtreo Aontais nos fearr a bhun don todhcha .
I spiorad an chomhphobail ' is ar scth a chile a mairimid , ' agus is mar thoradh ar r gcomhoibri laethil go bhfuil Aontas cruthaithe againn anois at nos treise n iomln a rannphirteanna .
N h sin le r gur fidir linn anois r scth a ligean , caithfimid leanint ar aghaidh leis an dea-obair ag tarraingt ar Eoraip at nos ifeachta fs , Eoraip at ag obair don uile dhuine .
( Translation : The European Union has its roots in the concept of community .
This spirit has permeated the vision of Europe from the 1950s to the present day , a Europe of good neighbours and good neighbourliness , countries large and small working together .
I have set Ireland 's priorities for our next six months as presidency ; we will make our contribution to the building of a better Union for the future .
In the best traditions of the community we will not be alone in this task - it has been through working together that a Union has been created that is greater than the sum of its parts .
We should not rest on our laurels , but continue the process towards a more effective Europe , one that works for all . )
Mr President , it is a pleasure for me to address you in a great language .
Thank you .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
We also thank you for this example of cultural and linguistic diversity in Europe that you have given us .
Ladies and gentlemen , we come now to the debate .
Mrs Malone will begin on behalf of the Party of European Socialists .
Mr President , it is a great honour for me , on behalf of my Group , to extend to the Tnaiste , Mr Spring , the President-in-Office , a cad mile filte to the European Parliament and I want to congratulate him on the very detailed programme of work that he has set out .
I can tell him to take off the earphones now , I am going to proceed in English .
I also want to congratulate you , Mr Spring , on your success last week with regard to ending the impasse on the MEDA programme .
This fifth Irish presidency takes place at a time when the Union is facing exceptional challenges , including the preparations for economic and monetary union and for enlargement and the revision of the treaties .
I want to acknowledge , Mr Spring , your own personal efforts in trying to establish reconciliation in Northern Ireland , often in very difficult circumstances .
We in this Parliament support your efforts to restore credibility to the peace process and indeed to the political process .
Can you assure us that the Council will play its full part , in the same way that the Commission and Parliament have , in mobilizing the political resources of the European Union in bringing about a peaceful resolution to this conflict in Northern Ireland ?
Returning now to the priorities which you have outlined for your presidency , we fully agree with the emphasis you have put on unemployment , organized crime , drugs and fighting fraud .
But the real challenge for the Irish presidency will be to get concrete results so that these aspirations are not left as empty sentiments .
On employment , I hope that the high-level working group which has just been set up to examine the question of financing the trans-European networks will report back as quickly as possible .
As to the IGC , it is important that the draft treaty being prepared is not based on the lowest common denominator principle .
We need a revised treaty that is truly relevant to the needs of ordinary people .
This should provide , for example , for the establishment of a European coastguard service to tackle the drugs problem , which is a dreadful blight on all our communities .
Mr President-in-Office , we have heard your remarks on the EU-US agenda , and , as a member of this Parliament 's US Delegation , I can tell you that we have just returned from Washington , where we had meetings with members of the Congress , and a lot of our discussions obviously focused on the Helms-Burton legislation - legislation that is very damaging to our European interests .
So while we welcomed last night 's announcement from the American side of a six months delay , we are fundamentally opposed to this legislation in principle and we want to say that we think that the Americans , by bullying their allies , have not found the correct way forward .
I am confident that this Irish presidency will deliver on its priorities as it has consistently done in the past and give the lie to the myth that the small states cannot effectively handle the assignment .
We share the goals that the Tnaiste has outlined , his vision and commitment , and we will work with you , Mr Spring , so we can progress towards an EU which is based on equity , tolerance , justice and peace and which is open and accessible to all citizens .
.
It gives me great pleasure also to welcome the commencement of the Irish presidency and to listen to the ambitious programme which Minister Spring has laid out for us today , because his priorities - unemployment , drugs , tolerance , openness , education , the environment and human rights for people with disabilities - are all key areas in Parliament 's agenda .
His commitment to keeping his message simple , human and , above all , relevant , is also greatly to be welcomed , because if we do not do this , and include the citizens in our programmes , the vital survival of this Community will be at risk .
The President-in-Office has an onerous burden : to make progress in these areas under the shadow of what is , perhaps , the last remaining and most intractable political conflict in Europe is , indeed , a very heavy burden to bear .
However , the President-in-Office has made a very good start .
We have made a very good start : we have seen many ministers visiting parliamentary committees and political groups already , and this has been much appreciated .
The briefing and exchanging of views will set a very good precedent for the Irish presidency .
We look forward to this continuing throughout the presidency .
With few exceptions , European society today is very tolerant .
However , our tolerant and open society is under threat from organized crime and from the drug trade .
We must engage in a wholehearted and unrelenting attack on these threats to our society .
Our hospitals and jails are full of the victims of drug addiction ; most crime is now fuelled by the need to fund a drug habit ; and our ability to remain open and grow in tolerance and openness in our Community depends on our capacity to control the narcotics and organized crime trade .
The President-in-Office will have the primary responsibility for guiding negotiations in the Intergovernmental Conference on the revision of the Treaties .
I hope that he can ensure that any new Treaty will provide the legal framework needed successfully to fight organized crime and the drug trade .
I also hope he will encourage all the Member States to honour and sign the various international conventions which remain unsigned by some Member States - conventions , for example , on money-laundering , on the internationalization of organized crime and , of course , on cooperation between the police forces within the Community .
If we wish to hold on to an open and tolerant Europe , we must defeat these organized criminals .
Enlargement of the Union to include countries from Central and Eastern Europe is absolutely unthinkable unless we have this kind of control over organized crime .
This also has a serious affect on immigration policies within the Community .
We must remember , in terms of immigration , that mercy and tolerance must be our first preoccupation .
Unless we can control organized crime - international organized crime , particularly - we will find that these policies will become more and more restrictive .
I take this opportunity , on behalf of my group , to congratulate and offer support to the President-in-Office and to wish him every success in the course of the presidency .
Mr President , i dtosach bire ba mhaith liomsa cad mle filte a chuir roimh Tnaiste na hEireann is Uachtarin Chomhairle na hAir do Comhphobal na hEorpa ar an gcad turais seo at danta aige do Parlaimint na hEorpa .
I warmly welcome the Irish presidency on their first visit to the European Parliament since taking up office on 1 July .
I would briefly like to comment on the introductory remarks made by the Tnaiste in relation to the Northern Ireland situation and say to him that many in this Parliament were dismayed at the abject surrender in Northern Ireland in recent days to mob rule .
The official message conveyed is that the rights of the nationalist community can be overridden by force when necessary .
This has inevitably caused deep anger within the nationalist community which must , however , be channelled constructively and with dignity .
There must be no violence , no bombs and no retaliation .
All must respect that the principle of consent must be upheld and consent must be sought and given freely , peacefully and without intimidation or coercion .
The freedom to give consent is also the freedom to withhold consent and the consent of both communities is needed .
The British Government pledged in the framework document to exercise their jurisdiction with rigorous impartiality on behalf of all the people of Northern Ireland in their diversity with emphasis on full respect for and equality of civil , political , social and cultural rights and freedom from discrimination for all citizens , on parity of esteem and a just and equal treatment for the identity , ethos and aspirations of both communities .
That is the pledge .
Both communities in Northern Ireland are vulnerable in different parts in Northern Ireland .
I deplore the sectarian attacks to which each of them have been subjected in recent days .
The spirit of reconciliation and mutual accommodation is needed all over Northern Ireland in place of the spirit that the majority rules .
The human , political and economic cost of such an attitude is far too great and risks repeating the shameful intimidation of people from their homes which has scarred Northern Ireland so often in the past .
There is a great responsibility on the British Government and the Irish Government and all the northern parties to give the peace process fresh impetus after the grave setback of the last ten days .
I am sure that the work of the Irish presidency over the next six months will yield positive results for the many difficult problems which are confronting decision-makers in the European Union at the present time .
The most serious political , social and economic problem confronting the Union at the present time continues to be the urgent need to find job opportunities for the 18 million people without work in Europe today .
Commission President Jacques Santer recently tabled proposals for a Confidence Pact on Employment containing a series of measures which have the potential to promote economic growth and new job opportunities provided that our respective governments agree to work with each other and with the Commission on the implementation of President Santer 's plans .
The Irish presidency has decided that tackling unemployment will be the main priority of its term in office .
If the presidency is to succeed in making progress on this important issue , then it must persuade the Union 's Member States not just to give political support to the Confidence Pact on Employment , but also to provide the funding to implement the proposals and construct the TENs projects put forward by President Santer .
While it will not be easy to get the agreement of the national governments on the politically difficult question of funding , the Irish presidency must guard against efforts , which are already under way , simply to divert resources from the structural funds and the common agricultural policy to fund these new proposals .
Such a solution would effectively result only in funds being transferred from the agricultural and peripheral regions to the denselypopulated and already highly-developed regions of the centre of the Union .
This would not be in the best interests of the European Union as a whole nor would it be in the best interests of the countries on the periphery such as Ireland .
The presidency 's second priority is to tackle the drugs problem .
Effective action to confront the illegal drugs trade requires a wide range of measures such as harmonizing laws on drug smuggling and money laundering and increased cooperation between police and custom agencies .
Most of all , as customs and immigration control within the Union are progressively reduced , increased cooperation will be required to confront the drug smugglers along the Union 's external frontiers .
Resources will have to be transferred from the Union 's internal frontiers , where they are no longer required , to the external frontiers .
The most appropriate method of transferring resources to the Union 's external frontiers to combat drug smuggling is by making money available in the annual budget of the Union for upgrading equipment and increasing training to these agencies .
The 1996 budget does not contain any money to assist in policing the Union 's external frontiers .
If the presidency is to succeed in making progress in tackling the drug problem then it should , as a matter of urgency , bring forward proposals for making money available from the Union 's 1997 budget for this purpose .
Mr President , may I right at the start of this debate , as a Dutchman and a European , express my solidarity with the Irish Government in its efforts to move the peace process in Northern Ireland forward .
This is a subject on which my friend and colleague Pat Cox will be speaking in detail shortly .
I hope the people of Northern Ireland will draw inspiration from the European Union 's role as an instrument for fostering understanding and cultivating reconciliation .
There are 18 million people without work in the Union .
The combating of unemployment must be the top priority of any presidency .
Grand objectives are not enough .
It is actions which count .
It is high time the Council actually accepted the proposals which have been gathering dust on its shelves for years and which would , if accepted , help to create jobs .
I am thinking particularly of the proposal for a European company statute .
The European Commission estimates that businesses would save 30 billion ECU a year if this instrument were in place .
A sum bigger than the annual budget for the European structural funds .
Just think how many jobs could be created if investment on this scale were made feasible .
But this decision has remained blocked in the Council for years .
I urge the Irish presidency to get this matter sorted out at last .
One of the Irish presidency 's priorities , and rightly so , is the fight against crime .
Criminals are currently the only people who can come and go across Europe 's borders at will .
Our internal borders are no deterrent to crime , quite the opposite , they make it harder for us to combat crime .
My Group believes that things like border checks , immigration and drug trafficking should be placed under the authority of the Union .
Intergovernmental cooperation on these is simply not working .
Take drugs , for example .
The French and Dutch Governments have dug themselves into an entrenched position .
The only way they can dig themselves out again and resolve their differences is by getting the European Union to act as a bridge-builder .
The Dutch are right to point to the relative attractiveness of their policy in terms of addict numbers and drug-related deaths .
But the French are equally right to ask the Dutch to limit the cross-border effects of that Dutch policy .
I urge the Irish presidency to try to mend fences between The Hague and Paris here .
The lack of courage shown by the European Union in Yugoslavia continues to undermine the Union 's credibility in the eyes of the world .
The European Union would like to see Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic relinquishing power .
But last Monday the foreign ministers once again ended their meeting without agreement on how this objective can be secured .
It is high time IFOR was given a mandate to help bring about the arrest of these alleged war criminals .
It is high time the foreign ministers showed leadership here .
I trust the fact that Ireland is the only EU Member State which is not part of IFOR will not prevent Ireland from giving a lead on this .
Europe was not prepared to bring peace to Bosnia . It should at least help to bring reconciliation and justice .
I also urge the presidency to concentrate on Kosovo .
The merciless Serb oppression of the Albanian minority in Kosovo is a direct threat to peace and stability in the Balkans .
It is vital for the Union to bring every possible pressure to bear on Mr Milosevic to persuade him to open talks with the leader of Kosovo , Mr Rikova .
Here too I ask the Irish presidency to show leadership .
Finally , a word or two on Cyprus .
The situation in Cyprus is getting worse .
Union efforts to improve things have not been successful .
Nor have those of the USA .
I call on the Irish presidency to work with the USA to help improve the situation in Cyprus .
It is essential that stability in that part of the Mediterranean should be improved .
Mr President , I should like to tell the President-in-Office of the Council that our group feels very much in agreement with the presentation that he made of the Irish Government 's six-month programme and in respect of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Like the other groups , we are also very much aware of the awfulness of violence in Northern Ireland .
This is not something affecting Ireland alone , it is something affecting the whole of Europe and we wish to lend our support to the Irish presidency to try and resolve the problem - our eventual aim should be peace , solidarity and cooperation between all parties involved .
Undoubtedly , this is a vital time to take a look at the Intergovernmental Conference and assess the results .
As you said it is necessary to begin the real negotiations so that a Treaty programme can be presented at the December Summit in Dublin .
We cannot have any transitional presidencies .
The Irish presidency cannot be seen as a transition to the Dutch presidency and therefore we very much appreciate his courage , the clarity of his ideas and the fact that he has set objectives already for the December Council .
We should also add dialogue and cooperation with the European Parliament and bring European construction closer to the citizens and social protagonists .
A dialogue , in particular , on the social model and problem of unemployment .
We also give our support to the presentation and approval of a constitutional framework which includes a declaration of fundamental rights and duties and the inclusion of a chapter on employment in the Treaties .
We must give employment the same importance as EMU .
We refuse to consider employment as a rare commodity on the market of which we are difficult consumers .
It is another philosophy the lack of jobs for so many European citizens is also costly .
In terms of regional policy and , more particularly , in terms of the structural funds , we reject any linking of the structural policies with the accomplishment of the indices of convergence through conditionality clauses .
Cohesion and enlargement have to be re-enforced head-on .
We agree with the measures proposed to combat drug abuse , delinquency and the white slave trade .
The Irish presidency will also show special sensitivity to the treatment of immigrants .
The Irish people has always been a people of migration and it has helped to build new countries , it has taken its culture around the world and it should know how to deal with all immigrants , including the so-called legal immigrants and those without immigration papers .
I must say , I am surprised that there is so little determination to fight the Helms-Burton Act .
We have asked for the Act to be rejected clearly and energetically , not only the third chapter - but obviously the third chapter in particular , which contaminates international relations .
As for Turkey , our question is whether we are going to demand that Turkey respects human rights and fulfils international resolutions .
Will pressure be put on Turkey to free Leila Zana ?
I return to an internal problem because this is still a global problem which concerns us all : the problem of mad cows .
In our opinion , this is now , above all , a problem of public health .
But we also know that it is a problem facing the beef market and , therefore , we are asking for transparency and efficient action - and for that you can count fully on our support .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Spring , it is very difficult today to speak about the Irish presidency - difficult , because I cannot simply speak about a routine programme of work after all that has happened over the past few days in Northern Ireland .
The business of the day is actually discussion of the Intergovernmental Conference , of economic and monetary union , of employment and environmental policy , of Europol and of internal security in Europe .
But who can simply turn his attention to routine business when the fires are raging in Northern Ireland , when the internal security of Belfast and Derry is threatened in a different and more horrific manner than that of Munich , Paris , Rome or Brussels ?
Turning our attention to routine business today would mean sweeping violence under the carpet , refusing to point the finger at its causes and its perpetrators .
It would mean ignoring the systematic violations of human and civil rights in Northern Ireland .
By our silence we also incur a share in the guilt .
How , ladies and gentlemen , am I to discuss the programme of the presidency and move on from there to speak and make judgements about greater closeness to the citizens and about the fight against racism when in my mind 's eye I see the pictures of the death of the young Catholic who was buried two days ago , when I see the Irish flag being burned in Northern Ireland , when I am touched by the despair of people in our midst because peace is so far off ?
What good is it to speak of closeness to the citizens and civil rights when basic fundamental rights are on the line for the minority in Northern Ireland ?
John Bruton has criticized the British Government more vehemently than any Irish head of government before him for the failure of its policy on Northern Ireland .
I should have liked him to be able to speak these words with the same clarity and force as President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union , because he is right .
I have demands to make of the Irish presidency in terms of a sustained environmental policy , consistent measures to combat social exclusion , marginalization and unemployment , to promote work and fight poverty , in terms of rethinking the convergence criteria and taking comprehensive action against discrimination .
Responses to all these reasonable and important demands , however , can only develop under peaceful conditions , which is why the foremost priority is an all-out effort to promote the peace process .
And in that you will be supported to the hilt !
. I am your Celtic sister from Scotland and you have a lot to live up to because the previous Irish presidencies have been such a success .
I speak also for my group and I am proud to do so .
Recently your President Mary Robinson came and made time to visit Scotland .
She said that Europe deepens Irish identity and this is a matter well understood in Scotland .
I would just like to say that - and I do not think the Irish presidency needs to be reminded - there are 40 languages , 40 minority cultures in our Union , and all of them hope that Europe will deepen their identity too .
But they often need a helping hand with funding .
The Committee of the Regions which was not mentioned - you could not mention everything in your basketful of dreams - has a very important part to play .
On reading your priorities I found myself almost in tears because I know this was drafted before the troubles reemerged .
A peaceful Europe .
There is not much sign of peace in the north part of the island of Ireland .
I have to say something which is perhaps a little drastic .
Yesterday Mr Crowley , speaking from the heart , said this part of the European Union is now ungovernable .
That is indeed the position .
In view of precedents in the Middle East and South Africa where the coming together of people has been achieved despite enormous animosity , perhaps we should look at another solution such as the United Nations .
Or let us stop this talk of preconditions that the British Government keeps on about .
In the precedents of South Africa , Kenya , Rhodesia and the Middle East , no such preconditions were made .
Unless we get rid of this we are never going to get the talks going .
I was glad that mention was made of Nelson Mandela .
For ten years I have been involved with the Lom Convention and I am so proud to think that the world has recognized this man .
But are we going to make sure that the funding for the Third World is not diminished because we have so many other demands on our funds ?
We want to help Eastern Europe but please do not let us allow any diminution of the funds for the Third World .
Recently I was privileged to be in Ireland with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and meet many of the Irish Ministers .
It was very interesting that Ireland is one of the four Member States that can meet the criteria for entry into EMU .
Yet , as the Minister of Finance told us , there is , as everywhere else , a problem of unemployment .
I am glad that this is a priority of the presidency .
I also come from a peripheral region - the Highlands and Islands of Scotland - and we have to look to the SMEs , particularly the very small ones .
And we have to look at that sleeping giant , tourism , which can create so many jobs .
Perhaps we have to look at more funding for the upgrading of tourist facilities and marketing the lengthening of the season in those northern climes that do not necessarily have assured sunshine .
We have to look at late payments and access to cheap money .
There are many practical ways where we can translate the hopes of reducing unemployment into reality .
On discrimination , perhaps the President-in-Office should lean on some of the EU institutions to make sure women get to the top .
On fishing , let us have some attempt at regional control and on beef let us try and remove the ban , bit by bit , starting with quality herds in Northern Ireland and Scotland .
On the IGC , let us make sure that this Parliament us very fully involved .
( Applause )
Mr President , the Italian Alleanza Nazionale Group would like to welcome Ireland , which is to represent the European Union over the next six months ; and we should also like to express our hope that peace will be restored within Ireland .
We are confident that Ireland 's courage will , during these next six months , help to solve at least some of the many problems that are currently dogging the European Union and have remained unsolved over several presidencies .
We are sure the European Union understands the need to strengthen itself , in complete political unity , before opening its doors to nations that have yet to achieve , within their own borders , the necessary conditions for aspiring to become part of the broader consensus of the European Union , itself suffering from considerable problems , including the very serious one of unemployment .
I say this , not out of narrow-minded egotism , but because I am sure that the sum of the weaker parts does not make a strong whole , it makes a weak whole , and also because the stronger Member States of this Union must not be permitted to create for themselves an area of even greater power in the more extensive jigsaw of old Europe .
Good luck to Europe and good luck to Ireland .
Mr President , allow me to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his presentation of the Irish presidency 's ambitious programme .
In the long term the most important priority is , of course , the intergovernmental conference , to which the Irish presidency has already given a lot of attention . That and the development by this presidency of a common security policy with other countries which do not belong to the Western European Union .
The European Union has common values and a single economy and shortly it will also have a common currency .
It has already displayed solidarity via a series of common policies and it must now turn its attention to the sectors of defence and security .
It is comforting - and I should like the presidency and Mr Spring personally to note the fact - that the Fernndez-Albor report on the CFSP states that the external frontiers of the Member States should be considered the frontiers of the European Union and that solidarity should be shown where these frontiers are not respected .
This is a subject in which the countries on the periphery , such as your country , Mr Spring , have a special interest .
The credibility of the Union in the eyes of Europe 's citizens depends among other things on making tangible progress on this specific issue in the framework of the intergovernmental conference .
One of the presidency 's objectives is the presentation of a first draft of the new treaty prior to the European Council in December .
That text must match the aspirations of the Member States which want substantial results from the intergovernmental conference .
It must not be a minimum compromise .
Of course , the most important immediate priority - but with long-term significance also - is employment .
I welcome everything that you have said about employment , but I feel obliged to point out that we have heard it all before and often it has turned out to be just empty words .
Let me remind you that very little of what was envisaged in the White Paper of Jacques Delors has become reality .
I hope that the same will not happen with the Irish presidency .
The funding of the trans-European networks , the research programme and other measures which would help are slipping behind .
Other Members will raise a whole host of other matters but I wish to mention just two . The unacceptable situation that has been brought about by the US administration 's decisions on Cuba - and the delay of six months means nothing - and the continuing refusal of Turkey to protect the rights of its citizens and to respect the international rule of law .
I think that you , Mr Spring , and your presidency , can achieve a great deal on those two matters also .
On behalf of the Socialist Group I welcome you and wish you good progress and every success .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the President-in-Office of the Council mentioned the Intergovernmental Conference , and the presidency will present an outline for a draft revision of the Treaties to the December summit meeting of Heads of State and Government in Dublin .
What we as Members of the European Parliament have heard about the meeting of government representatives held in Cork at the beginning of July has been very encouraging .
We have heard , Mr President-in-Office , that the Irish presidency conducted the talks very effectively and briskly , and we should like to encourage you to continue in the same manner .
We should also like to encourage you to pursue the negotiations now on the basis of quite specific texts so that we achieve a good result in time for December .
Lastly , we should like to encourage you to avoid basing your proposals for the draft treaty revision on the lowest common denominator among the 15 States of the EU but rather to go a good bit further than the positions on which agreement may ultimately be reached .
We in the European People 's Party call for reform of the European Union , which now has a population of 370 million , to enable the Union to prepare , on the threshold of the 21st century , for the accession of new States .
You spoke , Mr President-in-Office , of a Community of 27 States ; we shall have to wait and see whether that actually comes to pass in the foreseeable future .
The prospect facing us is that of over 100 million people who want their countries to join the European Union .
We in the European People 's Party base our policy for reform of the Treaties on the principle of effectiveness - effectiveness , indeed , is perhaps the key to the future of our continent - combined , of course , with the democratic principles as well as with the transparency to which you have referred .
For us in the European People 's Party - and in this debate I can only focus on the main points - the following criteria are vital to reform of the European Union :
First of all , in the international context the European Union must be endowed with the legal capacity which , as we know , it does not yet possess , and only through this capacitation in international law can we enable the European Union to act as a legal and political entity and to be represented in international organizations .
Secondly , we call for the principal human rights to be incorporated into the Treaties and for the European Union to accede to the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Thirdly , it should be standard practice for the Council of Ministers to decide by majority vote on Community legislation ; unanimity should only apply in exceptional cases , and even where unanimous decisions are still prescribed by the Treaty they should be phased out within a fixed period of time .
Fourthly , the European Parliament should participate in the legislative process as an equal partner with the Council , and legislative procedure must be simplified accordingly .
Fifthly , we in the European People 's Party believe that the rationale of European unification demands the integration of the Western European Union into the European Union .
We do realize that this will probably not be achieved at the present Intergovernmental Conference , because a number of Member States that do not belong to the WEU are unlikely to accept Article 5 , in other words the mutual assistance clause .
That is why we support the inclusion of a political solidarity clause in the Treaty on European Union as a stepping-stone and in particular the incorporation in the EU Treaty of the Petersberg Declaration of June 1992 regarding humanitarian , peacemaking and peacekeeping operations outside the area of application of the WEU Treaty .
We believe that no Member State should be forced to take part in military operations to defend democracy and human rights but that a minority of States must not be able to prevent action being taken by the majority of States if the latter wish to act .
Our sixth and final point - and this is perhaps the most important point , having been mentioned several times already - concerns the field of justice and home affairs .
We must start to bring some aspects of justice and home affairs under the Community umbrella , such as asylum , immigration and visas .
The conventions , in other words international agreements , and intergovernmental cooperation in these domains are becoming increasingly unsuitable platforms from which to launch the campaign against crime in Europe .
In this fight against crime too , we need the Community procedures of majority decisionmaking by the Council and equal legislative rights for the European Parliament .
Your presidency of the Council , Mr Spring , faces great challenges and a host of other issues .
We wish the Irish presidency perseverance and determination but also good fortune and success .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to wish the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Spring , every success in the course of the Irish presidency agus go n 'eir an bthar leat sa post at romhat amach anseo .
In the light of the mayhem of communal strife , street violence , intimidation , murder and bombing which has returned to Northern Ireland , unfortunately , in the past 10 days , I want first of all to place on record my group 's utter condemnation of that descent towards the abyss .
Now is the time , we believe , to cool it ; the time for cool heads and calm reflection ; the time for a renewed but deepened commitment to resorting and sustaining the peace .
In the long and complex history of Anglo-Irish relations and relations on the island of Ireland , and especially the violent history of the past 25 years in Northern Ireland , one lesson is beyond any possible doubt : that violence from whatever source postpones the day of reconciliation .
We share with you , Mr Spring , your assertion that the primacy of politics must be reclaimed and restored , and support your efforts in this regard .
The past 10 days have been a watershed , a defining moment for the peace process .
On the one side there is the prospect of slipping into violence - a renewed violence , but without hope ; or alternatively , a renewed commitment to redoubling efforts to engage once and for all , and perhaps for the first time , in a genuine and meaningful political dialogue .
It has to be founded , if it is to be meaningful , on mutual respect rather than political posturing or gallery-playing which , unfortunately to date , have attended much of the political aspect of that process , especially in Northern Ireland .
All political leaders in both governments , but especially those in Northern Ireland itself , bear a heavy responsibility .
Those who will not learn the lessons of history condemn themselves and society to repeat that history .
Those who are more at home with the cosy familiarity of their own tribe , on both sides , must choose a more open and pluralist alternative .
If not , the blood that flows will be on their hands as surely as on the hands of those who pull the triggers or plant the bombs .
This House is the chamber of deputies of the people of Europe and is a testament to the ability to reconcile difference and to found a lasting peace .
That has been built against staggering odds , if you look back to the starting point of 50 years ago .
It gives a message of hope to those who would lead Northern Ireland forward .
But that message of hope carries within it the seeds of the other fundamental message .
It requires also a leadership commitment .
That is the absent tribal part that has not yet been won over .
And that is the challenge .
If they do not meet the challenge I regret to say the alternative is too horrible to contemplate .
Madam President , firstly , on Northern Ireland , it is clear that force and the threat of force have overcome the rule of law in Northern Ireland .
During the Irish presidency the government should be seeking support from other Member States for an urgent reform of policing structures in Northern Ireland .
It can no longer simply be argued that this is an internal matter for the British .
The marching season is not over in Northern Ireland yet .
There will be the Apprentice Boys ' March on 12 August in Derry .
If this Parliament wants to show solidarity with the people of Northern Ireland it should perhaps consider sending a delegation there for that march .
Moreover , the Irish Greens have always argued that a neutral and impartial player should be brought in , like the United Nations .
Now is the time for this to happen .
As regards the Irish presidency , the programme of the Irish presidency states that , on security and disarmament , it will pursue the continuing and effective development of EU / WEU cooperation on the basis of the Treaty on European Union in cooperation with the Belgian WEU presidency .
Ireland is not even a full member of WEU , so why does it need to cooperate more with the WEU presidency and on what issues will it be cooperating ?
Minister Spring , you stated last year that WEU 's nuclear policy was unpalatable for Ireland .
Last week the International Court of Justice found , much to the vindication of Ireland 's position , that nuclear weapons were the ultimate evil .
Why then is Ireland gradually forging closer and closer links with an alliance committed to , and endowed with , a nuclear capability ?
The Irish presidency also pledges that it will be highlighting conventional arms issues .
I wonder , Minister , if that means that you will be publicly putting pressure on Britain , Sweden and Finland , among others , to cease selling arms to places like Indonesia where they have been used in genocide campaigns against the East Timorese .
As a non-aligned country , Ireland should be promoting the right of the four Member States of this Union to maintain their non-aligned status within the Union instead of toeing the EU pro-military line .
Mr President , a new presidency marks a change .
Change brings hope , and we are hopeful , but we are also anxious let me say to the Irish Members , anxious about the past and about plans for the future .
First , the past .
You say that one of your priorities is to combat Alzheimer 's disease .
Well , there is nothing wrong with our memories .
We remember Mr MacSharry , first of all , with the sinister Blair House agreement , the negotiation of the agricultural GATT , and most of all we remember Dublin .
For the wine-growing people of Europe , and especially for my wine growers in Languedoc-Roussillon , the memory is of ' Black Dublin ' , compulsory distillation ( in Catholic Ireland ! ) , the grubbing-up of vines that are one of the symbols of christianity , the freezing of prices , the change of course towards globalization , which Mr MacSharry was to confirm .
And so we wonder what the viticultural CMO plans may yet have in store for us , and we cannot help worrying .
Then there are your plans for the future .
We note first of all the ' Spinellist ' atmosphere of those plans - constitution , new Union Treaty - but also , and especially , we note their content .
It is formal , conventional in appearance .
You offer , no doubt speaking for President Santer , a Pact of Confidence for employment .
The only thing missing is confidence , because there is no analysis of causes and so , as a consequence , it is difficult to treat the effects .
It is true that you do have plans that attract me in fiscal matters .
Although here again there is a snag : your legislation on excise duty .
No one can accuse you of doing things by halves : 17 francs tax on a litre of wine , but a mere 6.50 francs on a litre of beer !
Even so , you are trying to lighten the tax burden , I grant you that .
I will propose to you two rules which I have proposed n times to President Santer .
Rule one : compulsory deductions must not increase faster than the growth of GDP .
Rule two , to fit in with your European ideology : establish the principle of free choice of the least taxed geographical route .
Madam President , Ireland has taken on the responsibilities of presidency .
I wish Ireland success .
A great many hopes and expectations are placed in a new country holding the presidency , even now .
The last presidency left a feeling of disappointment because no progress was made on employment .
This increases the expectations placed in Ireland 's presidency .
I note with satisfaction that the first of Ireland 's priorities mentioned by name was unemployment .
The programme continues in this vein by considering as a priority new job seekers , the long-term unemployed and unemployed women .
Youth unemployment and long-term unemployment are indeed high on the list for the Union 's attention .
Mr Spring said just now in his speech that he would stress the concerns of the citizens and would invest in job security .
Improving the unemployment situation is indeed the most important of the Union 's tasks at present in Parliament 's view .
In my opinion , as far as citizens are concerned , it is the decisive issue , for the whole credibility of the European Union .
Hitherto programmes and reports have been drawn up , but decisions to create jobs in practice have been lacking .
In my opinion this will also be the acid test of Ireland 's presidency . Our citizens expect action , not programmes or reports .
Employment , as the President Spring said , is an area for action at national level .
However , we have included employment for so long in other contexts as one of the areas of priority action by the Union that expectations of the Union have increased .
I may remind you of the conclusions of Cannes , Essen and Madrid .
According to these conclusions it is possible , by means of decisions at Union level , to have a positive influence on employment in the Member States .
Mr Rasmussen , Prime Minister of Denmark , asked a few weeks ago whether we were so well off that we could afford to manage without the work contribution of 18 million people , and he replied that we really were not .
I would give the same answer .
On that basis I appeal to Ireland for a chapter on employment to be prepared now , at the beginning of its half-year presidency , for inclusion in the Treaty .
It would ensure the continuation of serious efforts to remove unemployment from Europe for we will not achieve a good employment situation without serious joint efforts .
This is referred to in the OECD 's most recent report which regards the alternatives as being continuing high employment or freer labour markets which would leave a section of the population in permanent poverty .
In preparing for enlargement , we did not desire this development .
Our only alternative must be to organize jobs for our nationals .
Madam President , first of all I should like to convey my sympathy to the Irish Government on the great difficulties being experienced in Northern Ireland .
As a Dutch protestant I would also emphasize how very much we as Dutch people deplore the misuse of the name and colour ' orange ' .
The House of Orange has always fostered religious freedom , not religious conflict .
Our Queen , a member of the House of Orange , is queen of catholics and protestants alike .
Madam President , I must compliment the Irish presidency on the programme it has outlined to us .
Past Irish presidencies have always been good and effective ones .
We have every confidence in Mr Bruton and Mr Spring .
I should like to focus on three points : the IGC , measures against drugs , and the situation in Yugoslavia .
Regarding the IGC , I believe it is most significant that the Irish presidency is proposing a number of substantial advances here .
The plan to start concrete talks on texts as soon as possible and if possible to put forward a new draft treaty seems to me an excellent idea .
It will then be the job of the Netherlands to take that good beginning through to the end .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on the IGC , let me run through our principal concerns again .
I agree here with Mr Poettering that we want the position of Europe 's citizens to be defined more clearly and the principle of non-discrimination to be enshrined firmly in the Treaty .
We want more openness and transparency over the Union 's documents and its decision-making .
We want use of the veto to be kept to an absolute minimum and we want Parliament 's joint legislative powers to be respected and extended , in respect both of legislation and of the budget .
As regards substance we want the European Union to do more in the areas of employment , and we support the Irish presidency on that , of internal security , environmental policy , foreign and security policy and measures to combat crime .
A detail or two on that , Madam President .
A lot of good things have already been said on the subject . But I would like to stress once again the importance of the Irish proposal for a European coastguard service .
As a former Dutch transport minister I tried to secure this during the Dutch presidency in 1991 .
I did not succeed .
But I can tell you that it is a good idea and that there are perhaps more arguments in favour of it now than there were at that earlier time .
So I wholeheartedly back the Irish presidency on that one .
And then there is Yugoslavia , Madam President .
I am very concerned at the way things are going .
My question is whether the Irish presidency is totally committed to getting Karadzic and Mladic arrested .
I have no faith in a peace without justice .
It is scandalous that these two men are allowed to remain at liberty and a poor example to the rest of the world of how Europe deals with war criminals .
Mr President , if your presidency can get this problem resolved I think you will have done Europe a service .
And I urge support here for Parliament 's call for an international inquiry on Srebrenica , which is urgently needed .
I would ask the Irish presidency to take initiatives on this too .
Mr President , I wish your presidency well .
We have every confidence that it will be a successful one .
I wish to thank the President-in-Office for outlining the priorities of the Irish presidency .
The important tasks of this presidency have , however , been overshadowed by the crisis in the peace process in the north of Ireland .
We want to deal with unemployment and the social crisis we are faced with .
We cannot do so while anarchy is permitted to rule in any state of the Union .
It is fundamental to civilized life that people enjoy equal rights under the law .
Last week in Northern Ireland the forces of the state capitulated in the face of lawlessness .
It is unacceptable in any state of the Union that an organization should impose sectarian intimidation of citizens .
If we cannot protect women and children from being intimidated from their homes and if people are forced to flee , then the evils of lawlessness and terror will be loosed again for another generation .
We cannot go back to burying people , we have to move forward in peace together and to do that we have to maintain political authority .
We in the EU have failed to do that in Ireland over 25 years .
I ask the President-in-Office to try once more , otherwise we will have to ask the UN and the Americans to help us out .
Surely we should not be faced with that within the borders of the European Union .
I do not want to see any more people buried in my country on either side .
Remember that people are intimidated on both sides within their own communities : Protestants are intimidated by Protestants , Catholics are intimidated by Catholics .
We can call them unionists or nationalists .
That is a terrible side to it which we do not refer to here .
I also wish to ask the President-in-Office to deal with the nuclear issue .
Many citizens are critical of nuclear power and the non-nuclear states have a right not to be polluted by emissions from nuclear states , such as those in the Irish Sea from Sellafield , now much increased by THORP .
I would ask the President-in-Office to foster a coalition of nuclear-free states within the European Union .
He talks about cooperation and the WEU , but we want that cooperation to extend to the neutral and non-nuclear states of this Union .
Madam President , it is very gratifying to note that tourism also features in the list of priorities of the Irish presidency .
I should like to point out that the entire European tourism and travel industry has great expectations of the Irish presidency .
The substance of these expectations is that this industry should finally be granted the official and legal status commensurate with its actual social and economic importance and with its contribution to the maintenance of peace and international understanding .
A few months ago , a majority of the European Parliament voted in favour of tourism having its own legal basis in the Treaty .
It would be very good and very gratifying if , under the influence of the Irish presidency , the Council also endorsed this position , which has important implications for the preservation and creation of jobs .
Madam President , may I congratulate the President-in-Office on the priorities of the Irish presidency for a Europe that meets the needs of its people .
The first and surely the most important priority to everyone in Europe relates to employment and in particular to the continued development of a Pact of Confidence on Employment in which special attention is to be focused on the problems of young people , the long-term unemployed and women .
Since declarations of intent are virtually all we have seen so far , it is now time for practical implementation , and I can only reemphasize your statement , President Spring , in which you stressed that job creation is the overriding challenge for all of our Governments .
I consider it especially important that the Irish presidency has emphasized the role of the partnership between management and labour , the importance of small and medium-sized businesses and the promotion of local employment and development initiatives .
Our efforts to underpin the EMU project in particular need to be accompanied by energetic labour-market strategies .
But as someone involved in education policy , I am especially pleased when I hear lifelong access to education and training being mentioned in the same breath as employment , and I am delighted that a separate chapter on education and young people has been included in the programme .
As you know , we are currently discussing the Commission White Paper on teaching and learning , a sequel to the Delors White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment .
As with your priorities , Mr President , what we are concerned with here is the quality of education , a lifelong learning process and teacher training .
Unimpeded lifelong access to general and vocational education is the best weapon in the fight against marginalization and the division of European society into a society of ' knows ' and ' don 't knows ' .
I am also pleased that a point about cultural cooperation is contained in the programme and that there are plans to conduct a debate during the Irish presidency on European cultural policy , including media policy and the Community 's cultural action programmes .
Although culture is the very soul of Europe as well as an important means of bringing the Community closer to many of its citizens , its significance is still underestimated .
In addition , it is important to find ways of helping our young people to identify with European ideals .
The third priority after employment and the fight against drug abuse is the creation of a Union based on equal treatment and tolerance , which is why precedence must be given to addressing issues such as equality of opportunity , social exclusion , transparency and the fight against racism and xenophobia .
This is an important aspect of our policies for peace and security , whether they seek to promote the process for peace in Northern Ireland , which all of us in Europe so fervently desire , or to establish an outgoing Europe that plays an active part in the quest for peace , security and solidarity .
Madam President , I want to welcome the President-in-Office and to congratulate him on his enthusiastic and competent approach to the whole business of guiding the affairs of this Union over the next six months .
As a European federalist without reservation , I have every confidence in the Irish Government in its intention to help guide and develop this Community in every possible way for the benefit of its citizens .
I would like to have talked about the financing of the larger European Union , in particular , and other issues which were raised by the President-in-Office , but in my brief time and as I represent the entire border area of the Irish Republic , I want to refer briefly to the statement on Northern Ireland by the President-in-Office .
While the people in my constituency identify with nationalist sentiment and aspirations in Northern Ireland they are by no means in any way hostile to the Unionist population in Northern Ireland , to their aspirations or their vision of the future for themselves .
Yet I have to say that in all my political life I have never seen so much anger as I saw in my constituency and across the border in Northern Ireland over the weekend .
This anger was fuelled by the massive disappointment at what was perceived to be the intimidation of the minority with the participation of the police force and the British Army in that exercise .
The people were disappointed .
They had seen some evidence of a greater effort by the police force in Northern Ireland to be impartial and helpful to all the citizens .
They were disappointed in the British Government and bitterly disappointed at the way the months of ceasefire were squandered and the opportunity to establish a greater dialogue was lost .
We hear all the time that the Unionist population in Northern Ireland feel that they are under siege and under threat .
The vast majority of people even in the border area of Southern Ireland have no aspiration to intimidate the Unionist majority in Northern Ireland into a United Ireland .
They only have one aspiration - you could hardly call it a hope because it is so long-term - and that is that the people in Northern Ireland will find an accommodation with each other .
There will be peace on the island of Ireland if peace can be established between those two communities .
Nobody wants to upset the Union at this moment or withdraw Northern Ireland from it without the consent of both traditions .
I speak for the part of the Republic of Ireland which lies on the border .
We can see that with Northern Ireland within the United Kingdom there is no border in the new Europe between Southern Ireland and Northern Ireland .
There is no border to prevent our contact and cooperation .
There are common policies to encourage our development .
The island of Ireland has been growing more rapidly than any other part of the developed world in the past 18 months during this peace process and the fruit was only beginning to ripen .
We have gone to the edge of the precipice but we have not gone over .
We can restore peace and confidence which was beginning to emerge .
But a lot is in the hands of the politicians in both communities in Northern Ireland .
Madam President , the Irish presidency has chosen employment as the number one priority for its presidency and that is nothing new .
Its wish to translate the many pronouncements of European Union summits into deeds is nothing new either but it merits our support .
I warmly endorse what the Irish prime minister said in an interview , namely that if we want to demonstrate the benefits of a single currency we can only do so if we also demonstrate that it will be good for jobs .
And it is good that the Irish presidency has already , straight away , started a concrete debate on measures to combat long-term unemployment .
Here too I warmly endorse the prime minister 's claim that a measure of unemployment may perhaps be good for healthy competition in the labour market but that certainly is not true of long-term unemployment which reduces workforce mobility and the willingness of workers to take risks .
I would add that it also wastes one of our most important resources for the future , namely human resources .
You cannot read anything about the information society without constantly being reminded that people are the most important resource for the economy of the future .
We currently waste millions ' worth .
Regrettably , I have to tell the presidency that the dangerous possibility looms of a discrepancy between word and deed .
Under the current Union budget it is likely that far too little of those budget funds will directly benefit the citizens of Europe .
I urge the presidency not to accept this under-use , but to encourage their colleagues to view the Union budget as a task-setter , a means of ensuring that this money is actually spent on human resources , rather than arguing that it enables more money to be spent on the TENs .
The same discrepancy between word and deed threatens the plan for EMU .
Ireland has made enormous and successful efforts to modernize itself in all manner of areas thanks to billions in aid , from the Union , it has to be said , but that in no way detracts from the achievement .
And Ireland is now one of the likeliest qualifiers for EMU .
Yet unemployment there , at 14 % or so , is well above the EU average of 10.9 % and nearly twice that in the ' best ' Member States .
In my view that reinforces the argument that one should not believe that EMU will automatically mean jobs .
I think it also provides evidence to support the European Parliament 's view that the criteria for EMU are more flexible than the ECOFIN ministers would often have us believe .
As I understand it your minister Ruairi Quinn intends primarily to put the criterion of budget deficit into perspective and to split it into investment costs and current budget costs .
I wish him success in that .
It is , I think , the only thing which may succeed in convincing our citizens that EMU is a plan designed to benefit them and not a measure of purely financial discipline .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , the initial contacts we have had with your Ministers within the various committees give us high hope of the Irish presidency .
We have been able to see for ourselves their goodwill , their availability and their attentiveness to Parliament 's concerns , which only reflect those of the public , and all that is reflected in the priorities you have laid down .
The only comment I would make is that there are rather a lot of priorities : American business has a saying that if you have more than three priorities you have no priorities .
In other words , we know that the presidency is subject to constraints , to limitations .
The President-in-Office is surrounded by large numbers of people who do not all have the same objectives , and we know that the Council can have trouble reaching a ruling on certain difficult subjects .
When we have conciliation talks with the Council , the talks do not always take place with the Council itself but sometimes with COREPER , and often three or four levels down .
In other words , we know the kind of difficulties you have .
That is why , by placing the emphasis on certain priorities , you are running the risk of developing a credibility gap .
We know that when it comes to unemployment the main responsibilities and the main activities are at Member State level .
What little can be done at European level is established and solemnly proclaimed by the European Council , and then three months later ECOFIN meets and does exactly the opposite , or near enough .
The only thing that can be done at European level to combat unemployment is to finance the intra-Community infrastructures .
And then what happens ?
When you decide to do it everyone thinks it 's going to be done , but your Finance Ministers meet a little later and do exactly the opposite .
So it is no surprise , in these circumstances , that the citizen has difficulty believing in Europe and in the capability of Europe to solve his problems .
As far as organized crime is concerned , it is all very well wanting to draw up a program to combat it , but that involves other resources than mere inter-governmental cooperation .
Well , that is what we are reduced to nowadays , and we know that in order to fight international organized crime we are going to have to adopt the same weapons as the organized criminals themselves .
They have organized themselves internationally , while you are hesitating to do so .
When they read your communications and when they see what we are doing , they must be saying to each other that the good times are not over yet !
That , Mr President-in-Office , is why I would like to concentrate on essentials , and especially on the work of the IGC , where we will need to start thinking about forms of differentiation .
Madam President , I would like to deal with two issues very quickly in the time that I have .
The first one is in relation to the Helms-Burton legislation and our relations with the United States .
As one of my colleagues mentioned earlier , the European Parliament delegation was in the United States last week for the annual meeting with the US Congress .
I hope the presidency of the Council understands the seriousness of the situation that we now face with a Congress that is increasingly protectionist and increasingly hostile to the multilateral arrangements that it has entered into .
It is essential that this morning , when Mr Spring winds up this debate , he should state very clearly that we will not simply have an exchange of letters with the United States on the unilateral and illegal action being taken , not only in Helms-Burton , but the threatened action on Iran and Libya ; that there will be firm and decisive action taken as a reprisal against the United States because of the likely injustice that will be meted out to European citizens .
I do not think letters are sufficient .
Congress goaded us last week , Mr Spring , and said that all it expected from Europe was a strongly worded letter from President Santer .
We will actually not get any action unless we act on HelmsBurton , unless we make it clear that US interests will be damaged , that we will take a calculated decision to damage US interests .
Failing that , we will get the D 'Amato legislation on Iran and we will get legislation on Libya .
The other issue I want to deal with very briefly is the way in which your presidency will deal with the Essen conclusions and the whole approach to employment .
What we really want to see in Dublin is a target to tackle a manageable aspect of employment .
We do not want these glorious resolutions passed at the end of summit meetings .
We want something done about unemployment .
The best thing that the Irish presidency could do , given its own problems with unemployment , is to tackle one section of the labour market .
The area that we would like to see you tackle is the question of youth unemployment .
In Dublin , at the end of your presidency , we would like to see a determined practical commitment by the Council actually to reduce dramatically the numbers of young people on the unemployment market .
Unless we do that I believe that all these statements that come from summit meetings are increasingly going to make the population in Europe cynical about what Europe is going to try to achieve .
I hope that we can single out one section of the labour market and ensure that by the end of the six-month presidency - and I hope it will be a very successful presidency - there is a very clear light at the end of the tunnel , particularly for the young people in Europe who really do still have faith in the whole project of building a strong European Union .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , I welcome the priorities of the Irish presidency put forward here today .
The battle to reduce unemployment is and must remain our first priority .
The emphasis given to coordinating and developing all services involved in the elimination of drug trafficking and organized crime is also welcome .
Drug addiction is one of the greatest threats to modern society .
Therefore , every possible effort must be made to destroy it and also the related crime of money-laundering .
I do not wish to repeat all the comments made on the situation in Northern Ireland , but I believe it is important to realize that events there in recent days are an offence against the European ideal .
We depend on democratic institutions and respect for the rule of law .
There can be no excuse for any government to apply the rule of law in a purely partisan way .
I welcome the attempts , in very difficult circumstances , by both governments to restore the peace process .
We must never lose hope .
Let me briefly turn to two important issues mentioned by the President-in-Office , Mr Spring : enlargement and institutional reform .
The enlargement of the European Union to include all the applicant countries is an ambition that will be achieved over a period of years .
However , the conditions must be right .
All the applicant countries are in need of substantial help to develop industry and infrastructure .
We must make realistic estimates of these costs and agree to provide the extra finance in the European budget .
Enlargement with the current restrictions on our budget would be disastrous for the new Member States and would also destroy much of the success in achieving economic and social cohesion between the existing 15 Member States .
An under-financed Union cannot be successful .
Similarly , an enlarged Europe needs wide-ranging institutional reform .
In this Parliament the decision-making process must be reformed .
There are at least 15 different procedures for making decisions in this House .
Such complexity is wasteful of resources and cannot be reasonably explained to the general public .
In the Council of Ministers the unanimity rule must be removed in almost all areas .
We have seen the destructive power of this rule recently when Britain , in a very misguided policy decision , held up most decisions for several months .
This type of behaviour has no beneficial result and must be prevented .
The Irish presidency has made good preparation for its period in office .
We know the Irish Government is determined to make progress on a wide range of issues over the next six months .
Can I wish all my colleagues every success .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a Member of the House referred this morning to the idea that , when they hold the presidency of the Council , the small Member States of the European Union do not possess the clout to galvanize the other States into action .
Nevertheless , I am very encouraged by what we have heard this morning .
For that reason I ask the Irish presidency to channel some of the energy to which the President-in-Office bore witness this morning into addressing a problem currently under discussion at the Intergovernmental Conference and about which our group is increasingly concerned , namely that of the democratic deficit within the European Union .
When we fight crime , when we proceed now - as Mr Poettering very lucidly and rightly said - to bring certain domains such as asylum or immigration under the Community umbrella as a matter of urgency , we not only need to intensify cooperation among Member governments , as the President-in-Office advocated .
We certainly need to do that , but we must also intensify cooperation between police authorities in the fight against crime and create a European police organization .
This , however , must not be done at the level of intergovernmental cooperation , for that would give rise to a dangerous development .
The fact that only executive bodies cooperate with each other and try to come up with European solutions means that the national parliaments - as we have all heard from parliamentarian colleagues in our own countries - are told with increasing regularity that they need no longer concern themselves with this particular issue because it is a European matter .
This domain , in other words , is being surreptitiously prised from the control and participation of the national parliaments .
At the same time , however , because of the structure of the Treaties and the current interinstitutional structure , the power to legislate on these matters has not passed to the European Parliament .
So an uncontrolled democracyfree zone , as it were , is emerging , precisely where decisions are taken which affect the personal rights of the individual citizens of the European Union , as we saw here yesterday in our debate on freedom of movement .
Parliament and the Commission are endeavouring to eliminate the deficit in terms of the remaining restrictions on freedom of movement , but we hear that , behind the backs of Parliament and the Commission , the Council under its present Irish presidency is planning a draft joint action , in other words a joint measure on the basis of Article K.4 of the Treaty , which means that neither the Commission nor Parliament are involved in it .
That is no way to foster democratization and amounts at best to a contribution to closer intergovernmental cooperation .
That is why I ask the presidency to lend impetus to the democratization process by ensuring that Parliament is strengthened .
You can set a good example , Mr President-in-Office , if you can ensure that , at a joint meeting of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs in September , the competent Minister helps to allay the irritation that has arisen in connection with the Monti initiatives and the debate on freedom of movement .
Madam President , could I also give a word of welcome to the President-in-Office , I wish him well for the time that he holds that office .
As I represent a Unionist point of view , I am not going to mince my words with you because you know me well enough and you would not expect anything else .
Northern Ireland has come through many difficult times during the past 27 years .
Last weekend we faced an abyss so deep we could see no bottom .
It is not my intention today to respond to earlier comments in this House , although I just wish a lot of people would be aware of the full facts before they make some wild statements .
Drumcree and Garvaghy Road manifest our divisions in Northern Ireland . I have to say the Chief Constable got everything totally wrong and he now holds the trust of very few in the Province .
In the interests of accuracy I must make some points very clear .
Garvaghy Road is a main arterial route , no houses fronting the road .
That march would have taken between 10 and 14 minutes .
The route was an agreed compromise many years ago .
There is now only one parade which goes down that road , where 10 years ago there were 7 , and that is the bottom of the problem that was faced .
The return of megaphone diplomacy by the Dublin Government was extremely unhelpful and was quite frankly like pouring petrol on a raging fire last weekend .
I wish to remind this House and the President-in-Office of the Council : Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom , the people vote , time after time , in free elections , to remain within the Union .
The views and the wishes of the majority community have been set aside and dismissed , and they have observed terrorists being rewarded and lauded for their atrocities .
Both governments stand for overlooking and taking for granted the views of the majority community - I hope you will give that consideration in the future .
We have in Northern Ireland the clear ability within both communities to thwart each other , yes , and unfortunately we have the power to bomb and kill each other , as we have shown .
Only when we genuinely respect each other 's traditions and principles will we begin to understand and promote reciprocal tolerance which will genuinely respect each other 's traditions , we will begin to find a real long-term peace .
The people of Northern Ireland have experienced , since the original ceasefires , a period of uncertain peace , and they have enjoyed that time .
The last two weeks has brought home to them , in the most vivid way , the options they now face .
I pray the people of Northern Ireland will choose wisely .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , I welcome the fact that Mediterranean policy is also one of the priorities of the Irish presidency .
We certainly achieved a great deal in Barcelona , but we must keep at it .
We have assumed obligations , for example with regard to human rights and the rights of minorities .
We spoke of our search for mechanisms for the settlement of conflicts and our desire to initiate disarmament and arms control measures .
These intentions must be converted into specific projects .
It is not enough , Mr President-inOffice , to have a huge selection of political options on the table , like a kind of  la carte menu , if nobody in the kitchen is preparing the various dishes .
For the next meeting of foreign ministers in the spring of next year - Barcelona II , so to speak - specific projects must be prepared and presented to our Mediterranean partners .
So what is the presidency 's position on the Euro-Mediterranean Convention , the Euro-Mediterranean partnership and the stability pact ?
These are various proposals , some emanating from the European Parliament , with which we should like to tempt the palates of the presidency .
What about a charter on emigration in the Mediterranean region ?
Another subject , Mr President-in-Office , is Turkey .
We have heard very little about Turkey today .
I remember that in 1995 we could not escape the appeals with which the French presidency bombarded us to approve the customs union .
What is happening with the customs union , Mr President ?
Are we going to reform it , are we going to revise it in accordance with the wishes of Mr Erbakan ?
We were told that we really ought to support the customs union in order to promote stability in Turkey .
Instead of a customs union we now have Mr Erbakan , and I think , Mr President , that the Council presidency ought to comment on that .
In my opinion , the presidency too should let its voice be heard on the threat to the borders of the European - I repeat , the borders of the European Union .
One final point , Mr President : the dynamics of the peace process in the Middle East seem to have seized up for the time being .
If we are waiting for Mr Holbrook or Mr Christopher or some other flying peacebroker to arrive on the scene , we can wait a long time - to be precise , at least until after the presidential elections in the United States !
Why cannot we as the European Union take an initiative ?
Why can we not convene an extraordinary meeting of foreign ministers along the lines of the Barcelona Conference and then try to inject fresh impetus into the process ?
( Applause from the left )
Madam President , the US President has made use of his right to defer Title 3 of the Helms Burton Act for six months .
So there will be no court cases for the time being .
But the US can refuse visas to employees of the firms concerned , their spouses and children .
Even though the US has now eased this extraterritorial law , it is still totally unacceptable and a flagrant breach of international law .
It is the EU 's fervent hope that working together with the US , we shall get true democracy and human rights restored to Cuba .
Let there be no misapprehension about that .
But we want to decide for ourselves what route the EU will follow in pursuing that goal .
We do not wish to be pressurized by the US .
The United States should realize that you don 't beat your enemies by hurting your friends .
We call on the new Irish presidency resolutely to counter any move by the United States which will be disadvantageous to the citizens of the EU .
Following the example of the Canadian Government which reacted strongly and proposes among other things to refer the US to the conciliation machinery of NAFTA .
We should do the same with the World Trade Organization .
We must retaliate swiftly and not be content with spoken or written protests .
By its very existence , however , the Act has already done great damage to the more than 150 firms which feature in what the Americans so graphically call Cuba 's ' Hall of Shame ' .
One Dutch bank has already been forced to withdraw from financing the sugar industry in Cuba .
Where can that bank go for compensation ?
There is only one Member State of the European Union which has legislation to indemnify companies and individuals against the consequences of extraterritorial legislation .
Is it not time , Mr President-in-Office , for the European Union to accept its responsibilities and enact framework legislation under which Member States can pass desirable and harmonized laws to protect citizens and companies ?
The exclusive powers which the EU enjoys in trade create obligations too .
Because the US has plans for countries other than just Cuba .
Extraterritorial laws against Iran and Libya are also at an advanced stage of preparation .
In the corridors of Congress there is talk too of other possible target countries where there is a high level of European investment .
So with an eye to the future , Mr President-inOffice , the EU 's reaction must be prompt , clear and tough .
A tough response by the Irish presidency will make an impression during this pre-election period in America .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate the Irish presidency on its programme on trade policy .
But we have to express our surprise that there has been no mention of problems arising from complications of the Helms-Burton Act because this is not a law to protect the security and integrity of the United States but it is an Act which exercises excessive power and is an instrument which is likely to lead to a trade war .
The decision to suspend for six months the right to bring action under Title III of the Act is no Pax Romana .
The threat is still there .
Only if we are able to take a firm stand will we win .
Otherwise we shall just be ridiculous .
Let us not delude ourselves about the true nature of these measures , since we are the world 's leading trading power .
Who is behind this incomprehensible operation - and this is the awful thing - which is being sold with so much media support ?
It is a powerful lobby of Cuban exiles led Mr Mas Canosa .
First of all , we should ask whether it is possible to allow a single economic lobby to plunge into crisis the relationship of traditional friendship between the United States and the European Community and whether that same lobby can dash the expectations raised by the trans-Atlantic declaration signed in Madrid last December . And also whether it is legitimate to introduce an instrument to attack our national sovereignties in the pretence of defending that of the world 's most powerful country .
No nation has the right to prevent the rest of the world trading with whoever it wishes .
If it does so it will be breaking the rules which were reached in the World Trade Organisation and this calls for the punitive action contemplated for extreme cases and executed under the mandate of supra-national political institutions .
On the other hand , if the intention of these unilateral measures is to bring an end to the current Cuban regime the effect is the opposite one - in other words the Cuban regime has been strengthened .
If the intention is to prevent us from achieving the European Union by weakening it or undermining our desire to build a civic , political , social , economic and monetary space , it too has failed .
This attack has helped to strengthen the Commission and the Council and the measures which we have announced in response have had the full backing of European public opinion .
Our group gives firm backing to our joint institutions and we therefore congratulate them ; but with the same firmness we should like to criticise any cracks which may have appeared .
From a consensus perspective it seems incomprehensible to us that the Spanish Foreign Affairs Minister should have held talks last week with Mr Mas Canosa , who is the inspiration behind this awful Act and the black lists .
I should like to make one last remark , Madam President .
Whether we like it or not it is the Cuban president who has won this battle , even though his political health is far from excellent .
Was it worth it for the White House to embark on such a fragile ship ?
Given the outcome , everything seems to point to a negative answer .
As we say in Basque , eskerrik asko , thank you very much , Madam President .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I am very concerned at the attendance and surprised that there has been so little participation in this House by our British colleagues during this whole debate on the Irish presidency .
In fact , only one Member spoke and he did not address the issue of Northern Ireland .
I do not know what kind of a message that will send to people in Ireland .
Are they not concerned ?
Do they not worry ?
Is it contempt , or what ?
For the first day of a presidency , I have never seen this before and I am quite concerned that not one has participated .
Madam President , that is a quite unwarranted attack .
I have been here throughout this discussion .
I can tell you that until this morning it was not clear from the presidency of Parliament at what stage the issue of Northern Ireland would be dealt with : whether it would be dealt with in the Irish presidency discussion or whether there would be a special slot provided tonight .
The leader of the British Labour Members wished very much to speak but , because we had no idea of when , we had anticipated that the debate would take place tonight .
So , I reject entirely that suggestion that there is disinterest .
There is very great interest and concern amongst all the British Members of this House .
That is a quite unwarranted attack and should be withdrawn .
Firstly , let me say that I have listened very attentively .
I thank the Members for their contributions .
There are a number of things which strike me very forcibly .
Firstly , we in the Irish presidency are setting out to ensure that we have an effective and efficient presidency .
It is well-known by Members of the European Parliament that for a small Member State the presidency is an enormous challenge .
It brings with it great demands on a small country .
We have shown in the past , most recently in 1990 , that we are capable of an effective and efficient presidency .
I can assure Parliament that is our intention in the course of the next six months .
There seems to be sufficient consensus on the priorities of the presidency .
Someone quoted a business expression that if you have too many priorities , you have no priorities and the European agenda is certainly a very full one .
It is an obligation on the Irish presidency to ensure that we address all of the items on that agenda .
Some of them will be dealt with as an immediate priority , others will be taken along and progress achieved over a period of time .
But what strikes me from this debate here this morning is that there is very strong consensus on the fact that employment remains top of the agenda , that the drugs question must be tackled in an effective manner by all European Member States in cooperation with other regions .
We must work and strive to establish social justice and bring Europe closer to its citizens .
I think that sometimes we under-sell the achievements of Europe to our citizens and indeed to ourselves .
We , as politicians - both the European parliamentarians and the Member State governments - have to work harder to ensure that the people of Europe realize what is happening in the Union and what we are trying to achieve both domestically , internally and in our external relations and in terms of the role that we have to play .
Obviously at the end of the presidency we are going to be judged by results .
We are prepared to face that test .
Two senior formations of the Union have met in the last few day .
We have had the ECOFIN meeting and the General Affairs Council on Monday and Tuesday of this week .
I certainly hope that already we have given very strong signals and demonstrated that our presidency is going to be effective : we are going to get the business done and address the agenda items we have before us .
I also welcome the tenor of the remarks by colleagues here in terms of the spirit of cooperation and solidarity which was expressed .
I can assure you that is going to be the hallmark of the relationship between the Irish presidency and the European Parliament for the next six months .
In relation to Northern Ireland I feel that I have to respond because so many people expressed their concern .
I have been directly or indirectly involved in Northern Ireland on behalf of the Irish Labour Party or on behalf of the Irish Government for over 14 years .
I have to say that it is no exaggeration to state the level of despondency which has permeated Northern Ireland for the last number of days .
The despondency is particularly palpable because of the optimism that existed in Northern Ireland between the parties and between the public at large in Northern Ireland over the period 1994 / 95 during the cease-fire .
There was an air of optimism that people under the age of 25 had never experienced previously .
All they had known was terrorism , bombs and civil strife over the past twenty-five years .
We have to get back into dialogue between the parties and we have to do that as a matter of urgency .
That is the responsibility for the governments and for the political parties in Northern Ireland .
Through dialogue we have to develop tolerance and we have to find a peaceful accommodation which will be built on mutual respect and equality and we have to get away from the politics of domination and from the threat of violence .
Those are objectives of the governments and , already with the meetings which took place yesterday and further meetings today and tomorrow , we are working towards those objectives .
In relation to the presidency and the European Parliament , I can assure you that Irish Ministers will be in full consultation in the months ahead .
We will be attending many of your committee meetings and my hope - and indeed my certainty - is that we will cooperate closely with you on advancing the many technical dossiers which provide the foundation of European economic integration .
Many Members have mentioned the difficulties which Europe faces in relation to the Helms-Burton legislation .
Let me reiterate that we share the desire of the United States for reforming Cuba .
We seek the establishment of political freedom and full respect for human rights in Cuba and we should work together with the United States for these common aims .
I am sure that Members are aware that at the General Affairs Council on Monday , at the first opportunity that was available to us during our presidency , we reaffirmed our concern to promote democratic reform in Cuba but we also recalled our deep concern , already expressed in the European Council at Florence , at the extra-territorial effects of the Helms-Burton legislation .
We moved very quickly to give a very strong signal of our intention to respond to any damage which the application of legislation could cause to European interests .
I have to say that I welcome President Clinton 's decision yesterday to suspend for six months the right to bring action under Title 3 of the Helms-Burton legislation .
This is a useful step and we will carefully examine its implications .
However , it must also be said that it does not remove the extra-territorial effect of the legislation nor does it remove the restrictions which have been applied to European businessmen .
The Helms-Burton legislation has been condemned by the main trading partners of the United States and I certainly hope that the United States will reflect further on the implications of its action and work with its partners to protect and promote an open international trading system for the benefit of all .
Through the trans-Atlantic agenda we have a framework to further develop Europe 's relations with the United States .
As I have already indicated , the Irish presidency intends to advance cooperation with the United States in the many areas covered by this dialogue .
A number of speakers have referred to the discussions which are taking place in the IGC on the ways in which the Union 's common foreign and security policy can be strengthened .
I will be addressing these issues in the debate on the Fernndez-Albor report immediately after this debate .
The IGC is currently addressing the aim identified by the Florence European Council of strengthening and enlarging the scope of the CFSP , including the Union 's security and defence dimension .
This discussion also embraces the question of closer links between the EU and the WEU .
As their first priority , many Members raised the matter of employment and I would point out that the Irish experience of local development , which is an integrated approach to tackling disadvantage including unemployment black spots , will be the subject of a European conference in Dublin during our presidency .
The OECD report on the Irish experience of local development was recently published and I commend it to Members of the European Parliament who may be interested in this topic .
On the issue of free movement , I have listened very carefully to the remarks made by the honourable Members here today .
This issue could be very appropriately discussed when the President-in-Office of the Justice and Home Affairs Council , Minister Owen , meets the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs in September .
It will be very useful to hear the views of the committee on this important issue .
Many Members raised the question of Cyprus .
I would state that the prospect of accession to the EU by Cyprus offers an opportunity and incentive to seek a political settlement on the Cyprus question .
It was in this context that the Italian presidency appointed a special representative .
As holder of the EU presidency , Ireland will seek to continue the Union 's support to contribute to the international effort to make progress towards an agreed settlement .
At the General Affairs Council this week I announced the appointment of Ambassador Heaslip as the presidency 's representative for Cyprus and we will consult with our partners when his recommendations are available on how the Union 's approach to Cyprus might be further developed .
Many mentioned the difficulties in former Yugoslavia , a concern which I would share myself , having visited the region in the last ten days .
The position of the European Union , as it was set out at the European Council at Florence , is that the peace agreement excludes those indicted by the international criminal tribunal from running for office .
Mr Karadzic 's removal from the political scene is essential and indeed vital .
The presidency will continue to work urgently together with others in the international community to achieve this objective .
Likewise in relation to Kosovo , the European Union is very concerned at the situation .
The Council expressed the hope that further steps by the Belgrade authorities , notably as regards Kosovo , would allow the development of good relations with the former Republic of Yugoslavia as well as improvement of Belgrade 's position within the international community .
We will maintain pressure towards this end .
Mention was made of the importance of the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue .
I personally put great emphasis on the achievements of the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue to date and particularly the success of the Barcelona Conference during the Spanish presidency .
We have that as a priority and I am very glad , and I am sure Council Members are aware , that on Monday of this week , with the approval of MEDA , took a very important step in the direction of enhancing relations between Europe and the Mediterranean region and we will continue with that work .
In fact , this afternoon we have a meeting with the Foreign Minister of Turkey to discuss relations between the European Union and Turkey , which I know is of concern to Members .
We will use all of our abilities to make progress with regard to the relationship between Turkey and the European Union .
Madam President , I welcome the contributions made by the Members of the European Parliament .
As I said at the outset , I look forward during the Irish presidency to working very closely with you , the elected Members of the European citizens .
I know that good work between the institutions will be vital if we are going to make the progress that we have said we want to make on the various dossiers and the various agenda items of the European Union .
The debate is closed
Welcome
Before proceeding with the agenda , I would like to welcome on your behalf a delegation from the Sabor , the Croatian Parliament , which is in the gallery and is being shown round by the President of the Parliament , Mr Pavletic .
I hope your work will be beneficial , and we are certain that it will be .
I welcome you on behalf of Parliament .
( Applause )
Progress in CFSP
The next item is the report ( A4-0175 / 96 ) by Mr Fernndez-Albor , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the progress made in implementing the common foreign and security policy ( January-December 1995 ) .
Madam President , as you will know this the second time that the European Parliament is holding a debate which , pursuant to Article J.7 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union , it must hold on progress achieved in implementing the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
In order to facilitate an orderly debate in the plenary session , the committee which it is my honour to chair has presented a report which we hope is balanced and likely win over an overwhelming majority of the Assembly .
The draft report drawn up by my predecessor , Mr Matutes , was amended in committee by all political groups , with 57 amendments in all , most of which were incorporated into the text which is being presented today .
It must be pointed out that most of the amendments were more amendments of form than substance , perhaps with the exception of those referring to the subjects of security and defence which , as we shall see , are still posing certain problems of analysis and interpretation , as well as the objectives and the general conception of European integration .
It is important to emphasise that the Committee on Foreign Affairs did not want to duplicate the work already carried out the Assembly in respect of the necessary improvements which must be introduced into Title V during the Intergovernmental Conference which is under way . We have tried to keep to the Treaty provision limiting our exercise to analysis of the developments of the CFSP and the main thrust of the European Union 's activity in this area over the year 1995 .
The general spirit of the report , and the motion for a resolution presented , is quite critical .
This could not be any other way since in general terms 1995 was not a satisfactory year for development and implementation of CFSP .
This lack of any development in the CFSP is all the more obvious since the Union 's external activity was particularly intense .
It was intense and we could even say that it was satisfactory in terms of the Union 's external activity of a conventional nature .
Along these lines the signing of the agreement with Mercosur , the Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean Conference , active and practical participation in the reconstruction plan for former Yugoslavia , the trans-Atlantic Pact , the signing of association agreements with Morocco , Tunisia , the Baltic States , etc . , are major successes but does this mean that we have made any progress in developing a common external policy , does it mean that all of the potential of Title V of the Treaty has been put into action or does it even mean that we can detect a positive trend ?
We do not think so .
The perception we have , which also coincides with other analysts and public opinion , is that very little is being done to put into motion a CFSP worthy of that name .
Therefore we think it is incongruous and discouraging ( in points 9 of our motion for a resolution ) that such intensive , fruitful conventional external activity should have produced so little development of the CFSP instruments .
Indeed , we wish to emphasise the imbalance that exists in the Union 's external activity .
On one hand , we sign treaties and pay bills and yet , on the other hand we do not actually take any diplomatic initiatives which live up to our ambitions .
The Treaty on European Union was a lukewarm attempt at overcoming the differences in European political cooperation and to assert , as it says in Article B , the European Union 's identity in the international arena .
That is why we were given a European political cooperation consisting of three elements : common action , common positions and the definition of a common defence policy .
These three elements , which are vital for developing the non-conventional or diplomatic part of our external relations , has suffered very slow development , not to say non-existent , compared with the level of everyone 's expectations , during the period which we are assessing .
That is why in point 12 of the report we deplore the apparent confusion between the use of common positions and common measures .
Their use seems to be the result of random or capricious designs which are no substitute for the application of instruments of a different scope devised for different situations .
It would seem necessary to emphasise that , when we speak of a common deterrent system , there is no reference to the fact that that deterrent should have anything to do with nuclear deterrents , a subject which does not appear anywhere in the report and which lies outside the subject which we are dealing with .
Our subject matter is only that of developing - as provided for in the Treaty on European Union - a credible common defence and security policy , one which is therefore dissuasive and effective .
However , the term ' deterrent ' is an unfortunate one because it is associated with nuclear weapons .
Nothing prevents its being deleted in the text .
I wish to conclude by regretting , as the report does in point 27 of the motion for a resolution , that we have not been capable - and I sincerely think this is not the fault of the European Parliament - to reach an inter-institutional agreement for correctly implementing Article J.4 of the Treaty .
We have to point out that the Council has systematically ignored the European Parliament 's recommendations on external policy and - which seems even more serious to me - has not even bothered to explain its stance politically .
The European Parliament is entitled to be informed and consulted and that right has not been respected .
Madam President , my presentation of Ireland 's priorities earlier today gives a flavour of the increasing scale of the European Union 's external engagement .
The Union 's activity in the foreign policy area has intensified considerably since the establishment of the common foreign and security policy .
The Treaty on European Union expressed the Union 's ambition to act coherently and effectively on the international scene .
It provided , for this purpose , a mechanism for the definition of a common policy .
The European Parliament 's resolution , which is the subject of this debate , aptly describes the common foreign and security policy as an evolutionary process which must progress slowly but steadily in the direction of the objectives clearly laid down in the Treaty on European Union .
Since the Treaty came into force , the Council has worked to develop agreed approaches to the major challenges confronting the Union and the procedures necessary for their implementation .
The Intergovernmental Conference 's review of the CFSP provides a timely opportunity to take stock of the progress achieved and to consider aspects which may require improvement .
The deliberations of the Reflection Group last year helped to identify and clarify the issues to be addressed at the IGC .
I would like to salute , in this regard , the invaluable contribution made to the work of the Reflection Group by the European Parliament 's representatives , Mrs Guigou and Mr Brok .
The concern expressed in Parliament 's resolution about the lack of an identifiable analysis centre capable of evaluating risks and threats is broadly shared by its Member States .
The IGC is considering the modalities for the possible establishment of a planning and analysis capacity at Union level which could serve as a focus for the identification of the common interest on foreign policy issues and facilitate the formulation of rapid and effective responses to these challenges .
The Conference is also reviewing the procedures for the adoption and implementation of foreign policy decisions and the Treaty provisions on security and defence policy .
Parliament 's resolution correctly observes the establishment of the CFSP is not an end in itself but rather a means to promote the Union 's objectives in relation to international peace and security , the development and consolidation of democracy , respect for the rule of law and fundamental freedoms .
These objectives are pursued in a range of international fora , in particular the UN and the OSCE , and through the development of the Union 's relations with its third country partners .
Various means are used for this purpose .
While joint actions and common positions are important CFSP instruments , they are by no means the sole measure of the scope or effectiveness of the Union 's foreign policy activities .
The new trans-Atlantic agenda and the action plan adopted at Madrid in December 1995 , for example , represent a detailed strategy for closer EU-US cooperation in promoting international peace , stability , prosperity , democracy and human rights .
Comprehensive political cooperation mechanisms have been developed with the European associate countries within the framework of the pre-accession strategy and structured dialogue .
Notable progress has been made towards aligning the foreign policy positions of applicant countries with those of the Union in preparation for enlargement .
The stability pact initiative of the Union , which was concluded last year , provides a framework for the development of cooperation and good neighbourly relations between the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , which are party to it .
A more profound relationship is being developed with the countries of the former Soviet Union ; the European Union is committed to negotiating partnership and cooperation agreements with Russia and each of the newly independent states , based on the principles of partnership and mutual respect .
A number of agreements have already been negotiated .
They are wide-ranging in scope and include important provisions on political dialogue , support for the consolidation of democratic structures and protection of human rights .
The first parliamentary elections to the state Duma , established under the 1993 Constitution , and the recent presidential elections - both of which were observed by the EU - were important milestones in the process of democratic reform in Russia .
The situation in Chechnya , however , remains a cause of concern , especially in the light of the recent resumption of fighting .
The Union is continuing its support for the efforts of the OSCE to promote a negotiated settlement for this conflict .
The declaration adopted at the Barcelona Conference in November 1995 represents a major step in the development of the Union 's relations with its neighbours in the Mediterranean region , including the core parties to the Middle East peace process .
The declaration established a process for deepening cooperation and partnership in the political , security , economic , social and cultural fields .
It sets out a number of principles and objectives , together with a work programme , which is being actively implemented .
The progressive development of all aspects of the partnership is a key objective of the Irish presidency .
I am very pleased to be able to report in this context that the General Affairs Council this week adopted the MEDA regulation .
This will give effect to our cooperation in the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
In 1995 the Council agreed general guidelines for the cooperation between the Union and Latin America for the period leading up to the 21st century .
The political objectives of such future cooperation relate to institutional support for consolidation of democratic processes and respect for human rights with the involvement of civil society and in a context of open regionalism .
With a view to redirecting its institutionalized dialogue with all countries in the region , the Union entered into a number of innovative dialogue arrangements .
These included the signature of an interregional framework cooperation agreement with Mercosur at the Madrid European Council , preparation of an agreement with the Andean Pact countries - a political declaration was signed recently - and the signature of joint declarations with Mexico and Chile .
These provide a dynamic framework for strengthening relations between the European Union and Latin America .
Asia is now a major player on the international scene , in political as well as economic terms .
The European Union is giving due priority to developing the dialogue between the Union and Asia and its countries and leaders .
The Bangkok Summit established a new comprehensive Asia-Europe partnership aimed at strengthening links with a view to promoting peace , global stability and prosperity .
The meeting agreed a number of specific follow-up measures in the political and economic areas .
The Asia-Europe process provides the Union with an enhanced framework to develop mutual understanding with its Asean partners and to pursue its foreign policy interests and concerns in the region .
As well as developing its external relations , the Union has continued its involvement in international efforts to address the major contemporary challenges to peace and stability .
The peace agreement on Bosnia-Herzegovina , concluded last December , was a culmination of a sustained commitment by the international community , to which the European Union contributed substantially .
The Council has at all times been concerned to ensure the Union 's capacity to respond rapidly and flexibly to the evolving situation on the ground , in close consultation with its main international partners .
It has used the instruments available to it under the Treaty on European Union for this purpose .
The challenge now is to develop the structures necessary to secure and consolidate the peace .
The Union is playing a key role in the implementation of the civil aspects of the peace accord through its contribution to economic reconstruction and its joint actions in support of the high representative , Mr Carl Bildt , the electoral process in Bosnia-Herzegovina and humanitarian assistance , including de-mining activities .
The Union is also pursuing its support for the Middle East peace process on the basis of the approach set out in the Florence Declaration .
The Union has played an active , constructive and even-handed role in cooperation with the co-sponsors of the process and the regional parties .
It has been the principal provider of economic assistance to the Palestinian authority and has participated actively in the development of Palestinian institutions .
The major role played by the Union in the organization and supervision of the January 1996 elections which led to the establishment of Palestinian institutions on a democratic basis was widely appreciated in the region .
The continuing violence in the Great Lakes region and in particular Burundi has been a matter of serious concern to the Council , reflected in the series of steps taken with a view to alleviating the crisis .
The common position on Burundi adopted in March 1995 expressed the EU 's support for the process of national reconciliation and for dialogue between the local parties .
This instrument also provided a framework for EU assistance in the form of support for the OAU military observer mission in Burundi and for the sending of human rights observers by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights .
In the light of subsequent developments the Council appointed an EU special envoy to the region .
He is actively supporting the ongoing peace efforts of the UN , the Organization of African Unity , regional leaders and other mediators such as former Presidents Carter and Nyerere .
The Council supports the objectives of the security assistance process recently initiated at Arusha and hopes that it will help to create the conditions for an inclusive and substantial political dialogue between the parties .
The Council strongly condemned the execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa in November 1995 and subsequently adopted two common positions on Nigeria , both of which were designed to encourage respect for human rights and a return to civil democratic rule there .
These included measures such as restrictions on visas to members of the security forces , an arms embargo and a suspension of development cooperation .
The Union has continued to monitor the situation in Nigeria closely and intends to pursue its examination and identification of possible further measures against that country .
The primary objective of the common position on Angola adopted in October 1995 was to assist its government in firmly establishing democratic structures and the rule of law .
Other provisions included pursuing EU participation in efforts to alleviate the suffering of refugees and to encourage respect for human rights .
The Union supplemented its activity in this area with a pledge of almost $ 800m in humanitarian rehabilitation assistance at the UNDP round-table last year .
In the context of its joint action on mine clearance the EU has contributed ECU 1.5m to mine clearance projects in Angola .
Early completion of the military demobilization process is crucial to the long-term underpinning of the peace process .
As well as responding to immediate crises , the Union is also seeking to address the underlying causes of conflict in Africa through its ongoing practical dialogue in cooperation with the Organization of African Unity .
In its conclusions of 4 December 1995 , the Council reiterated that preventive diplomacy , peacekeeping and international security are priority aims of the CFSP .
It outlined the principles behind the Union 's contribution in support of action taken by African bodies , in particular the OAU , to establish conflict prevention and resolution mechanisms .
These principles are now the basis of the EU 's ongoing dialogue with the OAU in this important area .
They are aimed at assisting the OAU 's efforts to create its own effective conflict prevention and resolution mechanisms by providing training , expertise and logistical support in the areas of early warning , preventative diplomacy and peacekeeping .
The joint action on anti-personnel landmines , adopted on 12 May 1995 , was a significant step in the European Union 's efforts to address the tragedy caused by the indiscriminate use of weapons of this kind in many countries .
The joint action established a common moratorium on the export of anti-personnel landmines and made provision for active preparation of the review conference of the 1980 Inhumane Weapons Convention and a contribution to international mine clearance .
While the joint action did help to give some impetus to the work of the review conference , the outcome fell short of our expectations , and some of the goals set out in our joint action in a number of important respects .
Our objective now is to reach agreement on an updated joint action in order to maximise the European Union 's contribution to the international movement for a world-wide ban on these weapons .
I welcome the emphasis placed by Parliament 's resolution on the protection of human rights in its endorsement of the efforts made by the Council to uphold this principle .
The Council 's annual report to Parliament on the Union 's activities in the human rights area was presented earlier this month by President Hnsch .
The Irish presidency will pursue the Union 's efforts to advance respect for human rights and to ensuring this objective remains at the heart of the Union 's policies in general and its common foreign security policy in particular .
I would like to thank the European Parliament for providing the Irish presidency with an opportunity for an early exchange of views on CFSP .
I would like to assure you again of our commitment to keep Parliament informed of developments in the CFSP area over the coming months , and I look forward to a constructive working relationship between the Council and the European Parliament , which will enable the Union to effectively meet the challenges which lie ahead .
Mr President-in-Office , thank you .
We are suspending the debate on this report ; we shall resume at 3.00 p.m.
Votes
The next item is voting time .
I propose that we change the order of voting slightly , if only because of the Members who are present in the Chamber . We shall start with Mr Wolf 's recommendation and then vote on Mr Piecyk 's report , Mr Hoppenstedt 's recommendation and Mr Meier 's recommendation .
We shall then move on to the reports , or rather votes , which require an absolute majority , but before that we ought to vote on the calendar of part-sessions .
Are there any comments on this slightly amended procedure ?
Mr President , the vote on the calendar is precisely the point on which I would like to comment .
My request is a simple one : I would like you to declare inadmissible all the amendments relating to the number of plenary part-sessions at Strasbourg , for two reasons .
First , in order to comply with the Edinburgh compromise , and secondly because we should await the judgment of the Court of Justice , which has been asked to rule on this question .
Mr Wurtz , would you be good enough to put on your headphones so that I can say something to you !
I have just made a proposal to change the order of voting .
That has to do with the Members who are present in the Chamber .
I shall announce the calendar of part-sessions at a later point .
When I announce the vote on that item , you and anyone else who wishes to speak on it will have the opportunity to do so .
It is more efficient to do that when the item is announced .
Mr President , in yesterday 's debate there were a couple of ambiguities , which is why I wanted to say a few more words of clarification .
First of all , our vote today does not conclude our work on the trans-European networks , because they are , of course , subject to revision at regular intervals .
Secondly , some Members pointed out yesterday that a number of amendments to Annex I had not been considered . That is true , which is why we have agreed with the Commission that a separate proposal will be submitted for the ports , for instance , and that other parliamentary amendments which have not yet been considered will be taken into account by the Commission in the forthcoming revision .
Thirdly , the conclusions of the Florence Council caused annoyance here in Parliament , and in that respect I am very pleased that Mr Dini , in his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , set the record straight in our Brussels Chamber .
He stated that the Council had not made any unilateral amendments in Florence .
It was merely a question of acknowledging a proposed amendment to project No 8 ; any actual amendment would naturally be made through the codecision framework .
You know that we have both discussed the matter too , and under these conditions , Mr President , I can recommend to the House that we approve the joint text today .
( Parliament approved the joint text )
Mr President , I shall repeat my request , which is a very simple one .
Pursuant to Rule 125 ( 3 ) of our Rules of Procedure , I should like you to declare inadmissible all amendments on the draft calendar for the 1997 part-sessions which relate to the number of plenary part-sessions to be held in Strasbourg . I ask this for two reasons : first , in order to comply with the Edinburgh compromise , and secondly , Mr President , whatever your decision on that matter , we must wait until the Court of Justice , which is currently considering this problem , is able to give its judgment .
Mr President , I am grateful to be given the floor , all the more grateful because I didn 't ask for it .
As it is not a frequent occurrence for you to give it to me when I do ask for it , I would like to pay this small tribute .
Mr Striby spoke on my behalf .
Ladies and gentlemen , before we go any further with interventions of this nature , let me say the following : of course I have given thought to the question whether it is permissible to vote on this amendment today for the removal of an October part-session from the calendar , and I have examined the matter carefully .
Firstly , in the history of Parliament there are several precedents , and my predecessors have always considered amendments of this type to be admissible , and these amendments have always been put to the vote here in the House .
I should not like to deviate from that practice .
Secondly , last year we voted on a similar amendment .
It is now the subject of proceedings before the European Court of Justice .
Last year , by adopting the amendment , the House confirmed its de facto admissibility .
I shall not therefore proceed to complicate the case before the Court by deciding differently this year .
Thirdly , the House is free to adopt or reject the amendment .
Whoever considers it inadmissible must vote against it .
So the issue is in the hands of the House , and that is where I shall let it rest .
Mr President , I should like to make the point that we cannot accept your arguments , because the matter of admissibility is not a matter of fact but a matter of procedure .
Now , you are required to apply the Treaties and the Rules of Procedure , and having due regard to the Treaties and the Rules of Procedure - and the Treaties are definitive , since they represent a decision by the Heads of State and Government - you must declare these amendments inadmissible .
Ladies and gentlemen , you know every bit as well as I do that there are differing views in this House on the extent to which the Edinburgh decision is contractual in character .
The Court has yet to rule on the matter , so as long as there are differing views I shall apply the selfsame rule that Mr Striby quoted : ' The President shall decide whether amendments are admissible . '
That is the wording of Rule 125 ( 3 ) , and I have communicated that decision to you .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor on a point of order .
I am aware that you have difficulty in noticing certain people on your right , and so I am grateful for being given the floor .
I also wish to raise a point of order , in connection with the same points mentioned by previous speakers , Mr Pasty and Mr Striby in particular .
My own view is that the amendments are inadmissible .
I know you don 't agree with me , but even so I am bound to say that at a time when the intergovernmental conference is in session , it seems to me - irrespective of strictly legal questions , it seems to me , as I say - that , politically , it would be weakening Strasbourg to accept the symbolic submission of the European Parliament to the Council and Commission by deporting the sittings of the European Parliament to Brussels .
I believe that much of Parliament 's independence depends on the fact that its principal seat is located in a city other than the place where the Commission and the Council have their seats .
This submission , in my view , is quite deplorable . I wanted to make that point to honourable Members before the vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , we shall now proceed to the vote .
So that the matter can be properly resolved , you should refrain from trying to prevent or delay the vote by procedural ruses or interventions on points of order .
All Members have the opportunity to use their vote to express their views on the issue we have to decide here .
Mr President , it has been hard , but it has been worth the effort ; we are finally being heard in this House .
I do not wish to delay the vote , Mr President , I should simply like to ask you not to intervene every time a Member speaks , since you have now spoken five times on the same issue , whereas we can speak only once , and that with difficulty , because you rarely bother to look at either the far right or the far left .
I should therefore like to ask your collaborators to take more heed of Members ' requests to speak .
As regards the subject of our intervention , you have said that what happened with your predecessors was that only amendments of a certain kind were accepted , and yet you are doing just the same .
What comes to mind is the old Latin saying , errare humanum est , but it is a shame to see the same mistake being made again and again .
As for the special pleading for Brussels , I should like to denounce in this House the strange goings-on concerning the assets of both the Commission and Parliament , a problem on which we should like to see light shed , since somebody somewhere is getting shamefully rich at the expense of Parliament and of democracy .
Mr President , I am sure that the House overwhelmingly supports the statement you have made .
If this House is not sovereign in fixing its own agenda , what is it sovereign in ?
This must be understood , not just by the Council of Ministers and the European Council , but also by the Court of Justice .
Today we can send a signal .
I hope Parliament will do so .
Mr President , much has been made in this Parliament about the supremacy of this Parliament and also about observing the Rules of Procedure and the Treaties and so on .
Let us not forget that when Hitler wanted to take over , and impose Nazism on Germany he used so-called parliamentary democracy to this end .
What is happening here is that , by refusing to allow people to speak in this Parliament , by refusing to ensure that people abide by the Treaties and constitution of this Parliament and of the European Union , we are failing to fulfil our duty to set an example to people .
It is quite clear from the Treaties that Strasbourg is the seat of Parliament and , despite what the Members over there may try and say and despite what they may try and do , they are flying in the face of law , of constitutional law and of the rights of the people of Europe !
That is not a point of order !
Now please listen very carefully and concentrate on the vote !
Mr President , the comments of Mr Crowley are a disgrace to this House !
I would ask him to withdraw them straight away !
Mr President , with all the respect due to any honourable Member , I believe that making a comparison between a Parliamentary debate on the calendar and the political problem of Hitler 's Germany is not just a disgrace but also stupid , and unworthy of the European Parliament .
( Loud applause )
Mr Crowley , you can consider yourself fortunate that I did not hear what you said because of the noise in the House .
But I shall not permit any further debate on this question .
After the vote on Amendments Nos 1 to 7 :
Mr President , what you have just done is scandalous !
You have given proof of irresponsibility , and on top of that you have just violated the most elementary principle of democracy .
We are the authors of the amendments which you have just put to a block vote .
I ask you for the floor to withdraw some of those amendments . You refuse to give it to me .
Not only are you showing yourself to be totally irresponsible , you are also treating with contempt the right of each of us here to express an opinion .
When a Member tables amendments , he always has the right to speak before those amendments are voted on !
After the vote :
Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor , and I shall be very brief .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , now that things have calmed down , I would like to say a word about the majority in this House which is , as it were , legally empowered to do everything and anything .
Mr President , my point of order is based on Article 216 of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community , Article 77 of the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community and Article 189 of the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community . All these articles , Mr President , most explicitly provide - and they are available to you - that the seat of the institutions shall be determined by common accord of the Governments of the Member States .
The Edinburgh declaration , which is an international treaty , also forms part of the references .
If you create the principle that the parliamentary majority can violate the rules which determine that power , it can also violate the treaties on which that same power is based thus , as it were , sawing through the branch on which it is sitting .
Mr Gollnisch , the seat of the institution was not in any way the subject of this debate and vote .
At the Edinburgh Council , Strasbourg was designated as the seat of the institution .
Our vote here has merely been about holding a week 's part-session and nothing else !
Mr President , I was just looking at the text of Amendment No 21 , which we passed a few moments ago , which concerns changes to weeks 37 and 38 .
I note that it says week beginning 8 September and week beginning 15 September .
If you look at Parliament 's diary for 1997 , you will find that 8 and 15 September are actually Sundays and week-ending days , not week-beginning days .
Mr Cassidy , the calendar I have here does not show that .
We shall look into it , of course , but if you are correct the decision will stand , subject to the proviso that for Sunday the European Parliament will read Monday .
Mr President , at its meeting on 24 June 1995 the Committee on the Rules of Procedure gave a mandate to its chairman and to the rapporteurs to recommend a vote on the Nordmann and Ford reports , pursuant to Rule 114 of our Rules of Procedure .

The rapporteurs , and the chairman of the committee , recommend the House to reject all the amendments except those which were adopted in committee .
To the authors of the amendments whose rejection we recommend , I would say that our only purpose is to respect the commitments entered into by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , and that no value judgement is implied regarding the amendments whose rejection is proposed .
Some of the provisions contained in their amendments have , in any case , already been the subject of lengthy discussions within the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , and furthermore they will be discussed again during the preparation of subsequent reports which will be necessary for the continuation of our work .
I repeat , therefore , that the rejection of these amendments , some of which contain interesting ideas that will be useful for the further work of the committee , does not imply any value judgement .

Mr President , following on Mr Fayot 's very fair presentation , I would like to withdraw my Amendment No 4 in the interests of Amendment No 10 , which has been put forward by Mr Nordmann .


Amendment No 4 , if I understand correctly , is thereby withdrawn .
Mr President , I owe our colleagues an explanation regarding Amendment No 10 .
I naturally endorse in its entirety the declaration by Mr Fayot , which relates to the other amendments .
Amendment No 10 is somewhat special : it is a formula which I proposed following the mini-debate that took place on Monday , when my report was restored to the agenda , in order to make it easier to arrive at a consensus .
Of course , this amendment only has any prospect of being adopted - as demonstrated by the previous votes since the debate at this sitting - if it is supported by the majority of the groups , and especially of the major groups .
It would appear , from information I have received , that one of the major groups is not endorsing this amendment .
In the circumstances , in my capacity as a rapporteur interested in achieving a consensus , all I can do is withdraw it , though I still hope - since our Rules of Procedure provide such a possibility - that it may eventually be taken up again by one of my colleagues !
Mr President , I should like to follow the very broad hint given by Mr Nordmann and adopt the amendment on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party .
Before the vote on Amendment No 10 :
Mr President , this amendment was not tabled in due time and is therefore to be regarded as an oral amendment .
I oppose it for two reasons .
The first is a formal reason : we have been discussing this text now for a year and a half and this is no time for last-minute compromise amendments .
My second reason concerns the merits .
There is no need of detailed rules for the application of provisions that have been adopted hitherto .
If anyone wants detailed rules of application it is because , in point of fact , he wants to oppose the reform .
In the interests of transparency and in the desire to ensure disclosure of all the financial provisions affecting us , I therefore oppose this amendment and I have no doubt that I shall find twelve other Members to oppose it with me .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , the fact is that this is a compromise amendment which was tabled in the proper manner .
It is also available in all languages .
The amendment was withdrawn , and the Rules permit another Member to take over the amendment , which thereby becomes a compromise amendment .
That is how we have proceeded .
I cannot see even the slightest error in that course of action , and so we shall now vote on Amendment No 10 .
After the vote on Amendment No 10 :
Mr President , expanding on what I said earlier , I shall also call you inventive . You have just invented forms of compromise amendments although there are no amendments to start with .
In our Rules of Procedure , provision is clearly made for compromise amendments when there are a number of amendments and when in order to resolve clashes between two or more amendments a compromise amendment is agreed by two or more political groups .
You have described as a ' compromise amendment ' something which was not a compromise amendment .
I therefore maintain the reservations I have entered .
Here again , I think that , pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , you should have asked if honourable Members were opposed to a vote .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I shall try to choose my words more carefully in future .
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Mr President , I just wanted to welcome Sir James Goldsmith to the Chamber on one of his rare visits to Parliament .
Had he been here a little earlier his French voters might have been happier about the outcome of the vote on the Brussels / Strasbourg question which was lost by one vote .
( Laughter )
Madam President , on behalf of our group I should like to reemphasize that it was a matter of great importance to us to vote against the trans-European networks .
We consider it absurd to want to fight unemployment by means of expensive showcase projects and to seek at the same time to use the structural funds for that purpose , funds which are actually intended to improve local infrastructures and create jobs .
In addition , it is now undisputed that readiness to finance these crazy projects is declining .
It is also undisputed that their disadvantages far outweigh their advantages .
As the Spanish Minister of the Environment made clear when he addressed our Parliament last year , such enormous central roadbuilding projects make no sense whatsoever , because they concentrate wealth to the detriment of the underprivileged and remote regions , since these transEuropean networks link large population centres which already enjoy a high level of development , these being the only areas in which it pays to engage in such expensive flagship projects .
The underprivileged regions derive no benefit whatsoever from them .
Anyone who suggests otherwise is lying , for Europe 2000-plus has already demonstrated this to be the case .
The underprivileged regions will be further depleted , and their social infrastructure will continue to decay .
This in turn would mean that we should have to inject more structural funds , but these would no longer be available .
In other words , such regions will be cut adrift .
The environmental clause with which Parliament sought to redress the balance in certain respects has been watered down in the compromise .
So the projects as they now stand do not even meet the requirements of the negotiated environmental clause ; in other words , the clause is mere window-dressing in which the Council is now engaged .
I am pleased that we shall be voting by roll-call .
And I should also be pleased if the Members did not only have to answer for their vote to the present electorate but also to future generations .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is simply out of a sense of responsibility that I am voting for the common project .
Although , on the one hand , Article 20 pays special attention to projects concerning multi-modal transport and priority attention to the ' Adriatic Corridor ' and a reading of Article 19 reveals the purely indicative nature of the list of 14 Essen projects , on the other hand , the entire affair , which has now been dragging on for years , bears witness both to the terrible behaviour of the Council , which has often taken action in total disregard of Parliament , and to the negative outcome of the Florence Summit .
I find it especially mortifying that this occurred during the Italian presidency .
It also emerges from a reading of Article 18 , and this is extremely worrying , that the Committee on the Exchange of Information and Relations does not include a representative of the European Parliament and that the individual Member States are not in a position to guarantee the funds needed to implement a serious transport policy , so as to create the infrastructures required to help the development of Europe 's peripheral areas .
It is now up to the individual Member States and especially , in my opinion as a representative of southern Italy , the Italian Government .
I hope the Italian Government , together with the Government of the Union , will be able to guarantee the effective implementation of projects that could , especially in the case of multi-modal transport , really bring the peripheral regions into closer contact with central and northern Europe .
Madam President , following all the excellent points made in the debate by my colleague Mr Le Rachinel , I shall confine my intervention to three points of more specific relevance to France .
The first relates to the Rhne-Sane-Rhine wide inland waterway .
This link is shown in the documents supplied by the French Authorities , but it is high time they told us clearly whether or not they believe that this waterway - which has been delayed for nearly a quarter of a century - is still profitable today , and whether its completion is compatible with environmental protection .
If not , of course , it would be completely ridiculous to create it bit by bit .
My second point is along the same lines , but in this case I refer to the high-speed rail link .
I would hope that , for once in a way , Europe might actually achieve something and that we could avoid what has been done up to now , which is that all rail traffic has been concentrated around Paris . So I am glad to see this proposed link appearing on the documents that have been supplied .
Finally , my third and last point relates to the airport map we have been given .
The French and European Authorities refer to the cities of Toulon , Perpignan and Nantes as having regional airports .
One of them , Toulon , was actually proposed as a future international airport .
I have just learnt that the national airline was not only refusing to serve these cities but was even intending to prohibit any other airline from serving them either . This is a completely unacceptable practice .
We in the Freedom Party voted for the report on guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport networks because the Brenner Tunnel , an important project for Austria , is part of these guidelines .
We note , however , that the new approach has considerably eroded the legal status of the list of priorities in Annex III , thereby jeopardizing the building of the Brenner Tunnel , which is of such great importance to Austria .
We also place on record that without an agreement on the funding framework these guidelines will be utterly meaningless .
The major trans-European transport networks are one of the most ambitious projects of the European Union , fundamental for strengthening the internal market , the movement of persons and goods and for economic and social cohesion .
That is why we welcome this general plan to be put into execution by the year 2010 .
However , in respect of Portugal we have to raise some reservations .
The first refers to the policy on sea-transport and renovation of the port network which is not exactly highlighted .
We hope that in 1997 the Commission will make more explicit its policy on this sector .
The second refers to the motorway link between Valladolid and Lisbon which was introduced at the Essen summit .
In 1995 the Portuguese government showed an interest in building this link on a route between the IP5 and IP3 highways with an extension across to the north-south motorway somewhere between Lisbon and Oporto .
This solution seems to us right as it serves the whole of the national territory .
The intention which is now being announced to link this motorway to the Portuguese capital seems to us unacceptable because it forgets about the northern hinterland , the centre of the country and the coastline .
This solution does not serve the objectives of harmonious development of the national territory as a whole .
If we only serve the capital there is no doubt that regional imbalances will only increase .
We will not be able to support this new solution since it does not clearly define the simultaneous purpose of benefiting the interests of the coastline and the centre of the country by doubling up the IP 5 highway .
It should also be added that since the Portuguese government announced at the Florence Summit that it could replace the Valladolid-Lisbon axis by a system of inter-modal transport , we are not certain at the moment which concrete project will comprise that system .
Without calling into question the possible merit of this project we think that the details should already be defined so that we can actually vote in knowledge of all of the facts .
For these reasons , I am unable to give my full support to this proposal as I would have liked .
I am voting against the conciliation committee 's proposal , which would entail the Union continuing to waste money on unnecessary and expensive motorway projects .
In view of the fact that the countries of the European Union are supposed to achieve the objectives of the UN 's Rio Declaration concerning the significant reduction of carbon dioxide emissions this proposal is a step in the wrong direction .
The Commission has itself pointed out that emissions of carbon dioxide will increase by almost 40 % under the ' business as usual ' scenario .
The proposed motorway projects are harmful to the environment and will of course increase emissions still further .
The proposed rules on environmental protection appear largely to be empty political rhetoric and are far from sufficient .
The resund bridge is a typical example of how you can try , using calculations which are not serious , to prove that there will be environmental benefits .
The economic calculations are even more laughable !
The problems of traffic jams can be solved more simply and in a more environmentally friendly manner through economic management systems , primarily through the introduction of a high carbon tax which can persuade transport users to switch from private cars to public transport .
In terms of energy consumption rail transport is more effective and should be supported today .
If all types of transport had to pay their own environmental costs rail transport would automatically become competitive .
Investment in motorways is also a bad thing in terms of equal opportunities .
It is almost exclusively men who will get the jobs .
The EMU convergence criteria have compelled the Member States to make panic savings in health care and care of the elderly and this has resulted in many women becoming unemployed .
The proposal does include some support for certain rail projects but this in no way compares with the massive contributions to motorways and airports which dominate the proposal .
We have reached the final episode of the long soap opera of trans-European transport networks .
After much shilly-shallying by the European Parliament and Council , we have before us the outcome of conciliation .
But it needs to be said that the lack of respect Council has shown for the joint decisionmaking procedure laid down by the Maastricht Treaty is scandalous .
We had hoped it would be possible to discuss the projects set out as priorities by the Essen Council of December 1994 , and perhaps even to replace some of them with more substantial , more useful or simply more feasible projects .
We were told this was no longer possible - for the European Parliament .
But the same did not apply to Council , which , at Florence , announced a very substantial change in one of those projects .
And how can we believe , in this day and age , that it will be possible to find the Lit 25 000 billion needed to build the Brenner tunnel , a tunnel that will moreover serve absolutely no good purpose ?
It is not even going to be possible to build the high-speed line between Lyons and Trieste according to programme .
Minister Burlando himself has told the European Parliament that through the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The two lines added concerning protection of the environment , which are , in any case , inadequate , do nothing to change our negative opinion of this document .
And that is a real shame .
The Greens are not against modernizing or speeding-up Europe 's transport networks .
But neither are we willing to sacrifice all the available money and energy on the altar of competitiveness to carry our outdated projects that serve few people and have a very serious environmental and social impact .
First of all a word of thanks to the chairmen of the conciliation talks , the Italian minister and our principal Vice-President , Mrs Nicole Fontaine .
Both of them steered the talks with a great deal of dedication , patience and understanding .
Thanks and praise are due also to rapporteur Piecyk and Commissioner Kinnock .
The outcome is decidedly not as good as it might have been and it has created confusion .
Certainly , after what Council President Dini said at our last part-session in Brussels and following the Commissioner 's first letter to committee chairman Cornelissen , I thought that Parliament 's power of co-decision was clear enough and what Commissioner Kinnock subsequently told Mr Simpson simply gave rise to confusion and suspicion .
Why was this letter in fact necessary and why was it made public ?
In football terms this was a one-two which the referee should not have allowed .
The Commissioner 's reaction to Mr Bourlanges , who asked a number of perfectly reasonable questions , was certainly not the courteous reply which Parliament would have expected and prompted the VicePresident in the chair to intervene .
Regarding the matter in hand : in line with our criteria giving preference to environmentally friendly modes of transport Parliament adopted an altogether acceptable compromise on Malpensa airport at the second reading , and this was a clear sign of goodwill on our part that we were prepared , in exchange for recognition of our power of co-decision , to accept the list in Annex III without amendment .
The Commission was certainly in no doubt about that .
Given the budget appropriations , the list of networks as such and as shown in Annex I is certainly too long to be taken seriously .
The decision of the European summit in Essen to designate fourteen priority projects was thus understandable and sensible .
So it will not do subsequently to try to undermine Parliament 's power of codecision by saying that this list of priorities is ' a matter for the bosses ' and sacrosanct .
That was our complaint and the ultimate result of the conciliation procedure , as confirmed by Minister Dini 's statement .
In line with my contribution to the conciliation procedure , my Group has thus voted in favour of the result we have now .
Our citizens are now looking for concrete results , especially in view of the extra resources and extra positive effects on employment promised by Commission President Santer .
Those national politicians who believe that Europe cannot help to combat unemployment by carrying out infrastructure projects over and above the national interest have totally misunderstood .
The TENs , which are joint European undertakings , represent a positive contribution to the prosperity and integration of future generations and for that reason we can all be very happy with the result achieved .
Hoppenstedt report
In this report from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , Parliament is maintaining its position from the first reading in January this year .
The point is to ensure that in the selection of projects eligible for support as part of the development of trans-European telecommunications networks , sufficient emphasis is placed on projects which have a practical utility value for both businesses and private users of telecommunications services .
The information society is not emerging of its own accord : it must be developed by exploiting in practice and gradually expanding our awareness of the scope of information technology , as indicated in the Commission 's White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment of December 1993 .
In this context , Parliament wishes this joint European Parliament and Council decision to be implemented in accordance with Article 129d of the Treaty , whereby Article 189b will be applied .
This request should be supported - not least in the light of the commendable consistency with which Parliament has acted over a number of recent years in its efforts to promote technological development and to strengthen Europe 's competitiveness through extensive liberalization of the telecommunications sector .
Meier recommendation for second reading
At the first reading of the Commission 's original proposal for a directive , which took place in the spring of 1994 , the European Parliament adopted a large number of amendments aimed at increasing the safety requirements for pressure equipment which is produced and marketed in the EU .
In view of the nature of the products , there can of course be no concessions regarding user and consumer safety .
Of the 25 amendments which Parliament adopted at first reading , the Council has so far accepted 14 .
Before the second reading , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy therefore retabled ten amendments and tabled another five , with a view to further specifying the requirements to be met by pressure equipment before it is placed on the market .
There is every reason to encourage the committee and its rapporteur to maintain the amendments tabled in the recommendation during the discussions which must now be expected to start in the conciliation committee .
I can therefore fully endorse the recommendation and the amendments it contains as a basis for approving the Council 's common position .
I am afraid that safety standards regarding pressure equipment will in time fall .
The need for third party checks on such equipment is an important one and should have been established for even more of the equipment concerned .
The preparations for the approximation of Member States ' legislation have , however , been long and complicated ( the first reading in the European Parliament took place as long ago as April 1994 ) , and this has greatly restricted my ability to exert any influence over the report at second reading in the European Parliament .
Nordmann report
In voting on the Nordmann report , the European Parliament is initiating a salutary arrangement with regard to transparency and the financial interests of its Members .
This is a first step , though no more than that , towards a definition of the status of Member of the European Parliament defined at Union level .
No doubt it was impossible , as yet , to go beyond this compromise , given the diversity of traditions and practices in force in the various Member States .
That is why , despite its inadequacy , I voted in favour of this amendment to the rules , because , being unable to prohibit any form of financial support , it makes its disclosure compulsory .
I believe this is an advance as compared with the secret nature of the present situation , an advance which I feel sure will reduce the scale of these deplorable practices .
But total prohibition , which is still imposed on the French Members by national legislation and case law , should be our own , and the sooner the better .
The study of the Nordmann report , and the debate and vote on it , as in the case of the Ford report , had only one purpose and one meaning for me : the need to ensure , in conditions of the greatest possible transparency , the greatest possible independence of elected representatives from their economic environment .
In order to carry out his duties ( and perhaps ensuring that he does carry out his duties ' effectively ' ) , a Member of Parliament receives various forms of compensation .
They are justified and they are amply sufficient !
We must , then , prohibit any financial or material gift to a Member from any quarter whatsoever , and we must monitor compliance with that prohibition .
This is clear , it is simple , all we have to do is do it !
This a vital matter for the image of politicians and therefore for ' politics ' ... and for the future of democracy !
Mr Nordmann has done his job well , admittedly sometimes creating the feeling in some of his colleagues that he has something of a taste for ' liar 's poker ' .
Each of us has today had the opportunity to indicate in full public view what he wanted and display his choices .
As far as I am concerned , after twenty years of electoral life , I have only one regret - that we waited so long and wasted so much time before reaching this point .
The politician works for ' the public ' .
He is paid for it by ' the public ' .
He must provide a full accounting of what he has done and what he has earned and what assets he holds .
And that 's that !
At a time when public opinion is demanding transparency and rectitude from those who are elected to administer public life , it is high time that the European Parliament emerged from its protective cocoon with a clear statement of support for total prohibition of financial or material gifts to any Member from any person whatsoever .
Those were the conclusions of the working group set up by this institution and adopted by Mr Nordmann , and those are conclusions which I irrevocably support .
Members of the European Parliament , like their colleagues in the national Parliaments , receive allowances - public allowances , which are verified and verifiable - to enable them to perform their duties .
Any external , parallel or other form of remuneration , or any hand-outs of any kind , must be totally and definitively prohibited .
Why adopt a complicated approach when we can adopt a simple one , easy to understand and clearly stated . I shall therefore be voting for the absolute prohibition of any gift .
Eriksson and Sjstedt ( GUE / NGL ) , Holm and Schrling ( V ) , in writing .
( SV ) For us democracy is synonymous with government by the people .
This means that the people govern in accordance with the principle of one person , one vote .
The rights of citizenship should be exercised through voting rights , rather than being the preserve of wealthy elites .
It troubles us that in the context of the debates on the Ford and Nordmann reports the Members of the European Parliament did not manage to prohibit lobbyists from offering gifts and bribes within the domain of the European Parliament .
It is even more serious that MEPs found themselves unable to decide that they themselves should give written and public assurances that they had not accepted and would refuse to accept gifts , staff support or other benefits other than those financed by their own institution .
Furthermore , Parliament refused to agree to make public payments by the ' Caisse des Dputs ' , one of its own service departments .
Taken as a whole , this behaviour makes it look to the public as if Parliament has something to hide .
As a result , Parliament 's credibility as a driving force for democracy and openness within the institutions of the EU has been dealt a serious blow , and one whose consequences may prove extremely difficult to reverse .
The vote on the Ford and Nordmann reports represents a first step on a difficult road - it involves disciplining the activities of Members of the European Parliament in their relations with the outside world .
First , I would say this : in contrast to political life in certain Member States , European politics has not so far been the subject of any political and financial scandals .
Even if demagogues of all hues do like to moralize and never tire of denouncing supposed scandals , it is fair to say that the European Parliament has so far been free of any ' affairs ' .
As this Parliament gains in stature and importance , pressure groups are taking more and more interest in it .
That is the subject of Mr Ford 's report .
Hitherto , honourable Members have never really known whom they would meet during a day 's work in the European Parliament buildings .
The registration of lobbyists and the observance of a number of rules are going to bring a little transparency into relations between Members and the representatives of interest groups .
The other aspect , covered in Mr Nordmann 's report , concerns Members ' interests .
My view is that most Members have nothing for which to reproach themselves .
Here again , though , the card is worth playing - maximum transparency on incomes , outside occupations , support received by a Member in that capacity .
We do not want any gifts or hand-outs , anything at all is too much . Let 's be clear about that !
So , this is a first step .
We should remember that the European Parliament is a young institution , taking shape slowly .
By contrast , the national parliaments are a century or even several centuries old , while the European Parliament elected by direct suffrage dates from 1979 .
It is having to invent common rules , a common mentality , a European approach to ethics , bit by bit .
This is a first step , an agreement that was difficult to reach .
The next steps are in preparation : European rules for Members of Parliament , rules relating to assistants and intergroups , a code of conduct for interest groups .
Here again , we know that consensus will take a long time to ripen .
But it will be essential if we are to construct a consistent , serious and effective parliamentary institution , in the service of democracy and transparency in Europe .
Mr Nordmann 's report on transparency and Members ' financial interests ought to be resulting in strict rules on the influence of lobbyists on the work of the European Parliament .
However , the rules set out in the Nordmann report do not resolve the difficulties at all .
Amongst other things , they allow support to be provided by third parties in terms of staff or materials .
Gifts of any kind should naturally be declared , but ideally there should not be any gifts at all .
This applies to all kinds of gifts , including meals and travel .
The rules should prohibit gifts completely , but they fail to do so .
That is why I have voted against the Nordmann report today .
I have voted for the Ford and Nordmann reports as first steps towards a system of rules on lobbying and economic openness for MEPs .
The reports are not sufficient , however .
Donations and gifts should not be allowed .
The lobby register should of course be public and anyone who so wishes should have access to it .
Industry and organisations should not be able to offer financial benefits to MEPs by appointing staff within companies or the equivalent who are in reality working for a particular MEP .
The European Parliament 's accounts concerning MEPs ' travelling and subsistence expenses should be public .
As everyone knows we are governed by the principle of not enjoying personal benefits accruing from the exercise of public activity .
That is why we call - and not only in the European Parliament - for greater transparency and an effective upgrading of the morals of politics .
With the moral authority of someone who not only calls for but also always applies these principles personally .
Therefore , our votes on the reports in question and amendments which have been tabled were determined by the following main aspects :
In respect of the Nordmann report :
The complete ban on Members of Parliament receiving , in the framework of their parliamentary duties , any amounts or other donations in addition to those to which they are institutionally entitled ;
The total transparency and guarantee of maximum public information on Members ' incomes from all sources .
In respect of the Ford report :
Total opposition to the institutional promotion of lobbying activity even when carried out under the cover of its own regulations ;
Total opposition to the growing - albeit relative - obstruction of access to parliamentary activity by persons or entities not organised by the European Parliament ;
Total opposition to the explicit or implicit ' legalisation ' of the receipt , by Members of Parliament , of any benefits from lobbies .
In all honesty I do not really understand the Clochemerle-style goings-on of the last few days , which ended in Mr Nordmann 's report being put back on the agenda .
If this report is approved - even supposing it is tightened up by the most radical of amendments and the Christian-Democrats ' amendment is thus rejected - even then we shall have tackled no more than the tiniest tip of the iceberg of Euro-profiteering .
This is mere window-dressing .
It is cosmetic surgery designed to suggest that some real action is being taken against Euro-profiteering ; profiteering which in recent months and , in contrast to what Mr Wilfried Martens said yesterday , has very properly come under fire from public opinion .
I note that we have a few hundred honourable Members in attendance today who accepted the offer of a bit of political tourism from the Turkish Government just prior to our vote on the customs union with Turkey .
I know that those who voted for this customs union were subsequently given a gift by the Turkish Government .
I see that this report does nothing to change the more than generous salaries and other remunerations paid to us Members of Parliament .
I see that this report does nothing to change the wholesale squandering by all kinds of European bodies of billions of taxpayers ' money , nothing to change the enormous frauds over Community funds , nothing about the scandal of the European Parliament 's building in Brussels , which has now cost twice the original estimate and has proved a nice little earner for certain financial groups with links to political parties .
In short , I shall vote for this report - assuming at least that the amendment of the European People 's Party is rejected - but without the slightest enthusiasm and in the knowledge that it is nothing more than a political sop .
Obviously transparency is vital if citizens are to recognise themselves in their representatives .
I doubt that this report or any other will make any contribution to this , something that should be a fundamental objective of any politician .
Transparency can only result from a culture rooted in a concept of participatory and widespread citizenship and the concept of the State at the service of the citizen .
Otherwise , it would always be a game of illusion .
That is the case of this report for which I voted out of respect for my colleague and out of solidarity for my group - but without any conviction .
After considerable hesitation I have decided to vote with the Socialist Group on this report .
However , I consider Amendment No 7 by the GUE / NGL Group to be quite clearly better than that proposed in the report .
In Sweden it is perfectly natural that Members ' annual declarations to the tax authorities of their incomes and assets should be public documents .
The same is true with regard to share ownership .
This should also be the rule for Members of the European Parliament .
It is wrong that contributions to Members in the form of staff or equipment provided on top of the generous secretarial allowance we receive today from Parliament should be permitted .
There are now far too many rich lobby organisations which provide Members with ' assistance ' with their work .
It is only reasonable to suppose that this affects Members ' attitudes on the substantive issues of the day .
A lobby organisation does not furnish a Member with staff and material resources out of pure idealism : they consider that they have something to gain from it .
Information on all the payments made by Parliament 's ' Caisse des Dputs ' to each individual Member should also be public .
To summarise , I believe that this report could have gone much further in establishing rules on the ethics governing Members ' work in Parliament .
Ford report
After considerable hesitation I have decided to vote with the Socialist Group on this report .
However , I consider Amendment No 4 by the GUE / NGL Group to be quite clearly better than that proposed in the report .
The report could have explained the conditions under which lobbyists are permitted to work in Parliament even more clearly .
The report should also have stated that it is extremely important that the people whose names appear in the lobby register should in some way provide assurances that they have not provided and do not intend to provide any kind of benefit , gift or service to Members , officials or assistants .
Such assurances , where given , should also be public and take the form of documents attached to the register .
I believe it is of the utmost importance that a proper examination is made of Parliament .
It is quite clear that MEPs are influenced by the attentions showered upon them today by rich and powerful pressure groups operating at EU level ; these attentions include everything from free lunches to help with the services of assistants and gifts .
Measures must be taken .
Unfortunately it is apparent to me that this report does not go far enough to deal with the problems in the European Parliament at present concerning the behind the scenes influence of lobby organisations on political decisions .
BSE
Madam President , I should like to speak to the few colleagues who are willing to listen , because that seems to me to be the best way of voicing some feelings that could never be expressed on paper .
The joint resolution on which we have just voted has links with two other resolutions on the same subject , which were adopted by Parliament on 31 July and 19 December 1988 .
Precisely eight years ago .
Those two documents called for information on the alarming news concerning cases of bovine spongiform encephalitis .
The disease , which had already been identified in 1986 by the UK 's central veterinary laboratory , was , in 1987 , the subject of epidemiological studies that indicated as its cause the use of meal produced from the meat and bones of ruminants .
It is hard to believe that the results of those studies did not reach the European Union 's Veterinary Committee and , hence , the competent commission .
The outcome was that the problem exploded in all its gravity .
But what is even more scandalous is the fact that the sensational news was covered up , in 1990 , by a high-ranking civil servant , so as not to damage the market .
The protection of public health and of the consumer was obviously nothing more than an optional item of the Treaties then .
But even though we have , since then , had the Maastricht Treaty , which has helped to increase awareness in many areas , we are still at stalemate as far as any concrete results are concerned .
And the situation is still the same , even after the debate and even after the explanations offered by President Santer and Commissioner Fischler .
Having shrugged off the responsibilities of their predecessors , these two have still not provided sufficient guarantees concerning unequivocal clarification and the punishment of those responsible .
Indeed , the ease with which unscrupulous traders are still managing to evade the embargo is deeply worrying .
I therefore believe that this document , together with the other two , of eight years ago , will end up in the book of records of demagogic outrage , lost opportunities and betrayed expectations .
Madam President , we voted for this resolution , which was drawn up jointly with most of the other groups .
We should have liked it to be more forceful in some points .
We should also have welcomed the adoption of the amendments that called quite explicitly for the appointment of a committee of inquiry .
Nevertheless , we assume that the resolution itself will result in a committee of inquiry being appointed .
Mr Santini , in his explanation of vote , clearly reiterated why this is necessary .
We now hope that this afternoon 's Conference of Presidents will recommend the establishment of a committee of inquiry and that Parliament will be able to vote on it tomorrow and institute the committee in due form .
If it is necessary to use this new instrument , which has been available to us since Maastricht , the purpose of its use is not to act against the Commission , be it in the case of BSE or in any other case , but to work with the Commission in its present efforts to identify where faults have occurred with a view to ensuring that both Parliament and the Commission follow a consistent line in future in the implementation of measures against this BSE epidemic .
Madam President , someone - it was Charles Maurras - said that you should never despair in politics , not even of the European Parliament .
For those who remember the atmosphere in Brussels three months ago , I recall that no one wanted to know about responsibilities .
We were the only ones to use the word .
No civil responsibility for the Demulder brothers who manufactured the contaminated feeds in Britain .
No political responsibility for the Commission , and not even any political or criminal responsibility for Jacques Delors .
Today , the matter is resolved .
Everyone admits that we must , at last , talk about responsibility .
Parliament has just taken its first step . It is going to admit , I hope , this afternoon , the Commission of Inquiry .
It still has a second step to take , that of the Philippe de Villiers group , which tabled the motion of censure .
And finally , as a third step , it has to admit its philosophical responsibility , because before contamination through feeds we had contamination through ideas - the ideas of free trade , the elimination of borders , hyperproductivism .
The pathogenic agent has been a philosophical one .
In its handling of the ' mad cow ' crisis , the Commission claims that it has always acted , within the limits of its powers and on the bases of the knowledge available to it at the time , in the best interests of public health in Europe .
Unfortunately , we have extensive evidence to the contrary , evidence that reveals radical malfunctions among the European institutions .
President Santer told us that the Commission must be judged by its acts and not on hearsay .
Since that is what he wants , let us talk about acts .
They show that , in the ' mad cow ' crisis , the Commission has always been behindhand and has , if anything , endeavoured to restrain the initiatives of those Member States that were anxious to protect the health of their citizens , before following on willy-nilly in their wake .
In this context , the chronology of events is revealing .
Let us take a few examples . It was 18 July 1988 that the United Kingdom decided to prohibit the use of bone meal in the feeding of ruminants ; it was on 24 July 1990 that France took a similar decision ; but it was not until 27 June 1994 that the European Commission adopted the same measure , although it had had all the necessary powers since the directives of 1989 and 1990 .
The same applies to the imposing of the ban .
In May 1990 , when France wanted to prohibit the importing of certain British beef and veal products , the European Commission threatened to bring proceedings against France before the Court of Justice , as recently recalled by Henri Nallet , the former Minister of Agriculture .
That action would have been brought on charges of interference with freedom of trade .
Indeed , the Commission later repeated its error : in February 1996 , when five German Lnder unilaterally prohibited imports of British beef and veal into their territory , the Commission dared to bring proceedings against the German Government , once again for obstructing the free movement of goods , which seems to be its one and only obsession .
It was not until the following March , when thirteen Member States in succession prohibited the importing of British beef and veal on their own initiative , that the Commission eventually gave way .
Consequently , if we judge it by its acts , as its President wants us to , the Commission has to be found guilty .
It is quite obvious that at every stage it was more concerned with pursuing its utopia of a European super-State with no internal frontiers than with the health and safety of its citizens - exactly as it is still doing today in another area , the area of border controls on individuals .
There is nothing accidental about this deplorable attitude : on the contrary , it reflects the constant priorities of the Commission , those same priorities which have isolated that institution from public opinion .
Conversely , it must indeed be recognized that the Member States , more in touch with the concerns of their populations , have at every stage done the right thing , even though the Commission obstructed them on each occasion before eventually trailing along behind .
This is the context in which we need to see the disclosure of certain internal Commission matters , such as the unacceptable pressures brought to bear on the experts of the Scientific Committee for Food , as disclosed by the press , and the astounding meeting of 12 October 1990 , where European officials calmly discussed campaigns of disinformation to deceive the consumers .
These facts are not anecdotal . They confirm the priority that the Commission attaches to free trade , even at the expense of human health , and its determination to conceal the failures attributable to its misdirection of the movement towards European union .
These manoeuvres also show that a very worrying state of mind prevails within the Commission : the Commission believes it is the keeper of a higher truth - higher than the nation states , higher than Europe 's citizens , and ultimately even higher than democracy .
This state of mind is all the more dangerous in that the Commission has exorbitant powers , such as the monopoly right of initiative .
We believe that , as things stand , the European Union can no longer tolerate this situation if it is not to be plunged into the abyss .
That is why we demand that the intergovernmental conference should at last remind the Commission of its true role , which is a subordinate one .
BSE is just one disease brought about by a sick agricultural policy , and the Commission should take the opportunity to restructure this policy systematically , so that taxpayers ' money is only used in future to support production conditions which we can justify in terms of an environmentally threatened planet , animal welfare and human health .
At the moment , we are directly encouraging the spread of animal disease through our systems of support .
We are paying extra for animals to be mistreated , and making extra payments to those who are polluting our groundwater by using more fertilizer , thereby posing a threat to the health of future generations .
The more that is produced , the more support is triggered .
The more that goes into surplus stocks , the greater the support .
The more that is destroyed , the more support we provide .
The more allergyproducing colourings that are added to conceal the lower quality , and penicillin to increase the shelf life , the more is milked from the EU 's coffers .
We should be calling a halt to this madness and reorganizing things , so that any support only encourages decent goals such as animal welfare , human health , the cleanliness of our planet and farmers ' incomes .
A new agriculture policy would hardly give landowners with 1000 hectares ten times as much subsidy as farmers with 100 hectares , ecological landowners would hardly receive less subsidy than those who use pesticides , and there would no doubt be fewer animal diseases among livestock which are not farmed as intensively as they are today .
That is what we should all be thinking , now in the era of BSE .
I voted in favour of the resolution on BSE , because of the assurances given by Commissioner Fischler that full background information would be made available on all measures taken by the Commission and other EU authorities since the early 1980s and because of the further research which has been announced .
In the interests of public health and of beef as a safe product these investigations must not , however , be an excuse for delaying tactics in the handling of the BSE affair , behind which the Commission can take refuge .
I would thus ask you to give Parliament a time scale for the management of this affair .
The scourge of BSE is destroying the beef industry throughout Europe .
The Florence agreement gives us the opportunity to rebuild the industry but it will take some time yet .
We must proceed with haste to eradicate BSE from Europe , but we must above all return confidence to the consumer and this will only occur with the progress of time .
The Commission must bring in immediate new proposals to prepare for what will be a very difficult trading period in the autumn .
I do not believe we need or require any special committee , the present proposals are sufficient and capable of restoring confidence .
All such a committee can achieve is further public debate .
Contrary to the statements made by Mr Santer , scientific information existed from 1990 onwards suggesting first that BSE could cross the species barrier and secondly a connection between Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans and BSE in ruminants .
As evidence , I cite a neurological textbook dating from 1978 , used by French medical students , which was already putting forward strong presumptions of similarity between the illness detected in man and that found in monkeys .
We all know that medicine is not a cartesian science , like mathematics .
Experts have never been able to establish any certainties about the risks associated with this illness . But the Commission at the time , under Mr Delors 's presidency , should have been the guarantor of consumer health protection and should therefore have taken radical steps from 1990 onwards .
And today , what has been done ?
For example , has there been any serious research into possible transmission through milk ?
You must understand that we can no longer settle for vague replies - we have lost the confidence of our constituents .
The European Parliament 's Commission of Inquiry is an obligatory step . It will have to determine responsibilities at all levels : European institutions , governments , the animal feed industry , etc .
The Court of Justice will have to impose exemplary penalties , and only then will we be able once again to think in terms of confidence and of relaunching the consumption of beef and veal .
Madam President , I am amazed that there have been no explanations of vote on the calendar of part-sessions .
I recall perfectly that there were such explanations last year , and I draw my authority from the case law of President Hnsch , who said just now that the example of what happened last year must be followed in every detail .
Well , last year there were explanations of vote on the calendar and I want to make one on behalf of my group .
There was no final vote on the calendar .
For that reason there are no explanations of vote on the calendar .
I quite understand , Madam President , but last year the practice was different .
There were explanations of vote on the calendar , and I cannot see why we are not following the same course this time .
Madam President , one thing you said was very important .
There has been , as you say , no final vote on the calendar . But as this item appeared on the agenda , I think that this vote should be taken now .
And I hereby call for the vote to be taken .
There has never been a final vote ; we have always simply voted on the individual part-sessions .
The draft calendar was on the table , and amendments may be made to it , but as a general rule there is no final vote .
Amendments can be tabled .
If a specific amendment is adopted , the calendar is altered accordingly , but there is no final vote on the calendar in its entirety .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , pursuant to Rules 127 and 108 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament I wish to beg the indulgence of yourself and the House , if possible , to clarify remarks which I made this morning .
During the lunch break several Members from different groups across the House came to me and gave a different interpretation to what I had said , stating that they had felt personally insulted and aggrieved by my remarks .
To that end I wish to put on the official record that I intended no insult or aggression to any individual Member within this House and I wish to apologize unreservedly if my remarks were open to a different interpretation .
My main point was that this Parliament must not only uphold democracy and freedom of speech - it must be seen to do so .
My analogy with particular types of political movements was an attempt to reinforce my argument that this Parliament and this House in particular must abide by the balance of powers and the different competencies attributed to the different institutions in the European Union .
I wish to apologize unreservedly to all Members for any personal insult they may have felt .
Thank you very much , Mr Crawley .
I am happy to take note of the rectification which you have pointed out and today 's minutes will be amended accordingly .
Progress in CFSP ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on report ( A4-0175 / 96 ) by Mr Fernndez-Albor , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on progress in implementing the common foreign and security policy January-December 1995 ) .
Mr President , do not worry because I am not going to deliver a long speech : there is no time for that .
But , first of all , I would like to say that I am pleased with the declaration which I have just heard because I think that it is wise to amend one 's mistakes .
In respect of the Fernndez Albor report , I should like to say on behalf of the group of the party of European Socialists that , in our opinion , this report is a fairly complete and balanced assessment of the European Union 's activity in the field of the CFSP in 1995 .

On behalf of my group , I should like to take note of the important declaration made by Mr Fernndez Albor at the end of his speech , about his position on the subject of deterrents - something he is right has never been dealt with and I think that we ought to deal with it separately in due time ; as far what was said by the Council , I should like to thank , although the President-in-Office of the Council is not here , but he was here this morning , Mr Spring , who read out to us a very complete report of everything that the Union did in 1995 and so far in 1996 .
I was very pleased to hear that .
We already knew it but it is always good to hear people say that we are doing something .
In that respect I should like to point out that the Council 's enthusiasm for developing the CFSP should also , however , lead it to support not only the considerations given to it in the Intergovernmental Conference but also developing and applying the Treaty ; I think we must therefore call seriously upon the Council to support fulfilment of Article 7 .
But we should not only criticise the Council and the Commission and if you allow me Mr President , in the time which remains , I must also criticise Parliament and the presidency , because I had the honour and responsibility of adding to the Fernndez Albor report a recommendation which , I know not why , the presidency of the European Parliament has referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
What is planned by the Committee on Foreign Affairs is something very simple : what can be done by the Intergovernmental Conference is very good but progress has to be made .
In order to make progress and to learn from our mistakes and to meet the expectations of our fellow citizens in the European Union , what we have to do is make sure that the CFSP is governed by majority and is included in the Community budget and , as far as possible , that we develop our abilities to apply preventive diplomacy in our own camp .
Mr President , I have to say that it makes a great impression on me when there are many people in the Chamber , because sitting here there are indeed representatives of nations which have fought each other over hundreds of years .
Now at least they are sitting down and talking to one another .
One might well call that progress in terms of security policy .
And then we read in the newspapers that Europe is moving into a crisis once again .
It is going from one crisis to another , according to the newspapers , but at least that is better than before , when the countries were going from one war to another .
All things considered , one may wonder at the fact that Europe has survived .
Europe , this damsel in distress - and as a Phoenician princess she was indeed a member of the female sex - has been mutilated time and again by its inhabitants , and after the last major war in this part of the world , in 1945 , she actually became the lady who is sawn in two , with one half in the East and the other in the West .
Since then , she has been sewn together again to some extent , but she has not emerged from the experience unscathed .
New confrontations lie in wait for us on the map .
The constant task for Europe and the EU must now be to detect and counter new dangerous situations , before they end up as full-scale confrontations such as that in the Balkans .
An analysis centre such as that envisaged in Brussels is important .
It could also be called a look-out post or a watch-tower .
Using such means , we should be better equipped to help stabilize dangerous situations , and certainly to recognize them in time .
I also see this as the philosophy behind a reinforced common foreign and security policy in the EU , but such a policy cannot just be seen as one of fire protection , designed to extinguish the fire after it has broken out .
It must also be an instrument for creating a whole culture of preventive security - a culture of security for the old world , for Europe , and that is why I am in favour of working further in that direction through a general , reinforced foreign and security policy which is aimed at the whole of Europe .
I have to express my reservations regarding one point , however .
This concerns paragraph 21 of the report , which refers to a common system of deterrence .
This must be taken to mean nuclear weapons , as I read it , and I do not feel that I can agree to this , at a time when we are constantly trying to do away with nuclear weapons , and when we are talking about nuclear non-proliferation agreements in Geneva and elsewhere .
Moreover , in the view of the Conservative People 's Party , nuclear weapons are a matter for NATO , and that is why I have reservations concerning paragraph 21 - and I am pleased to see that I am not alone , but have the support of my fellow Scandinavians , as I might put it .
As a little twist in the tail , and with your permission , Mr President , I should like to present the compliments of one of my fellow countrymen .
He is pursuing a more European policy than most , at least just at the moment .
His name is Bjarne Riis .
He is Danish , and he is currently leading the Tour de France .
He is riding for a German firm , and his family lives in Luxembourg .
You can meet him on Friday in Paris , and I wish you all a good time !
Mr President , firstly I would like to convey a very warm and hearty welcome to the Irish Minister for European Affairs on this , his first visit to a plenary session of the European Parliament .
It is not his first visit to Strasbourg - he has been here on quite a number of occasions to prepare the groundwork in a careful way for a successful presidency , which I very much hope and am sure will emerge .
It is not yet clear if any decisive moves will be taken in 1996 to start serious work on what the Maastricht Treaty describes as the eventual framing of a common defence policy .
It is not yet clear , for that matter , how far Member States are prepared to go in framing a common security policy .
Recently , when asked how far I thought certain Members would go in foreign policy , I said I would be convinced of the intentions of colleagues when I saw Members of the Union who hold permanent seats on the Security Council of the United Nations offering one of those seats to Europe .
That in itself would be a test of how far countries are prepared to go .
In the field of defence , regardless of what common policy elements are adopted , I believe that Member States will continue to play different roles .
There is no suggestion to hand at yet , for example , that France or Britain is ready to hand over its independent nuclear deterrent to the WEU or to some new European defence organization .
For my part I believe that Ireland would be very reluctant to become part of a defence alliance still committed in certain circumstances to the use of nuclear weapons .
On the contrary , we want to see the dismantling of nuclear institutions which , if they are involved in bad accidents , could certainly bring a lot of ruin and disaster to the Member States of the European Union .
I believe that we have a duty to contribute to the upholding of peace but I think it legitimate to do so in a manner true to our own traditions .
The eventual framing of a common defence policy should allow Member States to play different roles - which they will do in any case - and to make different contributions .
Mr President , we are grateful to the rapporteur who is , moreover , the new chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , for his excellent report .
He unerringly picks out the weak points and proves once again that the Community structures of the first pillar are far better able to manage foreign policy than the intergovernmental CFSP .
1995 was a successful year for international agreements but an extremely poor and depressing year for the CFSP .
The report says that very clearly .
Both the quality and quantity of common positions were significantly poorer than in 1994 .
Of the ten common initiatives only three were truly new .
The others were continuations or amended versions of initiatives taken in 1994 .
Full use is not being made of the potential which the common foreign and security policy offers .
Although the Commission has had joint power of initiative since Maastricht , it made no use of it at all in 1995 .
Even though Maastricht sometimes allowed qualified majority voting in the Council , all decision taken in 1995 were reached on the basis of unanimity .
Moreover , the Council gave no response at all to the European Parliament 's recommendations concerning the common policy and our call for a common defence policy is being totally ignored .
Disappointing results on the common foreign policy front meant that the Union continued to be unrepresented on the world stage and it meant that the expectations awakened in the public mind were disappointed .
It remains to be seen how the Union will act over extending the mandate of IFOR to identify and arrest war criminals in former Yugoslavia .
The IGC must equip the European Union with a proper common policy as promised during the Maastricht summit .
Mr President , the actions of the EU Member States and the European Union are of course crucial to security in Europe .
It is also crucial that a real analysis should be conducted of where exactly the insecurity lies as regards threats to security from the rest of the world .
We can see several such areas of insecurity , such as the situation in the Balkans with the terrible war which has been conducted there and the need for the war criminals to be condemned by a lasting peace .
We can see that certain countries in Eastern Europe , such as Albania and Belarus , are sliding back into authoritarian forms of government .
This can even be said to some extent of countries like Croatia .
We can see enormous social and economic problems on our doorsteps , such as in Ukraine , and in North Africa .
This situation holds considerable risks for us and these include major security risks which must be dealt with using methods which are truly effective and which are in proportion to the risks .
Against this background the present report is to some extent a disappointment , because it argues very traditionally along military lines .
Common defence is discussed .
Paragraph 21 talks of a common system of deterrence .
This cannot be interpreted as meaning anything other than a common nuclear defence .
I do not believe this line of thinking provides any solution to the problem facing us , rather it is what one might call a ' non-solution ' .
What is needed is stability , social and economic development in Eastern Europe and North Africa .
Real pan-European cooperation within the UN and within the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe is required .
This is the only way that cooperation with the countries concerned can be achieved .
I believe that the military course represents the vestiges of an old Cold War mentality which is actually obsolete and which cannot survive .
We will therefore support the amendments by the Socialists and the Greens .
The most important of course concerns paragraph 21 .
I hope that my children and other people 's will grow up without the nuclear threat with which we grew up .
If we review the progress made towards a common foreign policy we see that 1995 was a year of very intense activity , especially as far as treaties and agreements are concerned - I am thinking of MERCOSUR , the Barcelona conference and so on .
But if we analyse the instruments which the Union deployed to this end , we have not really moved forward much from European Political Cooperation .
We have not made use of the opportunities afforded by the Maastricht Treaty .
Specifically on current events , of which European Union citizens have some expectations - either events on our own doorstep , former Yugoslavia for instance , or further afield , above all the Great Lakes region in Africa - we see that there was a spectacularly effective Union presence , with humanitarian aid , but that sadly the Union was unable to exert any influence in bringing a political solution any closer .
It is precisely this , a truly constructive presence and the ability to help bring about a political solution , which will give our citizens a positive picture of the Union 's foreign policy , which sadly they do not have at the moment .
On the one hand , of all the reports I have ever seen , there has never yet been one which paid as much attention as this does to preventing conflicts and as far as possible using peaceful means to obtain political solutions .
In this respect I find the report most encouraging .
On the other hand there are still of course a number of things which are hard to swallow and paragraph 21 is the hardest of all .
Primarily because it talks unashamedly of deterrence when it clearly means nuclear power .
We hope that Mr Sakellariou 's amendment will be accepted here because it makes a correction in respect of these proposed deterrent systems , and secondly because it calls for action to be taken on the demand made in Mr Rocard 's report for a centre providing analysis and proposals for active involvement .
Agreement on the feeble achievements of the Common Foreign Security Policy for 1995 , disagreement on the necessary steps to correct current practice - this is the dual judgement by the Europe of Nations Group on the Fernndez-Albor report .
We have embarked upon a process which generates both inconsistency at Community level and the undermining of national diplomacy , since the theoretical existence of a common foreign policy tends to provide an alibi for inertia and a desire to reduce national resources .
How can we prevent this dual process of drift , and return to the straight and narrow ?
Certainly not by communitizing the CFSP , nor by trying to define a single foreign policy , the only result of which would be the adoption of totally artificial and anti-democratic objectives .
The establishment of a genuine CFSP would involve , according to the report , and I quote , learning to share sovereignty equitably .
This expression is an outrageous one : sovereignty is not for sharing - at the very most it may be delegated in some cases when nations so decide .
If any attempt is made to bring into existence a genuine CFSP , utilizing the community method and calling into question its intergovernmental nature , even though that is enshrined in the Treaties , and setting up a European corps diplomatique which is dependent on the Commission , failure will inevitably result .
Let those Member States which desire a genuine CFSP start by controlling the galloping inflation afflicting the self-proclaimed embassies of the Commission 's external services , while the real embassies , vested with powers and networks which should make them the effective channel for implementing the CFSP , see their resources eroded .
In order for a genuine CFSP to come into existence , it is necessary to start from the facts and , as a first step , compile an inventory of those interests and needs which are genuinely common .
Next , it is necessary to measure the degree of political will that exists to defend those interests jointly .
The result may be a multi-track system , depending on the areas in question .
Where should this permanent inventory of interests shared by our countries in the field of foreign policy be kept ?
The institutional device best capable of providing this function will be one that strengthens its intergovernmental character and gives it its full effectiveness while reinforcing the part played by the institutions that represent the wills of the Member States .
In these fields of foreign and defence policy , which are at the heart of the sovereign powers of the Member States , it is therefore essential to strengthen the role of the Council and of the national Parliaments .
This reorientation is equally essential in the context of the enlargement of the Union to include nations which certainly have no intention of abdicating the essential powers of sovereignty that they have just recovered at the end of a long ideological winter .
This is why we have proposed the appointment , within the Council and under its authority , of a permanent VicePresident responsible for the CFSP and possessed of a sufficiently long-term mandate .
We would also like to see an end to the artificial separation between foreign policy as such and trade policy , which is an essential part of it .
The minister responsible for the CFSP would therefore also have to be responsible for its trade aspect .
This adjustment of the institutional balance would need to be one of the priorities of the intergovernmental conference .
This is a necessary condition if a genuine common foreign policy is eventually to come into being , the sufficient condition naturally being the political will of the Member States , the absence of which cannot , quite obviously , be compensated for by any institutional device at all .
Mr President , the report on progress on the Common Foreign and Security Policy gives Parliament a welcome opportunity to discuss this important topic .
A large majority here approves the objective of making the EU 's foreign and security policy more effective , to enable us to strengthen peace and security both in our own Continent and throughout the world .
At the same time , however , we come up against the differences arising from different countries ' different historical experiences .
Three new Member States , Finland , Sweden and Austria , which do not belong to any military alliance , bring a new approach into the Union .
It has sometimes been hard to explain , for example , that Finland 's non-aligned status is not just a way of getting a free ride in security terms but , in our view , increases the security at this time in Northern Europe , and in particular the Baltic .
Neither must our non aligned status hinder our active involvement in designing and bringing about a common foreign and security policy .
In life as in politics , clean cut solutions are rarely sensible .
It is necessary to do what is unavoidable and possible .
We must beware of solutions which may lead to an increase in tension and a new military division .
Getting stuck in a traditional military political viewpoint does not benefit us .
At the same time if the common foreign and security policy is to be made more effective in the EU , particularly in the fields of crisis prevention and crisis management , we must develop cooperation on the basis of the NATO Partnership for Peace Programme .
I am glad that my own Social Democratic Group uses a wide interpretation of ' security ' and understands different approaches .
I warmly support the amendments made on behalf of Jannis Sakellariou .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we can welcome the fact that Article J.7 of the Treaty on European Union allows us to have an annual debate on the implementation of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
Unfortunately , our finding is that the implementation is not entirely satisfactory .
First , we can recall with pleasure the fact that the Union has adjusted the balance of its medium-term collaboration with Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean , and that it has signed agreements with Morocco , Tunisia , Israel , South America and certain Asian countries . We can recognize a degree of inefficiency in the negotiations on the former Yugoslavia , where America still holds the diplomatic initiative , with Russia , where the Chechen problem remains untouched , and with Turkey , the Middle East , Burundi and Rwanda .
All of these , as the rapporteur emphasizes , and I congratulate him on his carefully documented work , result from the fact that declarations by the Council do not involve any specific decision by the Member States .
The fact is that there is no genuine political will in the Union within this area , and that is linked to our permanent vacillation as to what we want our Europe to become !
Secondly , as far as common security is concerned , the only decisive action is still the prohibition of antipersonnel mines , while in the field of human rights , we , personally , would prefer to see the European Union doing more about the constantly threatened security of its own citizens before worrying about what is happening outside its common borders .
In conclusion , we can only deplore the way our Parliament is disregarded by the Council , which makes no political response to our recommendations and supplies us with no regular written information - something which is essential for better cooperation between institutions and a better definition of a genuine common policy with clearly defined objectives .
Mr President , it is a little late in the day to be discussing progress in the Common Foreign and Security Policy more than six months after the end of 1995 .
However , have we made any progress in this field and , if so , what have we achieved ?
The customs union with Turkey is a partial victory for the European Union because some of the conditions we set for approval were met .
The human rights situation in the country is still far from satisfactory , however .
The human rights clauses in international agreements are a major step in the right direction but they will continue to be worth no more than the paper they are written on if they do not result in practical action .
We in the European Parliament can certainly congratulate ourselves on our commitment to the reconstruction work in the former Yugoslavia .
However , should it not have been the object of CFSP to prevent the human tragedies which also occurred in 1995 ?
You only have to think of Sarajevo , Srebrenica , Krajina and many other places .
CFSP must entail preventive action , not just a response after the event to assuage our guilty consciences .
Experience shows therefore that what is really needed is an extension of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
In my view NATO will continue in the future too to form the basis of our continent 's military security - and this will include a US presence .
Of course consideration needs to be given to the shape we , with the help of the WEU , will give to the European pillar .
In any event , there must not be still more bureaucracy to demonstrate our ability to manage by ourselves .
It is important that in the future too NATO should move more in the direction of crisis management , which might perhaps enable those countries , including mine , which are at present militarily nonaligned to join in due course .
I should also like to say that IFOR is an example of how NATO countries and non-aligned countries can together carry out a military operation in an atmosphere of excellent mutual understanding .
Mr President , despite certain reservations we welcome the content of these documents , with which we can identify to a great extent .
For that reason we also regret the minimal progress that has been made in developing our common foreign and security policy , especially in the sphere of defence policy .
For the same reason we especially regret the indecision of the Austrian Federal Government in this matter , because it ought to have recognized long ago that neutrality has no place in a community such as the EU and results in a free ride for some Member States , reflecting a lack of solidarity .
We are not happy with the practice of the European Parliament , in which it also indulges to some extent in this report , of putting forward too many utopian demands and resolutions that bear little relation to realistic foreign policy , which is primarily a means of asserting and safeguarding Community interests rather than an instrument for improving the world .
In the domain of CFSP , we are more in favour of restricting ourselves to a few priority areas of particular importance instead of pursuing a watering-can policy , which may be visible everywhere but is not effective in any single area .
Mr President , my Group and I also compliment Mr Fernndez-Albor on his report .
It is a competent analysis and shows that the Union and above all the Commission were very active last year in a wide range of areas .
The rapporteur 's account is in part highly critical of the CFSP and it covers the period 1995 when the Union showed itself incapable of taking a lead over the situation in former Yugoslavia .
That role was left more or less to the United States .
I think that did little to imprint the Union 's identity on the minds of the rest of the world , an identity which is largely recognizable only to citizens of the EU .
The rapporteur rightly notes that a lot has been said on a lot of subjects , but that little has been done in the area of security .
Unfortunately the rapporteur thinks that only a number of giant steps will get us out of this situation .
Only if the Union has a common defence policy and a common system of deterrence can it develop a true CFSP .
That includes too a kind of obligation to provide assistance .
He also wants a European Civil Peace Corps .
We think he should have mooted this peace corps earlier .
A Union which has the decision-making machinery and the capacity to conduct peace-keeping missions is already one step ahead .
This , rather than far more ambitious objectives like a common system of collective defence , should be the focus of attention in the immediate future .
Priority should be given to an IFOR-style peace-keeping force of the kind we have in Bosnia and to a EU planning and analysis unit .
The Union may perhaps be put to the test next year in Bosnia .
I think , for example , that NATO 's Berlin declaration offers a good starting point on which to build a development of this kind .
My view is that defence cooperation should be devised primarily on an empirical basis along the lines I suggested and not by formulating objectives which will prove unattainable in the years ahead .
Mr President , without oversimplifying things , a judgement of common foreign and defence policy could be summarized thus : we do what we can , but not always .
The boundaries within which CFSP can operate are necessarily tight and prevent us from speaking of any real foreign policy , just as the ambiguous relationship between the European Union and WEU prevents us from speaking of any real common defence policy .
To be able to do either , there would have needed to be a real defence community , but plans for that fell by the wayside some forty years ago .
So , we must now content ourselves with taking potluck , and the pot must be pretty empty if foreign policy is hopelessly inconsistent , or downright non-existent , at times of dire crisis or when a deterrent is needed .
Harmonization of the individual Member States ' foreign policies is undoubtedly a laudable expression of good will , but , when it comes to major issues , it comes to a grinding halt , blocked by the disparate interests of the individual Member States .
WEU , which could be one of the strong points of a hoped-for foreign policy , is little more than a paper army and , what is more , not all Member States of the Union are members of WEU .
How can we implement a CFSP that is in danger of remaining a non-entity without a common defence policy and a common system of deterrence ?
How can we implement a foreign policy when the concept of European sovereignty is clearly absent ?
It is on the answers to these questions that the future of Europe depends , if Europe is to be more than a monetary union , which is already difficult enough and is most certainly important , but like a single swallow it does not make a summer .
In the meantime , I call upon the Commission to take courage and seize all the opportunities offered by the Treaty - something it has not always done because , in its timidity , it is aware of national governments ' relentless watch on its powers .
But forcing the issue is the duty of any body called upon not to be the agent of national governments ' will but to serve as part of an embryonic European government - for embryos can and must grow if they are not to be still-born .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to compliment the chairman of the committee and my dear friend , Mr Fernndez-Albor , on the well drafted report he has presented us with .
This report deserves our full agreement since it refers to the significant development of the conventional activity of the European Union in foreign policy and at the same time , unfortunately , with reason , it refers to the fact that after more than two years we have got no further in defining the instruments of a Common Foreign and Security Policy .
My agreement with this report is strengthened since it refers to and emphasises the fact that , without a common defence policy , the European Union cannot have a strong , effective and credible foreign policy .
I should like to make a short but special reference to paragraphs 20 and 21 of the report .
A common defence policy , which is the very basis of an external policy of the European Union , calls for universal active cooperation by all Member States of the Union .
Neutrality or non-participation by certain Member States are positions which might be pleasing for a time and politically convenient , as well as economically comfortable , but they are far away from the principle of solidarity which cannot not only be applied to economics and which is now the very basis of the Union .
I should like to end with a slight dig at the report .
Although it is fashionable to forget and even condemn our allies in certain circumstances I think that , since it deals with defence policy , it might be right and proper for this report to spare a small word for our allies .
It seems that we only remember our allies when our own house is at risk .
This report has two sides to it .
It can be unreservedly supported in its criticism of the shortcomings , restrictions and limited effectiveness of the Union 's common foreign-policy stance .
As far as my own country is concerned , I can say that our neutrality has neither prevented us from participating in any previous initiatives nor will it prevent us from not only actively supporting but also helping to shape this common international policy of the Union .
But there is also a second side to this report , and that is the presentation of its strategy for defence policy , with which I - and no doubt others too - have certain problems .
Talk of Europe as a power with a deterrent capacity sends a shiver down the spine , not of the potential enemies of Europe but of the peoples of this continent .
I consider it wrong to want to make the Union into a nuclear power .
The potential strength of this Union is a broad security partnership with those States that are not yet Members or that may never become Members .
Austria , with its neutrality , has no problem at all in participating in the dynamic further development of the Union .
But a warning needs to be voiced in good time against any development that could ultimately result in this whole Union also assuming the status of a military pact .


Mr President , I do not know whether Mr Kone & # x010D ; ny was with us when the rapporteur , Mr Fernndez-Albor , was speaking , because he expressly pointed out that the report did not relate to nuclear weapons , and for that reason I can give it my wholehearted support .
One thing is clear , namely that Europe must have the means of acting in a timely and effective manner to prevent future crises .
Nothing has done more to harm the European ideal and the good name of the European Union than the lack of such means in the case of the former Yugoslavia .
That is why this shortcoming has to be rectified , which is one of the paramount tasks of our foreign and security policy .
In so doing , we must not create a situation in which a qualified majority can be prevented by a minority from engaging in peacekeeping and peacemaking operations .
That implies , of course , and cannot but imply , that the outvoted minority , whose parliaments and governments have good reason for being unable to participate in such operations , cannot for their part be compelled to assign troops to the task force .
This , needless to say , does not affect the obligation to show solidarity with the other Member States of the EU : any aggression against the Union is tantamount to an attack on each and every Member State .
The solidarity obligation is necessary here and must also be incorporated into the Treaty on European Union .
The delegation of the Austrian People 's Party therefore supports the motion for a resolution , and we also believe that we are thereby fulfilling the terms of the declaration made by Austria on its accession , in which it expressed its interest in a common foreign and security policy as well as its willingness to cooperate in the creation of this common foreign , security and defence policy .
The present coalition Government of Socialists and People 's Party have stated in their working agreement that we as Austrians intend to be among the leading proponents of further development of the Union .
That applies to the Schengen Agreement , it applies to economic and monetary union and it applies to the common foreign and security policy , because here too we want to play a creative role and because we see this as the great advantage of our membership , which we want to be an active and cooperative contribution with all our partners to the development of Europe .
Mr President , in my opinion Mr Fernndez-Albor 's opinion expresses an outdated , cold war thinking .
It is based on threats which belong to the past , and it seeks security solutions which cannot possibly promote security .
Europe 's current fundamental security structures are fulfilling their tasks well .
One positive feature of these structures is the neutrality of four EU Member States .
There is no military threat on the horizon which would be a reason for the European Union changing into a military alliance by uniting with the Western European Union .
NATO and the WEU as at present constituted make a positive contribution to the security of Europe as a whole .
However , we have before us the question of the enlargement of NATO .
We must of course respect the right of every European State to apply for membership of NATO and NATO 's right to accept new members .
On the other hand we must ask whether there is a real need for the enlargement of NATO and whether it would increase the security of Europe .
Would joining NATO really strengthen a State 's security ?
What effect would such enlargement have on those States which remain outside ?
Would it increase or weaken Europe 's military stability ?
In my opinion , Europe 's security can best be promoted by preserving the current basic military security structures and by developing pan-European and transatlantic security cooperation on that basis within the framework of the OSCE , the NACC and the Partnership for Peace .
On the other hand it is important to develop peaceful cooperation which will promote stability and democracy in the Eastern parts of our Continent .
The European Union must tighten its cooperation with all the States of Europe and must promote pan-European integration by exploiting , inter alia , the possibilities offered by the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
The EU 's common foreign and security policy must be developed but it must be based on unanimity among the Member States , and it must respect the differing security policy choices of the Member States .
Mr President , broadly speaking , I welcome this report , which is an improvement on last year 's attempt by Parliament to build elaborate and ambitious castles in the air .
Mr Fernndez-Albor has stuck much more closely to the practicalities of the issue and , as a consequence , has made some telling points .
Even this report , however , sometimes slips into discussing the grandiose and the theoretical .
Foreign and security policy is the most sensitive area of national sovereignty .
We have , therefore , to learn to walk before we can run and we should be getting the basics right before we start constructing more ambitious models .
Firstly , we need a clear understanding of the purpose and objectives of a common foreign policy .
At the moment we have 15 national foreign policies .
Recently a German Council official told me that his Brussels office might as well be in Bonn , as his main point of reference was the German Foreign Ministry .
Secondly , we need a proper mechanism for day-to-day decision-making in foreign policy .
Too often in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy we ask the CFSP secretariat what the EU stance on a particular situation is , only to be told that we do not have one because the Foreign Ministers have not met yet to discuss the matter .
I am afraid crises do not wait for the convenience of EU Foreign Ministers .
No wonder Richard Holbrooke recently boasted that Europe slept while President Clinton resolved a particular European crisis .
Thirdly , the current chaotic situation regarding finance must end .
Operational expenditure must come from the Community budget .
Unfortunately , the Fernndez-Albor report 's biggest weakness is the call for a common deterrent .
This is , frankly , nonsense .
Just when we are coming to grips with the changing security demands of the post-Cold War world ; just when people are beginning to understand that security is as much about economic and political stability as diplomatic and military action ; just when the Petersberg tasks on humanitarian aid and peacekeeping were agreed as an objective of our security policy , Parliament comes along with a demand for a common deterrent .
That is not the way to build a new security framework for the new European situation .
Mr President , too many dysfunctions , too many discords , too many repeated false notes !
CSFP is still an unfinished symphony , and as such it is much more a source of disappointments and frustrations than of satisfaction or pride .
In 1995 , Richard Holbrook took charge of things in the former Yugoslavia , showing the way in terms of determination and high profile .
He also derided the Europeans to the extent that some have seen it as a model of the leadership which Europe should be providing in its own backyard .
Clearly , the suggestions regarding a Mr CFSP take their cue from this American example .
The fact that Mr Holbrook has been back on duty since yesterday should really give us something to think about .
The CFSP is certainly one of the areas to which public opinion is - and has been made - highly sensitive .
It expects an affirmation of Europe 's international role , greater resolution and more capacity for action .
But his expectations are often disappointed , because - apart from a declaratory diplomacy which usually trails along behind the course of events - we too frequently offer a distressing spectacle of endless domestic strife and paralysis when it comes to action .
Failing some radical and sudden improvement in our performance , it would surely be appropriate to change the title of our report : rather than referring to progress in implementing the CSFP , it would I fear be more appropriate to place the emphasis for the present on the problems of getting it started .
And yet we know the answers . First , we should equip ourselves with a common analytical and planning capability .
Next , it would be valuable to take more advantage of political and financial solidarity .
And finally , we absolutely must improve the decision-taking mechanisms so as to increase the prospects of reaching agreement more frequently on joint action before it is too late .
In short , the time has come to acquire the resources to match up to our ambitions !
Mr President , progress on implementing the CFSP has been very meagre . In fact , in the public mind the European Union does not have a common foreign policy .
It is indicative that the Council has not made use of the instruments and mechanisms specifically provided for in the Maastricht Treaty .
In the last year it has adopted only three common measures and five common positions , and the Commission has not exercised its right of initiative at all .
The Council has , in addition , ignored recommendations from the European Parliament on crucial matters including the crisis in the former Yugoslavia , Turkey , in relation to which the European Union continues to display insufficient sensitivity on human rights issues , and on the Cyprus question , on which - despite the European Parliament 's resolution - the Council is essentially refusing to undertake an initiative in the form of joint actions which could help towards a solution of the problem .
The European Union must develop a coherent foreign policy of its own if it is truly serious about welcoming in new members and about playing a viable role on the world stage .
It must have a foreign policy which can contribute to the promotion of peace , stability and security and respect for human rights , international law and the territorial integrity of the Member States .
A policy which can set a new standard in international relations .
To that end it will be necessary to put in place the requisite institutions and mechanisms , and above all else , to elicit the requisite political will from the leaderships of the Member States , and from the leaderships of the powerful Member States in particular , and to ensure that those states understand that they cannot play a role by themselves on the world stage in disregard of the other partners or work for the creation of a controlling group of just a few countries for the purpose of imposing their views and positions on the remainder .
The IGC which is now in progress is a challenge . It offers the European Union an opportunity to make progress on the CFSP and , at the same time , to formulate a security and defence policy and strengthen its supranational institutions .
In concluding , Mr President , I wish to say that the Fernndez Albor report gives a clear presentation of the situation and offers a number of interesting ideas and proposals .
Mr President , even the Roman Cicero knew , two thousand years ago , that there are two ways of resolving conflicts : through negotiations or through force .
As he said , the former is intended for people , the second for wild beasts .
This piece of wisdom still applies today .
How we resolve our conflicts reflects how far we have come in our development , as people where we choose negotiation , as wild beasts where we choose force .
In shaping Europe 's security policy for the next century we must learn from this .
We must learn from history , not repeat it .
Conflict resolution , international relations , economic relations , trade , aid and cooperation with neighbouring countries are much more important parts of a common security policy than a common military defence , that is to say we must resolve conflicts rather than bring military might to bear on them .
The Cold War resulted in insane nuclear armament , which could annihilate all of humanity .
Nuclear arms have reduced , not increased , security for all countries , including those with their own nuclear arms .
Now , in a new era , with the Cold War over , we have the chance to construct a security policy without nuclear weapons .
To suggest in 1996 that a security policy for tomorrow should depend on nuclear deterrence is not only an obsolete way of thinking but also extremely dangerous .
The proposal in paragraph 21 of the Fernndez-Albor report must be rejected and replaced by Amendment No 10 .
The Socialist Group considers this to be so important that we will vote against the report as a whole if our Amendment No 10 is not adopted .
It is a common peace policy with a common system for the prevention of conflicts that we need in Europe .
It is time for a security policy based on negotiations and not on force .
Mr President , this report , in so far as it is a survey of the progress achieved to date in implementing a common foreign and security policy , has much to commend it .
It covers a whole range of the Union 's activities in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union , the Middle East , the Mediterranean , Africa , Latin America and elsewhere .
The report underlines the importance of common action on human , social and democratic rights and it emphasizes the central objective of peace .
It underwrites values such as the idea of the democratic welfare state and the need for common action to eliminate anti-personnel mines .
It is therefore very unfortunate that the report also puts forward proposals for a common defence policy which are not acceptable in a number of Member States and go further than public opinion would be prepared to support .
Without widespread public support across the Union , such a policy would not be viable , above all at times of stress and strain .
We also have to consider the kind of Europe we wish to build .
We should not be seeking to create a new nuclear power in the world , but paragraph 21 declares that without a common defence policy and a common system of deterrence the Union will never be able to implement a common foreign and security policy .
At a time when we are pressing for support for the principle of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons it will give the impression that we are in favour of creating a nuclear Europe while objecting to others doing likewise in their areas .
This would not only undermine our credibility and detract from our standing in the world as a force for peace and progress by peaceful means but it would in fact make very much more difficult achieving the objectives we have in view .
Unless paragraph 21 is changed or withdrawn , and there is a Socialist Group amendment , the report as a whole would be quite unacceptable despite the very positive proposals which it contains , I hope the rapporteur will bear this very much in mind .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report is a good report .
It pays a just tribute to a number of positive achievements , rightly reminds us that all this falls very short of convincing public opinion that there is some substance behind the terms ' foreign policy ' and ' common security ' , and rigorously criticises the serious conceptual , institutional , political and practical inadequacies reflected by the fact that our handful of common positions and joint actions are nowhere near sufficient to give evidence of a genuine common foreign and security policy .
I myself , together with the French socialist delegation on whose behalf I speak , sincerely agree with this general view of things , which is why we are preparing to vote in favour of this report .
There is a political problem , however , reflected by problems with wording and with voting on two amendments .
Our rapporteur is inspired by a European ardour which some would call federalist , others integrationist , and I myself simply vigorous , because it is consistent .
Basically , then , I share this enthusiasm , but our rapporteur allows himself to be carried away by it in two areas : that of vocabulary , as regards both courtesy and diplomatic caution in his report , and that of the conceptual relationship linking foreign policy , security and defence .
As to the first point , the fact that some governments and - as we have just heard -some national public opinions in the Union do not in fact propose to take part in the implementation of an effectively common foreign policy should prompt us to understand them and endorse their awareness of strategic and diplomatic issues that concern us all , rather than harassing or denouncing them .
I regret , in Article 9 , the adjective ' discouraging ' .
The phrase in Article 20 to the effect that there is a lack of the necessary political will for integration among certain Member States is more likely to be perceived as aggressive than as an attempt at persuasion .
The rejection by some Member States is explained by the nature of the national security consensus in each one of them .
Neutrality here , absolute submission to NATO as the sole guarantor there , independent nuclear deterrence somewhere else .
For my part , I believe that nuclear deterrence is entirely meaningless since the disappearance of the communist threat , that neutrality is entirely meaningless in a fully interdependent world , and that the dominant reference to the Atlantic Alliance is totally inadequate when the dangers threatening us are primarily linked to the geographical spread of regional conflicts , conflicts that exist everywhere in and around Europe while they affect America very little .
We would therefore lighten the burden on America by being more aware of these things in Europe .
Understanding that is the key to our future common foreign and security policy .
Let us allow everyone time to come to appreciate this point .
The second consequence of our rapporteur 's ardour is that he talks about defence rather than security .
This is perceived in some quarters as a provocation .
In Articles 9 and 21 , the concern expressed is for a common vision of the security of foreign policy .
The definition of institutions , procedures and means of defence can only be a consequence of it .
I must say to the rapporteur that this is an area that calls for persuasion and conviction , and the necessary time to achieve them .
Denunciation is no help at all .
Finally , the same enthusiasm leads the rapporteur to speak of a common system of deterrence .
You have all heard this , you heard it just now .
It is not within our power to dispel the common but incorrect notion that deterrence means nuclear deterrence .
Nuclear deterrence is obsolete , and does not arise here .
The first purpose of any defensive force is to prevent the other party from attacking , even by conventional means - that is what deterrence means - and only to defeat him if that fails .
But we must dispense with this word , which is unfortunate as regards what it means in non-nuclear terms .
I would prefer this renunciation not to dispel the idea that we have a common need to serve the United Nations ' peace-keeping missions , and to begin , at least , to equip ourselves with the intellectual resources of common security thinking before we draw any conclusions from it about defence .
Mr Fernndez-Albor , you need to pursue a more educational line , even though your European ardour agrees with us .
Mr President , the excellent report presented by Mr Fernndez Albor on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs might give rise to some specific comments and a few examples .
First of all , we now have a notorious example , that of the partial withdrawal of the Helms-Burton Act by President Clinton , which is undoubtedly a consequence of a common external policy exercised - and this is rare - by the European Union through the Council .
That means I can only point out the important function played by the Spanish Foreign Affairs Minister , something which is normal given the very special links between Spain and Cuba , links of a historic , cultural , linguistic and human nature .
Therefore , I was very much surprised this morning to hear a representative of the Spanish Socialist group criticising Mr Matutes for having received Mr Mas Canosa .


It must be pointed out to the honourable Member that Mr Mas Canosa was also received by the former Prime Minister , Mr Gonzalez , and by the former Foreign Affairs Minister , Mr Solana , who is now Secretary General of NATO .
The only difference is that they received him in secret and not in the transparency which we have always tried to apply to our own external policies .
This just shows that losing power also produces a certain loss of sense of humour in certain political parties .
The second practical observation refers , on the contrary , to failure rather than success .
In the first case this was a sign of the success of diplomacy based on economic reasons , the defence of legitimate interests , without any doubt , but perhaps slightly forgetting the dramatic situation which the Cuban people are experiencing .
But in the second practical case to which I wish to refer , it is surprising and sad for everyone that Mr Holbrooke should have to come back and sort out a situation which was supposedly dealt with at Dayton through US mediation .
This says nothing against Mr Bildt , but does seem to be clear proof that there is not sufficient solidarity in our foreign policy .
Finally , and here I direct myself again to the Irish presidency , I should like to call upon that admirable country to make progress in a policy for setting up genuine common diplomacy .
This is not only a matter of the external representation provided by the generally very efficient offices of the European Commission , but a genuine integration of diplomatic services .
The British and Germans have just made some steps in that direction by exchanging diplomatic employees .
But once again , as I have travelled around the world I have asked myself and now I am saying it before the European Parliament whether it might not be possible to consider setting up joint embassies , in other words bringing together our diplomatic services so that we can be represented jointly in other countries .
Therefore a country like Ireland , which has such an admirable tradition but which naturally cannot have diplomatic representation in every country in the world , might take steps which perhaps nations with bigger populations would not , on the other hand , be able to take .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the only consistency to be found in the Union 's foreign policy is its fairly automatic support for the policies conceived by the American superpower .
What , for example , is the European Union 's grand policy for dealing with the historic movement represented by the growth of Islam to the south and east of the Mediterranean ?
A single incident will show how blind we are : the incident of customs union with Turkey .
On this matter , we prefer to obey diplomatic instructions from beyond the Atlantic rather than think about the geopolitical and geocultural situation of the great Turkish state , which demonstrates that in fact it will never be European .
Another example : what is the European Union 's grand policy towards the great eastern power of Russia ?
Russia is a great independent nation which deserves a genuine spirit of partnership , because Russia is an essential element in the establishment of a balanced multipolar world .
It is not right that everything should be subordinated to a single world power .
That is precisely the type of thinking which the European Union refuses to adopt .
And that is why the results cannot be satisfactory .
Mr President , following the detailed presentation by the Council President Minister Spring this afternoon , I offer a number of brief comments of my own .
First of all the Commission too must compliment the rapporteur on his extremely clear report , which I have already had the privilege of discussing on a previous occasion with the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
It is perfectly clear that the rapporteur too appreciates that when we speak of the common foreign and security policy we may do so in a very broad sense and also in a narrow sense .
In the broad sense he points very clearly to a number of exceptionally good initiatives and activities of external policy pursued by the Union over the past year in the conclusion of agreements with a large number of third countries and regions which are politically , strategically and economically of great significance and which contribute to stability and security .
I am thinking not least of our relations with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe which have been further widened and deepened and which are ultimately aimed not only at those countries ' accession and full membership but also at furthering the security , stability and development of those countries .
The Commission has recorded its views on the shortcomings of the common foreign and security policy , which are readily admitted and pointed out , in the report submitted to the Intergovernmental Conference .
Minister Spring has also discussed them in detail this afternoon .
So I will not go over them again , even the main points , since they are already familiar to you .
I hope at any rate that the intensive discussion now going on in the Intergovernmental Conference on our policy under the second pillar will prove successful .
Today 's in-depth debate has shown once again how much this is needed and how much agreement there in fact is about our current machinery and perhaps also our political will is not great enough to give the European Union a political weight on the world scene which matches the huge economic weight it carries .
Looking at the progress of the Intergovernmental Conference I think in all honesty that we have to admit that positions held for some time have relaxed further and that the time is now beginning for real talks between the delegations .
We are not without hope on this , especially as it is fair to say , as far for example as the preparation of foreign policy decisions is concerned , that there has already been movement towards consensus on the setting up of a multidisciplinary preparatory body which will further facilitate decision-making .
Ideas are also developing further on the visible external representation of the Union in international policy .
More encouraging still is the clear impression , certainly following the NATO conference in Berlin , that progress is being made towards a common defence policy .
In response to the honourable Members who expressed concern that this was going too far I would say that it was already agreed at the time of Maastricht that a common defence policy would be devised , the exact form and content to be determined later .
But I very much agree with those who have said that we should not hamper a debate of this kind by getting so far ahead of ourselves and talking about things like nuclear deterrence , whether or not that was intended in the Fernndez-Albor report , that we forget that in addition to the more common diplomacy which we pursue we also need a degree of muscle behind that policy which we can flex in crisis situations or in order to prevent crisis situations .
We fervently hope that there will be further concrete acknowledgement of this need and that decisions on it will be taken at the Intergovernmental Conference .
The European Commission at any rate will continue to play its part .
Naturally , it has no powers of its own in the area of defence , but is very closely associated with the Union 's common foreign and security policy and also has a joint power of initiative which it will use .
We hope that in the year ahead , that is to say the remaining period of the Intergovernmental Conference , there will be constructive discussion of this with the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , under the chairmanship of Mr Fernndez-Albor , and with the plenary too .
This is enormously important to the future of the Union .
Thank you very much , Mr Mitchell .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Broad economic policy guidelines
The next item is the statement by the Council on the broad economic policy guidelines of the Member States and the Community .
Mr President , I am very pleased to be here today , as President-inOffice of the Economic and Finance Ministers of the European Union , to address Parliament on the broad economic policy guidelines of the Member States .
As you know , the Council adopted , at a session on 8 July , a recommendation setting out the broad guidelines on the economic policies of the Member States of the Community .
I wish to discuss in some detail the strategy underlying these guidelines and to deal with some of the concerns expressed by some Members of Parliament in relation to them .
The guidelines call for more than just a stable , macroeconomic framework in the progress towards EMU : they incorporate an explicit strategy for sustained growth and increased employment to be achieved through the key areas of monetary policy , budgetary policy , labour market policy and structural adjustment .
The core of the broad guideline strategy may be summed up in the following statement in the text : ' High and sustained non-inflationary economic growth over the medium term is essential to reduce significantly and durably the Community 's unacceptably high level of unemployment and to combat the spread of social exclusion . ' The guidelines recognize that , since employment growth is very sensitive to output growth , a high level of sustainable economic growth is a prerequisite for the necessary substantial increase in employment in the Union .
The guidelines incorporate a strategy which aims at generating a sustainable increase in both the rate of economic growth and its employment content .
The strategy recommended in the guidelines essentially consists of three interrelated elements .
The first major element is the creation and maintenance of a stable macroeconomic framework .
Monetary stability and sound public finances are preconditions for growth .
That is why we continue to underline the importance of a stabilityoriented monetary policy and budgetary consolidation .
Failure to achieve convergence on low inflation among Member States presents a major obstacle to growth because it overburdens monetary policy by necessitating higher interest rates to dampen inflation .
Higher interest rates , in turn , damage consumer and business confidence with adverse implications for private consumption , investment , output and employment .
As the guidelines rightly point out , budgetary consolidation does not just mean budgetary cuts , but also a redirection of government spending towards investment and human capital .
I will return to this point .
The second major element in the strategy concerns actions to raise permanently the Union 's potential rate of growth and to improve its competitive position both in its domestic and foreign markets .
The guidelines recognize that to achieve and sustain a high rate of economic growth , a significant rise in investment is required .
To increase investment significantly requires improved confidence , structural policies and wage moderation .
In addition , wage moderation will help improve the competitiveness of the Union economy which , in turn , will increase the Union 's capacity to create sustainable jobs .
As I indicated earlier , this means that budgetary consolidation efforts are not just needed for achieving sustainable public finances , they are also needed for improving the prospects for employment-creating investment by avoiding the crowding-out of the private sector , that is by avoiding the absorption of private savings by governments ' current spending .
Budgetary consolidation efforts will also restore confidence in the financial markets and exert downward pressure on interest rates on a sustainable basis .
This , in turn , contributes to increased investment profitability , enhanced growth potential and an easing of the debt service burden on Member States .
The guidelines also recommend redirecting government spending , to the greatest extent possible , towards productive activities such as investment in infrastructure , human capital and active labour market measures while not endangering the necessary reduction in budget deficits .
The guidelines recognize also , however , that in order to tackle unemployment effectively , and particularly the hard core of structural unemployment , sound macroeconomic policies must be supplemented by structural policies aimed at increasing the efficiency and employment-creating features of both the product and labour markets .
With this in mind , and to increase the employment content of growth , the guidelines draw on the recommendations of the Commission 's White Paper on Growth , Competitiveness and Employment .
The most important elements in this strategy are measures to reduce the barriers to employing people , active labour market policies and structural changes in the functioning of product and labour markets .
In the third element of the strategy the guidelines recommend active policies towards employment .
The necessity for a broad range of labour market reforms has been stressed by the Council .
What we have in mind is an improvement in occupational and regional mobility and the efficiency of employment services .
Moreover , the Council considers as vital the reform of the educational systems so as to equip more people with the skills required in today 's labour market .
But the Council has also made it clear that the labour market alone should not have to bear the burden of adaptation .
We need more efficient product and services markets in order to create investment opportunities .
We all have an important role to play in tackling our serious level of unemployment .
In its report to the European Council in Florence the Commission said that it would intensify its dialogue with the social partners on macroeconomic issues .
I now propose to turn to some of the areas where concern has been expressed by Parliament in relation to the guidelines .
I believe that Parliament and the Council agree completely that sustained , non-inflationary economic growth is essential to tackle the scourge of unemployment and the social exclusion which accompanies it .
Employment is our joint concern and is , of course , the concern of the citizens of the European Community .
Your request to refer to Articles 2 and 105 of the Treaty is more a question of style than a question of substance .
I can assure you that the Council supports fully those two fundamental provisions of the Treaty dealing with the general objectives of European Union policy and the tasks of a European Central Bank .
A reference to the transEuropean networks - the TENs - in the context of the guidelines has been a matter of contention between the Member States .
That is why the Council could not take it up in the guidelines .
However , on 8 July , the Council agreed to set up a high-level working party appointed by ministers and assisted by the Commission and the European Investment Bank to examine this contentious issue and to make recommendations before the informal Ecofin Council in Dublin in September .
I have the impression that the concrete policy actions suggested in the resolution , adopted by Parliament on 19 June are quite similar in substance to those the Council recommends .
Reading very carefully the European Parliament 's resolution on the broad economic guidelines from 19 June , I find that nearly all of the policy actions recommended by you are in line with the text and the spirit of the Council 's guidelines for 1994 , 1995 and 1996 and indeed , the Essen and Madrid conclusions on employment policies .
These are : firstly , reorienting public expenditure towards investment ; secondly , creating a favourable environment for job-creating companies ; thirdly , analysing best practices in the labour market and education policies of all of the individual Member States .
The commitment of Member States to tackling unemployment led to the adoption of a multi-annual employment programme at national level .
The implementation of the Madrid recommendations and the monitoring of the multiannual programmes will form the basis of the follow-up in 1996 of the employment policy of the Union .
Unfortunately I have to share the view of the European Parliament that implementation of the guidelines by Member States has been slow .
I share your impatience at the pace of progress and I intend to strive to increase it .
However , it is possible that the effects of some positive measures may have been temporarily concealed by the slow-down in economic growth .
It is also a fact that certain measures will take some time to show positive results .
In my view , the approach taken in the guidelines since 1994 is still valid .
But I recognise that we have a serious problem about its implementation .
I think the implementation has been slow for two main reasons .
Firstly , because certain structural measures require not only legislative procedures but also require consultation with , and the participation of , the social partners .
You cannot rewrite the social contract overnight .
Secondly , the coordination between macro-economic and structural policies and the adoption of policy responses to the internal market are relatively new challenges for Member States .
I now turn to another subject .
There is one area where I feel that the Council cannot share the views of Parliament , at least as I understand your resolution : that is your request for a relaxation of monetary policy .
The Council considers that the level of interest rates does not only lie in the hands of monetary authorities , but depends substantially on achieving sufficient fiscal consolidation and appropriate responses from the market .
The Council has always considered that keeping inflation low is a pre-condition for sustainable growth and employment .
I recognize , of course , that there is an important need to create the conditions for sustainable easing in monetary conditions , but this requires budgetary and pay developments to be compatible with the price stability objective .
Any lowering of short-term interest rates which was not warranted by appropriate budgetary and pay developments would soon risk being offset by expectations of higher future inflation and a weakening of confidence by financial markets , leading ultimately to higher long-term interest rates .
This , in my view and in the view of the Council , would damage investment prospects and weaken the recovery , with consequently adverse implications for growth and employment .
Budgetary consolidation and monetary easing can be compatible , but here we need to strike a balance .
If credible plans for budgetary consolidation and agreements leading to moderate pay increases were achieved , market expectations could be favourably influenced and conditions would be more favourable to sustained monetary easing .
I can assure you , Members of the European Parliament , that the Irish presidency will make all possible efforts to accelerate the implementation of the guidelines in a positive and constructive spirit and with a particular emphasis on the need for much stronger employment growth .
In addition , the Council will prepare the annual joint report on employment for the regular Dublin European Council .
I would also draw your attention to the fact that the Irish presidency is organizing a conference on local employment initiatives in November of this year .
The objectives of achieving strong , sustainable economic growth and increasing the employment intensity of that growth are receiving considerable attention , not only in the broad economic policy guidelines , but also in the wider work of the Commission and the European Council .
In all this work there is a clear recognition that we need to tackle this serious problem of our high level of unemployment and the social exclusion which it entails .
But we need to keep our attention focused on the employment objective and to intensify the debate on the most appropriate policy responses which cover a very broad spectrum of actions .
The discussion we are having here today will , I believe , contribute importantly to intensifying that debate .
I am looking forward to the common efforts of Parliament and the Council , the Commission and the Member States to improve policies towards the employment objective .
In all our deliberations we should keep before our minds what is ultimately at stake : the future performance , wealth and dignity of all our children .
Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Ecofin Council for his presentation today but also for the way in which he has already given an undertaking to the European Parliament on ensuring that we have a better relationship with Ecofin than we have in the past .
I should like to deal very quickly with four issues and hope that the President-in-Office of Ecofin will have the chance to respond to these .
First there is an issue I raised with the Italian presidency regarding the broad economic guidelines and that is the reason for the change that was made by Ecofin to the Commission 's proposals .
I wish to refer in particular to the dropping of the reference to a better economic policy mix more favourable to growth , which was taken out of the Commission text , and also concerning the convergence programmes - the reference to the fact that these programmes should clearly indicate that the measures aimed at improving convergence go hand in hand with the promotion of growth and employment in the medium term .
There are many more examples of the way in which these guidelines produced by the Commission were changed .
I am led to understand that in fact the document that was presented at the Ecofin Council was not the text from the Commission but the text that had been produced by the Monetary Committee .
Could the President-in-Office explain to us the role of the Monetary Committee here ?
Surely it is the obligation of Ecofin to consider the Commission text and not to allow the interference of central bankers in a text which should of course have been presented to it first for consideration .
My second point concerns the relationship with Parliament .
We do not have a very good relationship with the Council on economic and monetary issues .
We have a better relationship with the Commission where we meet regularly with Commissioner De Silguy .
Would the President-in-Office of the Ecofin Council , be prepared to meet with a delegation of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee perhaps early in September to see if , during the early weeks of the autumn , we can thrash out a new relationship which will strengthen the relationship between Parliament and the Council during the crucial period running up to the conclusion of economic and monetary union ?
The third issue relates to this idea of budgetary consolidation .
In the speeches I have heard recently no-one actually differentiates between borrowing for investment and borrowing for current expenditure .
Can the Presidentin-Office , during his term of office , ensure that Ecofin , particularly in the context of the stability pact , makes the distinction between borrowing for investment , which surely must be acceptable under carefully defined circumstances , and borrowing for current expenditure ?
The fourth issue is in relation to the stability pact .
We in this House are very nervous about the fact that there are those who want to promote a stability pact outside the Treaty on European Union .
They want some new intergovernmental arrangement .
We want the President-in-Office 's assurance that the stability pact will fit exactly with the terms and the spirit of the Treaty on European Union and also that when he presents that stability pact to this House during his presidency he will ensure that it also fits in exactly with the priorities of the Essen Summit .
Mr President , I would like to thank , on behalf of my Group , Mr Quinn , the President-in-Office , for the full and comprehensive way in which he set out the Council 's reactions to the broad economic guidelines .
I was particularly pleased that he raised and played back to us a number of items from our resolution of 19 June .
There are one or two issues which I would like to develop further with him , but may I first of all most sincerely thank him for taking note of our paragraph 11 , which states that the European Parliament considers it very important that the Irish presidency should be present at Parliament 's July part-session in order to present recommendations under Article 103 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
Thank you very much indeed , President-in-Office , for taking note of that particular suggestion .
On the other hand , I think it is true to say that the Council and , if I may also say so , the Commission , are still operating in what Parliament considers to be an area of wishful thinking .
We refer to this in paragraph 4 of our resolution , the fourth indent , where we specifically state that the current approach is based on wishful thinking .
There is nothing either in the communiqu from the Florence European Council , or indeed in the Ecofin recommendations and the Commission recommendations , which leads us to vary that opinion expressed by Parliament .
We would also perhaps have liked to have a little bit more attention paid to the questions raised elsewhere in paragraph 4 of our resolution , particularly in the sixth indent where we refer to the creation of an environment where employers in the European Union are encouraged to take on workers .
I think there was an implicit acknowledgement of that in the President-in-Office 's references to moderate pay increases .
I would have liked , as rapporteur , to have had something more specific , drawing attention to the burdens imposed on employers , because we did draw attention in our resolution , paragraph 8 , to the need to reduce non-wage labour costs , particularly at the lower end of the wage scale .
That indeed is referred to as well in our paragraph 4 , sixth indent , because it is the impact of high social costs or taxes on jobs at the lower end of the wage scale which is contributing to maintaining uncomfortably high levels , particularly of youth unemployment .
On the question of uncomfortably high levels , I would like also to draw attention to the points that we made in our resolution , recital B , to the historically high levels of unemployment here in the European Union : currently 18 million people unemployed with 50 million suffering from social exclusion .
Not a very creditable reflection on the famous European social pact .
There is one other point which I would have liked the President-in-Office to have raised , because it is something which I included in our original resolution , and that is the reference in paragraph 4 , seventh indent , to the need for us to study the best practice in the 15 Member States and elsewhere , particularly in the United States , to identify policies which can achieve results in bringing down unemployment .
Having said all that , however , I congratulate the President-in-Office , thank him once again for his courtesy in responding so promptly to our request in June and wish him a successful six months .
Mr President , two of the four main priorities the Irish presidency of the European Union has set for this six-month period concern economic issues : efficient finance and employment .
This means that 50 % of what is to be done or improved concern the economy .
In fact , half of our activities should concern social and policy issues , whilst the other half should concern economic matters .
This is why the broad guidelines the Council is required to set out in this area are of at least equal importance on the European stage .
The Community was born of the economic sector and has grown to include the social sector ; it must now seek a fair balance between the two .
That said , we believe that today 's broad economic-policy guidelines should focus primarily on small and mediumsized enterprises : although , individually , these enterprises are representative of the micro-economy , together , they are of macro-economic importance , because of their number , which amounts to some 18 million in the European Union .
Eighteen million , Minister Quinn , is also the number of people unemployed in the Community .
I shall leave you to do the simple equation concerning new jobs .
It is not simply a question of size ; it is not simply that small and medium-sized enterprises have greater employment potential than large industrial undertakings , which are replacing workers with machines ; it is also a sectoral issue , a question of directing more effort to sectors that offer major opportunities .
I am referring , in particular , to tourism , which the Irish presidency has rightly included among its priorities , but I am also referring to the crafts sector , services and the commercial distribution system .
We should like to see increasing attention , matched by appropriate resources , being paid to these four sectors - commerce , tourism , services and the crafts sector .
We feel sure that Commissioner De Silguy has this clearly in mind .
Large and small companies should be working together .
The objective is common growth of the European economy , growth of the Community itself .
Our thanks and best wishes to our Irish colleagues .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to welcome the beginning of the Irish presidency and the Irish presidency 's good will to cooperate with the European Parliament .
I should like to make a general remark , given that Mr Cox and Mr Watson have referred to much more specific subjects .
The President-in-Office of the Council mentioned four areas - monetary , budgetary , labour markets and structural reform .
However , we in the Liberal Group in a debate held a month ago on the guidelines of economic policies in the Union , expressed our concern that there was an excessively monetarist slant to the guidelines in economic policy in general , perhaps because money supply is one of the easiest parts of the economy to control .
On the other hand , we were asking for an effort to be made to reduce interest rates , as the OECD has called for , in order to offset the negative aspects of the economic climate brought about by budgetary cuts , in order to boost economic growth , without which it would be very difficult to achieve EMU which , as the Irish presidency and the European Parliament have shown , is our end objective .
This means we have to find ways of striking a good balance between the correct application of monetary policy and the necessary structural reforms , including proper measures in the other three areas which the President-inOffice of the Council mentioned .
Mr President , the Council appears , without justification , to be optimistic about the future .
Its assertions are the same as those of a year ago when the previous proposals were adopted and simply bear out the fact that the expectations expressed at that time have not been met and that since then economic activity in the Union has slowed down markedly , unemployment has risen again and the gap between the actual level of economic and social prosperity and the level that was projected remains in broad terms undiminished .
The point is that the approach to those problems is to remain unchanged and that still the Council is optimistic .
Resolute in its perception , the Council intends , according to the latest proposals and the general content of the convergence programmes , to continue with and harden the policy pursued in the previous period and to impose reductions in public spending , especially in social spending , the increasing of taxation revenues , a reduction in real incomes , deregulation of the labour market and a continuation of the privatization policy .
The Council seems not to understand the problem .
The problem is not that the proposals have not been implemented with sufficient determination and consistency . The failure of confidence in the European Union , which the Council itself acknowledges , can be traced to the philosophy and ideological choices pursued by the Union in determining the actual content of those proposals , in shaping out the content of the economic and social policy which it and the Member States have been implementing for many years .
Reality shows that the objectives are specious and the means ineffective and that a radically different approach is needed .
Yet again , the European Union is refusing to draw the necessary conclusions .
The workers , who are the main victims of its policy choices , will denounce the policies which are impoverishing them and driving them to the wall and will fight , with the support of others , to get them changed .
The delivery of the people 's verdict via referenda on the course imposed by the Maastricht Treaty , on economic and monetary union and on the changes that will result from the intergovernmental conference will , I feel sure , make clear the general disapproval of these policies . That is the conclusion that the Council should be thinking about .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you say that you do not wish under any circumstances to relax monetary policy and that you continue to be concerned about inflation .
But is not the real problem area the fact that the economy has moved rather in the direction of deflation ?
You clearly wish to rush the economy along at such a speed that over-rapid and violent convergence will only increase unemployment and social exclusion .
Do you really believe , Mr President , that under these conditions it is sufficient merely to have the courage to hold to the EMU timetable ?
In my opinion this does not seem even advisable .
It is , however , clearly not possible to admit this in the face of market forces .
Secondly I should like to say that the Council does not seem to care at all that the Union is incapable of taking any decision relating to taxation .
Does Ireland intend to do anything about this serious problem ?
Do you intend to contribute to altering the priorities of taxation so that the exploitation of natural resources and the pollution of the environment are taxed more heavily and employment and labour less heavily ?
Thirdly I would like to ask whether you have any initiatives in mind regarding the preconditions for international action on the economy ?
Do you intend to take any new initiatives towards coordinating monetary policy at international level ?
From more and more quarters , serious proposals are now being made for a speculation tax which would prevent the economy from becoming detached from reality and moving off into a sphere of its own , and would return it to a much closer relationship with the real economy .
I should like to hear whether the Council is considering any initiatives to this end .
Mr President , we were all delighted to hear the Irish presidency this morning , and Mr Quinn just now , saying once again that the matters of employment and growth would be given priority .
At the same time , though , it is impossible not to be struck by a contradiction between this declaration of priorities and the content of the guidelines proposed by the Council of Ministers regarding the economic policies of the Member States .
As far as those guidelines are concerned , in fact , they amount to no more than a restatement of those previously announced in earlier years which , to summarize , comprise monetary stabilization as a foundation for a policy of reducing public spending and a policy of imposing a ceiling on wage costs , or even reducing them .
Does that sound like a recipe for renewal of growth and increased employment ?
We think not , and to judge by the results of the economic policies pursued in recent years - especially in the year that has just ended - the opposite seems more likely to be the case : a slow-down of growth and worsening unemployment .
We believe that , on the contrary , pursuing and strengthening these guidelines is likely to trigger a kind of deflationary spiral which could be dangerous for the economy of the Union , for social peace in Europe and for the European idea as such .
What Europe needs is confidence - not just market confidence but consumer confidence , too , and the way to consumer confidence is through a future without unemployment .
Yet we see nothing in the proposals by the Council of Ministers specifically designed to provide a swift cure for the drastic employment situation in the European Union .
Furthermore , we are also struck by a growing contradiction between the march towards monetary union - however desirable it may be - and absolute inertia regarding the definition of other instruments of economic policy which would be necessary supplements to the monetary instrument in order to enable the Union to steer its economy efficiently .
In this context , we believe it to be entirely desirable that supplementary instruments should be defined as a matter of urgency .
In the budgetary area , first of all , we should - without awaiting the end of the application period for the Delors II package - begin to give thought to what the Union 's budget will be at the time when monetary union is in force .
Additionally , as regards taxation , which was mentioned just now , this is another area where action needs to be taken to move towards harmonization , first the harmonization of direct taxation .
Mr Monti recently gave an excellent account of the way labour in Europe has been overtaxed for several years : how can this be remedied without a policy of harmonization of direct taxation ?
And , over and above that , we should no doubt give consideration to a Union tax , a Community tax , which would enable the Union to be a union of citizens also .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I very much welcome the fact that the Irish presidency has emphasized that the Maastricht Treaty not only calls for the achievement of monetary union but also for European union in the fields of economic and social affairs and employment , and so the challenge of combating mass unemployment has rightly become a priority of the Irish presidency .
However , if we consider , analyse and evaluate the economic policy guidelines of the European Union , we really do start to wonder to what extent they represent an appropriate policy mix .
And since rigid monetary policy is not being subjected to critical scrutiny as the European Parliament has requested , I wonder just how monetary policy , along with economic policy , employment policy , structural policy and industrial policy , is supposed to achieve investment-led growth that will create jobs .
This question cannot be answered if we do not also take stock of our monetary policy , which is why I hope that the Irish presidency will step up its efforts to find an answer , because it simply cannot be in the interests of Parliament to speak here of a lax monetary policy .
On the contrary , we have to ask how monetary policy can help to achieve the objectives of economic and monetary union , namely greater growth , sustained growth and above all higher employment levels .
We do not want economic and monetary union to be merely a milestone in our monetary history ; we want it to benefit the people of this European Union .
When I assess the underlying economic policy principles , I also wonder how the years that still lie ahead can be used to make it even clearer , by means of the economic policy guidelines , that we need a political strategy at European level for the things we can no longer regulate at national level .
The globalization of markets has not left Europe untouched , and even though the single market and monetary union are appropriate responses to this challenge , there is still a pressing need to establish a framework governing the operation of the social market economy at European level .
I should very much welcome the Irish presidency coming up with a strategy for action in this area as part of its efforts to develop the economic policy guidelines .
In addition , may I also ask the President-in-Office to take another look at the question posed by the European Parliament about how the democratic deficit in the domain of economic and monetary policy can be overcome .
Can we not expect an interinstitutional agreement at some stage , laying down procedures for the multilateral monitoring of the excessive deficit ?
What is the Irish presidency 's position on this point , which is of great concern to the European Parliament and ought to be resolved at long last ?
A Uachtarin , ar an cad dul sos ba mhaith liom filte a chur roimh Aire Airgeadais na hEireann agus Uachtarn in Oifig , an tUasal Ruair Quinn , T.D. chuig Parlaimint na hEorpa .
Gum gach rath ort agus t sil agam to n-ireoidh go geal leat na haidhmeanna at curtha romhaibh le linn tarma Uachtarantacht na hEireann a bhaint amach .
( Translation : At the outset , I would like to welcome Mr Ruair Quinn , T.D. , Irish Minister for Finance and Presidentin-Office to the European Parliament .
I wish you every success and I sincerely hope that you will achieve the aims you have set out during the term of office of the Irish presidency ) .
President-in-Office , welcome and congratulations on your speech here this afternoon .
While Ireland has generally benefited from European funding , there are pockets of that country that are disadvantaged , whether it be the North-West , the West or indeed the border counties .
I believe the Economic Commission must now do the necessary studies in relation to the regions that continue to be disadvantaged - and disadvantaged irrespective of the economic indicators applied - where there is a high rate of unemployment , depopulation , a weak industrial base and poor rural infrastructure .
Indeed , in many parts of my constituency we must travel two hours before we meet these proposed TENs or national primary roads .
We cannot continue to ignore large regions or indeed any region within the Union .
We must learn from the Minister and President-in-Office precisely what he is doing to prepare the economy for the next round of structural funds .
While we might know what is in the financial envelope , it is not good enough .
It is important that we should know the strategic priorities that will be put in place .
As a representative of the NorthWest and the border counties , I must of course make the case for continuing support for a region lacking in infrastructure .
The border counties have suffered more than any other region in Ireland and possible more commercially than Northern Ireland , remembering that the national plan was in place prior to the cessation of violence .
In conclusion , can I say that the marine industry is the backbone of the coastal regions .
The industry is concerned about the slowing down of structural funds .
It is for another Minister to address the reduction in capacity .
The rural areas require funding from cohesion funds that should have a rural , a social and a regional factor and not just an economic factor .
Mr President , in its priorities for the coming months the Irish presidency has made it clear that it is in favour of virtue and firmly opposed to sin .
A solid commitment to monetary union ; firm and fair enforcement of Union law across all Member States ; completion and entrenchment of the single market ; few in this House would argue with these objectives .
But , as we all know , the real world has a way of making life more complicated .
As ever , my own country throws up the most paradoxes .
The government proclaims its staunch support for the single market , but threatens to exclude the UK from the single currency .
What it fails to realize is that an opt-out from the single currency , taken to its logical economic conclusion , will lead to a lock-out from the single market .
I hope that the Irish presidency will devote time and energy to explaining these facts of life to the British Government .
In so doing , it may finally turn on its head the old Anglo-Saxon misconception about the intellect of England 's Celtic neighbours .
My group is firmly committed to the achievement of EMU within the timetable and the convergence criteria laid down in the Treaties , but we will not find the political support necessary for such a move unless we show greater concern for the welfare of our citizens .
18 million unemployed and 50 million living in poverty provide a damning verdict on political leadership and government responsiveness in democracies which depend on political consent .
We must not allow the pain of transition to undermine the whole European project .
The cost of a palliative is small , the absence of it will cost us much more and if the Irish presidency can achieve one thing , it should be to administer the painkiller .
Mr President , it is obvious that the fundamental concern of the economic policy of the European Union and its Member States is the application of convergence plans in order to arrive shortly at a single currency , whereas the subject of employment seems only to be a consequence of arriving at the single currency . In other words , it is not a fundamental objective .
What is also clear in my view is that , during the years when we are applying the convergence plan , there is neither a resolve nor an effort to resolve the problem of unemployment .
I wish all the best for the Irish presidency but I would call upon it , since I think that the Florence Summit was a failure , to give serious thought to reorienting the macro-economic aggregates so that unemployment is made a fundamental objective which should be overriding all of the other economic policies .
From this point of view , I should like to make this remark , Mr Quinn , about the way in which the convergence policies are being applied in different countries .
Mr Quinn spoke about budgetary adjustment and consolidation .

That is all very well but in my country moves are afoot , with the blessing of the economic authorities of the Monetary Union , to privatise the most profitable undertakings in the public sector and in the medium and long term we are going to de-capitalise and it will not be possible to maintain low enough public deficits in the future .
Mr Quinn also spoke about wage restraint policies .
Yet demand is depressed because we are deliberately depressing it and we are keeping salaries down and demand is needed to reactivate the economy .
I could continue this list of contradictions in the application of the convergence plans ad infinitum .
In any case , I do wish the Irish presidency good luck and I would like to make a request on behalf of my group : I would like the presidency to give serious thought , in the chapters on economic policy , to the need for implementing an internal market and not only a single currency by means of fiscal harmonisation of profits , a thorny and complex issue but a fundamental one .
We cannot continue to develop the internal market unless we look at this aspect in a decisive way .
Mr President , once again the mounting unemployment in Europe has been cited , yet once again few speakers have acknowledged the real causes .
The President of the ECOFIN Council is also trying to pretend that the EU has nothing to do with the loss of millions of jobs , that the neoliberal crash course we have triggered off with the convergence criteria , and which is apparently to be pushed through at any price , simply does not exist .
It is almost cynical to speak of the responsibility of the Member States for employment policy in full awareness of the fact that the convergence criteria have deprived the Member States of their last vestige of control over their own employment policies , that they are practically forced to consolidate their budgets with fast , hot money from the social security budgets instead of through necessary structural reforms .
On the other hand , however , there is no competent body and no money to pursue a European employment policy .
We are rushing headlong into monetary union without first creating a social union .
We have mounted the horse before bridling it , and we should not be surprised if we suffer a nasty fall .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no denying it , it has to be said : despite the improvement in inflation , monetary stability and interest rates we are having great difficulty producing the necessary growth to stimulate the jobs market .
A number of theoretical mechanisms described in the guidelines are not currently working .
A number of mechanisms which are not working are the reason why growth is recovering only very slowly and why there is no visible fall in unemployment .
I thus call for a far more resolute policy on jobs .
I should like to address myself primarily to the President of the ECOFIN Council .
The ECOFIN Council has a bad reputation as regards measures to combat unemployment .
It is overwhelmingly the fault of the ECOFIN Council that Jacques Delors ' White Paper has so far largely remained a dead letter as far as the funding of trans-European networks is concerned .
I urge the new President of the ECOFIN Council , and I am counting on him , to do his utmost to make the funding of the trans-European networks more than a symbolic battle , but rather to come up with a powerful instrument of revitalization as a counterweight to the inevitable , and possibly deflationist , repercussions of the necessary revision of the convergence criteria .
In conclusion may I draw attention , particularly the attention of the Commissioner and Council President , to the current debate on the stability pact .
I appreciate that a good , sound Euro requires the consolidation of convergence .
But I would warn against us consolidating the deflationary effects of this .
Like Alan Donnelly , I thus advocate specific treatment of investment spending .
I advocate a sufficient degree of flexibility to accommodate short-term economic conditions .
I also advocate a discussion of fiscal erosion in the context of the stability pact .
If fiscal erosion continues the stability pact will put increasing pressure on social security systems and this will impart further deflationary impulses to the economy as a whole .
Mr President , I wish to welcome Mr Quinn here to the European Parliament and to congratulate him on the seriousness and skill of his efforts to date to work himself into the whole business of organizing the affairs of the Union for the next six months .
I welcome the fact that he has made unemployment and sound money his priorities .
In fact , these two are the same priority .
I am amazed that so many people are arguing that by being lax with monetary policy we can help to create jobs or improve the economic environment .
In fact , if you look around the European Union and look at the countries which have done well over the years , the ones which have created a lot of jobs and given their people higher standards of living , they are all the countries which have pursued sound money policies .
If they have unemployment - and it is , I have to say , then new to them - they look after their unemployed better than do other countries .
I can therefore see no good reason behind the demand for lax monetary policies so far as unemployment as a priority is concerned .
Obviously , it is an admirable priority .
The European Union can do some things .
The completion of the internal market made this Union more competitive .
It led to better business and greater confidence and competitiveness .
Consumers were able to get better value .
But it did not necessarily or automatically resolve the unemployment problem .
The same is true of the single currency .
We should not claim that a single currency will resolve unemployment .
It will make business more convenient ; it is a further step towards making the European Union more competitive and more efficient ; but it does not necessarily resolve the unemployment problem .
There is a danger in going out to the citizens of the European Union and saying to them that Maastricht was about unemployment , the single currency is about unemployment and then saying - if we fail - that Europe has failed us and let us down .
Today most of the instruments which affect employment prospects for their citizens are still in the hands of the Member States - rates of wages and social welfare , the length of hours worked and infrastructure within the individual states .
I hope that interest rates will be harmonized as time goes on .
But most of the instruments which can affect the growth of employment are still in the hands of the Member States .
We set the framework at European level and , as time goes on , there will be an evening up .
The single currency will be another step .
We worry unduly about the countries which will stay out and pursue soft currency policies in order to gain competitiveness .
Experience shows us that in the very short term they may succeed but the only thing those countries can do is to provide their own workers with lower standards of living .
The only thing they can gain from a soft monetary policy , devaluing their currency in order to gain competitiveness , is to reduce the wages of their own people and create greater poverty for the low paid .
In the end the single currency will prove an asset to the Community .
I wish to thank the President-in-Office for his resolve .
I wish to welcome the President-in-Office and wish him well during the course of the Irish presidency .
He will know the critical tone of Parliament 's resolution on the broad guidelines last month .
We share with the Council concerns on the unemployment crisis , but there is genuine and real frustration with the slow pace of policy change .
For example , subject to overall budget constraints , we believe taxation on the lower paid should be reduced .
It is in this year 's guidelines ; it was in last year 's guidelines ; it was in the guidelines the year before and it was in the Delors White Paper .
Commissioner Monti 's paper for Verona establishes clearly that tax on the low paid has gone up .
It is regression not progress : that is an issue of substance .
I do not have the time to develop any kind of linguistic or analytical subtlety on my next point .
But take the broad guidelines on fiscal and monetary policy : it is not only a question of style , but of substance .
The President-in-Office said the Council cannot share Parliament 's view on the evolution of monetary policy .
Does he reject the OECD view the day after our resolution ?
I quote from the OECD : ' There is scope to use lower interest rates . '
I quote from the OECD : ' A policy challenge in Europe will be to ensure that simultaneous fiscal consolidation does not have substantial adverse short-run effects on activity . '
I quote from OECD : ' Monetary policy will have to be used to avoid this short-run risk . Appropriate accommodating monetary policy is not lax monetary policy . '
The OECD calls a spade a spade .
President-in-Office , too much of what we want to say is lost in Jesuitical sophistry in our text .
If there is no difference of substance , let us call a spade a spade and let us do what we need to do .
Mr President , on the broad economic policy guidelines of the Member States and the Union little could be hoped of the declaration of this Council whose presidency , on the other hand , is the cause of some hope .
This is yet again an illustration of the much talked about squaring of the circle .
In truth , it is with some expectation and hope that this presidency is regarded as one which will take a multi-faceted look at political activity considering that it should not only be economics , and its monetarist form , that affects social life and cannot only be the big states which are in charge of the game .
Ireland would be in an excellent position to put such a perspective into practice .
It is a small state and it has shown acknowledged positive national economic results nor does it seem at all likely to forget or belittle social issues , especially that of unemployment .
But will it be possible even to do this given the broad economic policy guidelines to which it is subjected ?
Basic priorities with which we have to agree have been set out : employment , security , financial solidity and peace .
But I wonder whether those basic priorities are compatible with a fundamental and vital priority , namely the entrenched guidelines of economic politics , that road to the final stage of economic and monetary union all of which is conditioned by magic numbers and inflexible dates which impose on both States and the Union economic policies which are more than anti-inflationary , they are deflationary , and which stop growth and prevent the fulfilment of social needs . All they do is multiply and concentrate financial capital while aggravating inequalities and imbalances .
It is strange that we should be debating the broad economic policy guidelines since , by definition , they cannot be discussed . Therefore , we think that something has to be done , and done urgently .
It is this : we must discuss the broad economic policy guidelines not only for the Union ; it is very important that we discuss the economic policy of the Member States , seeing that there are different realities that are juxtaposed and which must co-exist in cooperation .
Mr President , I , too , wish to welcome my Dublin colleague , Ruairi Quinn , the Irish Minister for Finance and the President-in-Office of Ecofin , to Parliament this afternoon .
As indicated this morning by Dick Spring , the President-in-Office of the Council , maintaining the momentum towards Economic and Monetary Union is one of the main priorities of the Irish presidency .
So , by the end of the year , I hope that we will see real progress on issues such as the maintenance of stability in stage 3 , the exchangerate relationship between the Euro and the pre-in currencies and , especially , on the technical preparatory work for the legal framework of the Euro .
A major part of this work will be ensuring greater economic policy coordination between all 15 Member States .
In this regard , I have two main criticisms to make of Ecofin and European Council work so far - and I mean this in a very constructive way .
Too much attention has been given to the monetary aspect of EMU and not enough to the economic provisions .
I am not arguing for revision of the Maastricht convergence criteria , but I feel greater acknowledgement should be given to the ' E ' in EMU .
A more balanced economic policy mix is required .
EMU must meet the needs not only of central bankers but also of the millions of unemployed throughout the Union .
The President-in-Office has heard that from the Members here this afternoon .
I know that there are not many here , but others are following in their rooms on their monitors .
They will read the text .
So what we require of him is to look after those millions of unemployed and to take that into account .
Secondly , the Council is paying little or no attention to Parliament 's legitimate and legally enshrined role in the moves towards EMU .
I would specifically like an assurance from the President-in-Office that the key decisions will not be taken by the Irish presidency until we in Parliament have been given the chance to offer our own opinions .
I , too , want to wish him well in the work he is going to do for us in the European Union over the next six months .
Mr President , the Council admits in its text on the broad economic guidelines that since it presented its broad economic guidelines to Parliament in July 1995 , the situation in Europe has deteriorated in contrast to what was expected .
Growth has been below expectation and unemployment has continued to rise .
Yet once more the Council continues to argue for the continuation of the current macroeconomic policies given the ' fact ' that the fundamentals remain sound .
When Europe has such a high and rising unemployment rate and social welfare burden , can the Council really argue that the economic fundamentals are sound ?
What does soundness mean in this context ?
When the OECD is forecasting in its annual employment outlook , published last Monday , a deterioration in the levels of employment in European countries such as France and Germany over the next 18 months , can the Council really be arguing that Europe should carry on the same policies regardless of the results , in the hope - not in the reasoned expectation , but the hope - that things will somehow turn out to be all right ?
Furthermore , one has to contend with the problems faced by governments and by business as governments pursue the current form of fiscal strictness .
A report by the European Construction Industry Federation - by the business sector , not by politicians , indeed not by socialist politicians - estimates that the restricted economic policies of the Union will cause the loss of more than a quarter of a million jobs in the construction sector by the end of next year .
Since these policies inevitably undermine the perception at the grassroots of the well-foundedness of the common currency project , the German building federation believes that the Maastricht deficit criterion should be relaxed or monetary union delayed in order to ease pressure upon this sector .
Fiscal strictness undermines our march towards the common currency which I , at least , support .
Despite that , we have had from Mr Waigel the proposal that not only should there be no relaxation of fiscal strictness but that we should have an additional dose of even greater fiscal strictness after we have reached a common currency .
A high level of growth , increased employment , social protection and economic convergence can be achieved only through long-term investment , especially in infrastructure projects .
Here we see exposed the non-fulfilment of the White Paper on Growth Competitiveness and Employment .
Public investment must be encouraged and conditions for private investment must also be improved through the reduction of interest rates .
I am surprised that the President-in-Office , whose serious attitude I absolutely honour and salute , seems to have so misunderstood the tenor of Parliament 's resolution regarding monetary policy .
What Parliament was saying with reference to an easing of monetary policy is that there is no chance of reducing unemployment if the policy mix remains so unidirectional as it is now .
It is the frightful one-sidedness of the guidelines that Parliament wished to escape from .
But I am afraid , from your reaction , that we have missed our target .
The Council is essentially single-mindedly pursuing one target : control of inflation below 2 % , below 1 % - even below zero % perhaps - forgetting that there might be such a thing as a natural rate of inflation .
I am surprised that the hardened monetarists who write those papers and are so ready to accept that there is a natural rate of unemployment have forgotten that there might be a natural rate of inflation and that if you try to squash prices below that you might cause a reaction in the economy analogous to what happens when you go below the natural rate of unemployment .
This one-sidedness of policies is what really frightens us and what we have to escape if we are to have anything more than ritualistic reference to the reduction of unemployment .
Mr President , I understand the constraints of time , and colleagues will bear with me if I do not address in full all the questions posed to me .
At the outset , in response to Alan Donnelly 's question , the changes made by the Monetary Committee were made on behalf of the Ministers who are represented in Ecofin .
So , between the Commission and the Ecofin there is this technical working group on which both Ministers from the various Member States and the central banks are represented .
In his second question he suggested that perhaps the relationship between ECOFIN and Parliament needs to be reviewed and suggested that in September or early October we could meet to discuss in what way that relationship could be improved from an institutional point of view .
On behalf of the presidency , I am prepared to have such a meeting and to investigate it .
It is in the interests of all our citizens and the necessary political support to which I will address myself in a few seconds that a better understanding and a better form of communication between us should be established .
Therefore , anything that encourages and improves this communication has to be welcome .
So without prejudice to whatever conclusions may be arrived at and without in any way committing Ecofin during my presidency to a particular form of institutional change , I can certainly say that we will meet to discuss what Mr Donnelly suggested .
With regard to the stability pact , I have to say that it is my impression that a clear majority of the members of Ecofin are committed to a stability pact being framed within the context of the Treaty and consequently accountable to all the institutions of the Union .
There is a wide-ranging debate in relation to this and I will not go into it because of time constraints , but the Union can only move forward on a Treaty-based premise and we have to ensure that the concerns of those people who feel that the Treaty may not be strong enough to provide us with the sort of pact we require are also addressed and we have to seek within the framework of the Treaty the sort of pact that will bring about its objective , namely permanent monetary stability and sound finances .
I agree with Mr Cassidy that we have to look not just at best practices in employment terms within the European Union but also at the other two pillars of economic activity in the global market , the Asia-Pacific rim and North America , to see if we can transpose from those totally different cultures best practices that are suitable to adaptation within the European social model .
I have long held the view that the European social model of social protection which I , as deputy leader of the Irish Labour Party , fully support , cannot safely transpose itself into the next century in the context of a global market .
We do not have to abandon the principles which brought about the construction of the social model of protection , but we certainly have to redesign it to the new reality which it has to confront .
Coming from the Left in Europe I have an obligation - and I have said this elsewhere in this building over the last twenty-four hours - to ensure that we address that issue honestly and frankly without in any way appearing to compromise on our principles .
The general question centred around whether monetary policy can be relaxed or whether in fact Ecofin is too obsessed with monetary policy .
To some speakers - our Finnish friend from the Green Group - I would have to say that if spending money made countries wealthy , an awful lot of the highly indebted countries in the European Union at the present time would be immensely wealthy , including my own , which under the leadership of Mr Gallagher 's party thought it could spend itself into a fortune at one stage - my children 's children would still be paying off the debt of that mad escapade of crazy economics !
Sound monetary policy is the prerequisite .
The fact that we are moving slowly but inexorably towards economic and monetary union is the sole policy objective that is driving the broad consensus within Ecofin and , I dare say , within this Chamber as well .
The fact that we have 18 million unemployed is an absolute tragedy but I would put it to you that if we had loose monetary policy without the completion of the internal market , given the reality of the global market competition to which Mr McCartin referred , this figure would be higher .
In conclusion , I have heard clearly what this Parliament has said in response to the debate on the broad economic policy guidelines .
I have heard Mr Cox and others refer to looking at a range or a better mix of policy instruments other than the one set out in the economic policy guidelines .
This is the start of the Irish presidency .
This is the month of July and I should like to be able to come back at some stage between now and the end of the presidency .
I will carry a very clear message to my colleagues in Ecofin , namely the concern of this Parliament that while being fully committed to EMU and to the project of the single currency , you are concerned about the failure in relation to employment and the consequent lack of popular support to live with the discipline necessary to create the single currency .
We all ignore that lack of support at our peril and therefore we have to find ways within the framework of budgetary discipline , within the framework of the convergence criteria to address a concern which you , as elected representatives , are properly conveying here in this democratic assembly .

Mr President , very briefly , while adding my own best wishes to those already expressed in this House for the success of the Irish presidency , I would like to make three quick points to provide a degree of reassurance , and perhaps dispel a degree of misunderstanding , regarding unemployment and economic and monetary union , the stability pact and the present state of the economy .
As regards the relationship between economic and monetary union and unemployment , I have no doubt at all that the Euro is a precondition for the creation of jobs , for two very good reasons .
The first is that , in order to move forward to the single currency , we have to reduce our public deficits .
Well , today , public deficits in Europe are siphoning off 40 % or 50 % or perhaps even more of domestic saving , which would be better used to finance productive investment and job creation rather than debts inherited from previous generations .
The second reason is that Euro means stable exchange rates .
I have noticed that each time we reanalyse the monetary fluctuations of the spring of 1995 , we find that the damage - in terms of growth and job losses - is constantly greater than we thought .
At present , we believe that the monetary fluctuations of 1995 cost Europe about 1.2 to 1.5 % growth over two years , and 1.5 million jobs .
So the discipline and monetary stability that economic and monetary union will bring will undoubtedly allow an increase in growth - and growth means employment .
Next , as far as the stability pact is concerned I would say this : don 't worry , it will not have any deflationary effects .
The stability pact is a necessity .
It is , ultimately , the guarantee of the necessary soundness to derive maximum benefit from economic and monetary union .
In due course , after the end of the summer , this House will be invited to consider our proposals on this , and you will find that they include very specific objectives , which are not to be confused with the reference criteria for the transition to economic and monetary union .
They will also include ways and means for achieving that objective .
I should add that there is no question here of creating , or establishing , additional conditions for the transition to the Euro for those who are not among the first group .
I can assure you , too , that we are concerned with remaining within the scope of the Treaty and that , as the Commission sees it , the stability pact must not be concluded outside the Treaty .
The Treaty provides us with all the legal bases necessary to ensure a successful outcome for this instrument which is itself a necessity .
I am thinking in particular of Article 103 ( 5 ) , as regards multilateral surveillance , and Article 104c as regards excessive government deficits .
Even so , I do have confidence in the Irish presidency .
I can tell you that the preparatory work , whether it concerns the stability pact or the legal status of the Euro or even the new European monetary system , all this work being currently of a technical nature , is progressing normally and on schedule .
This preparatory work will be concluded under the Irish presidency , and the Euro will come into being on 1 January 1999 .
Few people today can have any doubt about that .
Finally , as regards the economic situation , I have the impression that the slow-down is behind us and that growth is returning .
What prompts me to express reasoned optimism is partly the fact that , for the first time for some months , I have noted a stabilization of economic forecasts in the European Union , and partly the recovery of investment .
The investment indicators are good ( plus 8 % for 1996 ) .
This is encouraging , because the recovery of investment shows that industry is anticipating a renewal of growth , and it seems to me that the upward trend of investment is likely to be sustained because the production capacity utilization rate is already high within the European Union .
I hope then , as I view these future prospects , that the Irish presidency will be able to steer the European vessel - I must not say down the right road , since we are talking about a maritime country , but through calm waters , which will bring it to port in ideal conditions at the end of the year .
The debate is closed .
Abduction of children
The next item is the oral questions by Mrs Banotti , Mrs Green , Mr Martens , Mr De Vries , Mr Newman , Mrs Ahern , Mrs Bennasar Tous , Mr Bertens , Mr Bowe , Mrs Cederschild , Mr Christodoulou , Mr K. Collins , Mrs Crawley , Mr Crowley , Mr Cushnahan , Mr Dimitrakopoulos , Mrs Fouque , Mr Gahrton , Mr Gillis , Mr Harrison , Mr Hendrick , Mr Kellett-Bowman , Mr Killilea , Mrs Kinnock , Mr Knig , Mr Lambrias , Mr McCartin , Mrs McIntosh , Mrs McKenna , Mr McMillan-Scott , Mrs Miranda de Lage , Mr Perry , Mr Rack , Mr O. Rehn , Mr Rothley , Mr Rbig , Mrs Schmidbauer , Mr Stenmarck , Mr Tannert and Mrs van Dijk , to the Council ( B4-0671 / 96-0085 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0672 / 96-0086 / 96 ) on child abduction in the Member States .
Mr President , I hope colleagues will indulge us for a few minutes if we eat into question time , but I hope we can hold at least part of this debate with the President-in-Office and the Commissioner present .
It is now 12 months since President Hnsch appointed me as his special mediator on transnationally abducted children .
In that time I have dealt with 12 cases and almost daily requests for information and for help .
He has also appointed Ms Ann Hennon to assist me and I am also happy today to acknowledge the presence , in the gallery , of Mr Adair Dyer , who is the deputy secretary-general of the Hague Conference on private international law , specifically charged with the Hague convention dealing with this issue .
In the last few years happily , there has been an increase in marriages between citizens from different countries , but this brings with it also its own problems .
When these marriages break down there is often an anguished debate about who the children will live with afterwards .
We have two pieces of international legislation to deal with this issue : the Luxembourg Convention and the Hague Convention .
The Hague Convention is a good piece of legislation , though it is not quite good enough .
The main problems which exist with its implementation are the slowness of the procedures , the lack of free legal aid in some of our countries , and the excessive recourse to the use of the exemption clauses .
For these conventions to be effective the implementation of the procedures must be extremely rapid and almost automatic .
Another problem is the lack of knowledge of the procedures among some lawyers and judges who only deal very rarely with these cases .
In some cases the children are never found .
Figures from Interpol show that at the moment there are 60 children reported missing in the European Union and none of them have been traced .
Many of these may not in fact be cases of parental abduction , but may be simply criminal abduction .
There is a need for an independent , centralized European organization to which all missing children should be reported .
I say this having visited in the United States last week the Institute for Missing and Exploited Children .
Every year in the United States , with a population less than the European Union , they deal with the disappearance of approximately 367 , 000 children , I repeat 367 , 000 .
A great proportion , though by no means all of them , are parentally abducted children .
Many of them are run-away children , sometimes running away with adults , not their parents .
Many of them are children who simply disappear and are murdered and are never found again .
We have a problem in Europe because we simply have no idea of the numbers of children affected .
I believe , as I have said , that we need a centralized system .
I would suggest that Europol would be a very appropriate place to have this centralized agency capable of responding within 24 hours .
I must stress again the need for rapid action on these issues .
The police have all too often been reluctant , unable , or unwilling to actually start looking for these children until tragically sometimes it is too late .
We need recognition between Member States of custody orders given in each country .
This would cut down a great deal on abductions .
We also continue to have a serious problem for abductions outside the Community .
You will recall that the first mediator on abducted children was appointed in response to the Algerian mothers ' campaigns in Belgium and France .
Parents need to be aware of some of these issues before they marry or before they create children .
It is all very well to fall in love on your holidays , but when the realities of life begin to strike home the romance wears off very quickly and sometimes at considerable cost to the parents and to their children .
Premarital arrangements might be a good idea simply to concentrate the mind .
All too often when there is one abduction there is a re-abduction by the other parent .
We need specialized , centralized courts in all our countries who will be well briefed and will deal with these cases within 24 hours of them being brought to their notice .
We also need more adequate training for our lawyers and for our judges .
Remember that at the heart of all these issues there is fear , love and all too often , unfortunately , revenge .
A great many of our children have suffered .
I have been totally and absolutely devastated by some of the stories I have heard over the last year .
I look forward very much to hearing what the Council and the Commission propose .
Mr President , the abduction of children across national boundaries is a matter of great concern and an issue that is now being addressed by the Council .
I would like to acknowledge the role that the European Parliament played in bringing this issue to the attention of a wider audience in Europe .
In particular , I would like to acknowledge the role played by our own Irish MEP , Mrs Banotti , as Parliament 's special mediator on transnationally abducted children .
A draft convention on the scope , jurisdiction and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters is currently under consideration by the Council .
It is the view of the Council that this instrument , when it comes into force , will greatly help many citizens in the European Union .
Discussions are ongoing on the draft convention .
It is proposed that the convention , when it comes into operation , will apply to civil procedures relating to the invalidity of a marriage , divorce , and the legal separation of spouses .
In addition , it will apply to civil procedures on parental authority for the children of both spouses undergoing matrimonial proceedings .
Regarding jurisdiction , the draft convention provides that the authorities of a Member State shall be competent to rule on matters relating to the invalidity of a marriage on the basis of certain criteria founded , on the one hand , on the habitual residence of one spouse or both spouses subject to certain conditions and , on the other hand , on the nationality of both spouses or the joint domicile established on a permanent basis .
It is also stipulated that the authorities of the Member State in which a ruling is given on actions relating to the annulment of the marriage , divorce or separation of the spouses shall be competent to take decisions on the exercise of parental authority over every child of both spouses on certain specific conditions , particularly where the children have their habitual residence in the same Member State .
Subject to the working party 's discussions , the draft convention provides that the competent authorities shall rule on the exercise of parental authority in conformity with the Hague Convention of 1980 on the civil aspects of international child abduction .
Regarding recognition and enforcement of judgments arising from these cases , the draft convention provides that any judgments given concerning the invalidity of a marriage , divorce or the separation of spouses shall have legal effect in the other Member States of the European Union .
This is also the case in judgments relating to the exercise of parental authority over the children of both spouses .
It is clear from what I have said that the adoption of this convention will make it possible to establish a more open legal regime in this area .
This will be a regime in which judgments given in one Member State of the Union will normally be recognized and enforced in another Member State .
The aim is to adopt the approach provided for by the Brussels Convention of 1968 which determines the jurisdiction of Member States ' courts in civil and commercial matters to facilitate recognition of judgments and to establish a swift procedure for the enforcement of judgments .
No special procedure will be necessary for recognition of judgments .
The honourable Members of the European Parliament will wish to be aware that the Council has examined the provisions in the draft convention on jurisdiction .
At present Council work is focusing on recognition and enforcement provisions of the draft convention .
Due to the complexity of the legal issues involved with this draft convention , it is not possible at this stage to estimate with any certainty when work on the convention will be completed .
However , I would like to underline that the Council regards conclusion of this convention as a major priority in work under Title 6 of the Treaty in the field of judicial cooperation in civil matters .
May I add that I note the specific suggestion of Mrs Banotti that Europol or some such agency should have a specific role .
This is a suggestion which has much merit and I will communicate this suggestion to the Irish President-in-Office of the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
I will say that , in pursuing this , I believe that the European Parliament and those Members of Parliament who have taken a particular interest in it have done a signal public service .
Mr President , custody questions are sensitive ones .
They concern our children 's future .
They also concern the conditions under which parents can fulfil their role as parents properly .
Traditionally , responsibility for decisions on custody has rested with national authorities .
There are no intergovernmental instruments governing situations where the dispute is between parents from different Member States .
In many cases this has resulted in legal disputes which were heart-rending for both parents and children .
Nevertheless , it would be natural for children to have both a father and a mother even after a separation .
It is against this background that the Commission has been working actively to ensure that the custody issue is governed by the convention on family law issues , the Brussels II convention , which is currently being debated by the Council .
The intention from the outset was that the convention should lay down clear rules on jurisdiction and the procedures for the execution of decisions in respect of marital disputes involving more than one Member State .
As a result of the study which the Commission presented in September 1995 , among other things , the field of application has been expanded to include custody issues .
The study demonstrated shortcomings in the existing international legislation and showed that there was a clear need for a future Community instrument to regulate custody issues .
Under the draft of the convention which is now being debated by the Council the court which is competent to decide on issues such as divorce , separation or the annulment of a marriage should also be competent to decide on custody .
One principle is that the children should have to be resident in the country where the issue is decided .
If this is not the case the court would still be able to decide the matter if this was not contrary to the children 's best interests and if neither parent was opposed .
I really do hope that work on the convention will be concluded soon .
For its part , the Commission will work actively to ensure that solutions can be found to the remaining issues .
Once the convention is in place it will be possible to avoid conflicts resulting from the fact that courts in different Member States arrive at contradictory decisions in the same cases .
Finally , Mr President , as the Europol Convention stands today , it does not include any provision which would allow Europol to take on cases involving abducted children .
However , as the honourable Minister said , there is nothing to prevent the presidency taking an initiative on this .
I just wish to ask the Commissioner : if a child is abducted by a non-parental person , surely that is a criminal offence and should be dealt with by Europol ?
I know there is a different set of criteria for abduction by parents , but surely we should not make so great a distinction between criminally and parentally-abducted children ?
It is difficult to answer that question .
As the Convention stands today Europol 's competence covers trafficking in people , which can of course include trafficking in children , but it does not cover disputes .
These would require a special initiative , as I see it .
However , as I said , it is important that the Council should take an initiative on this .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
The debate is suspended and will be resumed at 9 p.m.
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-0681 / 96 ) .
Question No 1 by James Nicholson ( H-0573 / 96 )
Subject : Peace Policy
Will the Council define the present policy objective , in view of the current tension in Northern Ireland and the continued refusal by the IRA to reinstate a ceasefire ?
In reply to the honourable Member , on behalf of the Council , I should like to say that all Member States wish to see a lasting , peaceful settlement in Northern Ireland and a renewal of the ceasefire .
The European Union has always unreservedly supported the process of peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland .
In Essen , moreover , the European Council confirmed the European Union 's commitment to providing its support for reconciliation and the restoration of sound economic foundations .
Having said that , it is not for the Council to comment on the conduct of the peace process and the positions of the parties involved , which are matters coming outside its sphere of responsibility .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
Although he has , to a large extent , given me the answer I expected , I have no doubt he would also agree with me that many people were devastated when the IRA called off its ceasefire - which was so welcome for that period of time .
Would he also welcome the fact that , through the trying circumstances of recent days , the loyalist ceasefire has still held in Northern Ireland ?
That has been very crucial over the past few days .
Would he also further agree with me that we cannot forget the bombs at Canary Wharf and Manchester and the wanton destruction and loss of life that that entailed , or , indeed , in his own country , the discovery of the bomb factory in County Laois and the worry that gives , because people just do not make bombs or hijack lorries to plant bombs without serious intent ?
Would he not agree with me and urge everyone - including the Provisional IRA - to accept the Mitchell principles as laid out by other parties in the talks in Northern Ireland and allow a way for dialogue because , as we all know , dialogue must take place in the long term .
That is the challenge to them .
There is no one keeping them away : they are keeping themselves away .
The opportunity is there for them .
Would he not agree with me on that ?
This whole area falls outside the remit of the Council .
But perhaps I may , on a personal basis , respond to the honourable Member .
Firstly , I agree with him that everybody in the island of Ireland was devastated when the IRA called off its ceasefire .
I certainly welcome the holding of the loyalist ceasefire and would look forward to a full restoration of the IRA ceasefire at the earliest possible time , which is something we are all working to bring about and hoping and praying for .
We certainly cannot forget what happened at Canary Wharf and Manchester or in County Laois , or the murder of a Detective Garda in County Limerick in recent times , for that matter .
I would say to the honourable Member , who I know to be an honourable man , that the problem of Northern Ireland is a problem of double minority .
I do not know whether you have ever heard it described in that way : it is my personal description of the problem .
In my view , nothing can be done without bringing both minorities along .
The unionists are a minority on the island of Ireland , the nationalists are a minority within Northern Ireland .
We have come a long way , over a long number of years , in trying to change the view that nationalism in Ireland has of itself .
But when we see a nationalist minority being treated in a way that is contemptuous of their minority status , it makes our role very difficult .
What I would say to the honourable Member is that both sides must work to respect minorities on the island so that we can respect each other 's traditions and bring about a lasting peace in which we do not threaten each other .
I certainly , on behalf of the presidency , will take into account and bear in mind the comments which the honourable Member has made in a very balanced and evenhanded manner , which is his usual mode of communication .
All of us , as Labour MEPs , have been enormously saddened by the events of the past week or so .
The bombing at Enniskillen , the rioting across large parts of Northern Ireland , and a clear attempt by the IRA to mount yet another bombing campaign in the mainland of the United Kingdom : all of these events must stand condemned .
The rule of law must be upheld without any equivocation .
But also we must ensure that these events - horrible as they have been - do not deter us in our determination to keep going with the peace process .
Clearly one of the most emotive issues over the last week or so has been the Orangemen 's marches .
My question to the President-in-Office is : in his view , would it be helpful if the United Kingdom Government set up an independent commission which would examine the conduct of parades in Northern Ireland , help to ensure that the routes for such parades are fair and consistent , and would also examine the existing law relating to such parades ?
Would that be helpful ?
In response to the honourable Member I should like to say that the position of the Irish Government is well-known in this regard , but I am here today answering questions on behalf of the Council of the European Union .
I reiterate what the Tnaiste said earlier in the House .
Events have taken place over the last 10 days which have led to serious instability in Northern Ireland and have placed in peril the substantial achievements of the peace process over the last two years .
The origins of the recent disturbances are deeply rooted in the fundamental divisions which exist within Northern Ireland and must be addressed by achieving a new beginning for relationships within Northern Ireland , within the island of Ireland , between the peoples of Britain and Ireland , and by agreeing new institutions and structures to take account of the totality of relationships .
Nothing can excuse the widespread violence and intimidation of the last 10 days .
Violence may be an outlet for frustration , but it can only worsen an already bad situation and will not solve the problems which lie at its root .
Solutions will be found exclusively through dialogue , negotiation and compromise .
It is essential that the primacy of politics over street violence should be quickly re-asserted .
The rule of law must be seen to prevail and be effectively policed in an impartial manner .
A solution must be found to the issue of contentious parades which served to provoke the recent unrest .
That is what the Tnaiste said to the House this morning .
I think if people reflect on that they will find it deals with the matter raised by the honourable Member .
Mr President , I should like to say to the President-in-Office of the Council that if people are treated equally under the law and if political authority holds as it did not hold in the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland this last time , it does not matter how many minorities there are on an island or indeed a continent : we can all enjoy our identities and indeed , our allegiances , provided we are all treated equally under the law .
Can he not answer the question of the honourable Member and state that the Council does abhor violence under all circumstances , that the Council does want to see the IRA cease-fire restored , can encourage the IRA cease-fire to be restored and indeed congratulate the Loyalist cease-fire for holding in these very trying circumstances ?
The events of the last 10 days have been absolutely terrible for those of us who have held to non-violent and to political traditions over the past 25 years in the most terrible and difficult circumstances .
We cannot continue to maltreat - indeed , crucify - people who have held to the political process , who have tried to maintain peace at all costs , political activity at all costs and to hold violence at bay .
We must now support that in whatever way we can .
I ask the Council here today to answer the question properly .
As the record will show , I have answered those questions unequivocally and properly .
I reject any suggestion that I have not done so .
I am sure the honourable Member who placed the question heard me quite clearly say how much I wanted to see the IRA cease-fire restored , how much I condemn the IRA activity , and that I did share with him and welcomed the Loyalist cease-fire .
Perhaps if Members listened to the debate they might contribute more light than heat .
This is a very important and delicate situation and one to which we should all do our best to contribute a solution , not to be seen simply to utter words , but to make a contribution to solving the problem .
It is a very complex problem .
I am probably the only Member here present who has studied Irish politics at Queens University in Belfast and who has been a practising politician for 17 years now on the island of Ireland .
I am sure the honourable Member from Northern Ireland who placed this question heard me unequivocally answer the question that he has put .
I hope that the record of this House will show very clearly where we stand in relation to this question .
Question No 2 by Saara-Maria Paakkinen ( H-0513 / 96 )
Subject : Continued joint funding for NGOs
For more than 20 years the European Union has allocated funding to NGOs involved in development cooperation to cover projects implemented in the developing countries and information programmes dealing with development issues .
Efforts have been made to establish a legal basis for this cooperation , which has produced excellent results , but the Council has failed to reach a unanimous decision on the proposal for a regulation at its last two meetings .
What measures does Italy , as the country holding the Council presidency , intend to take to bring an end to this stalemate and guarantee continued joint funding ?
Since 1976 the Community has been co-financing development projects with non-governmental organizations .
The funding has gradually increased over the years and in 1996 amounts to ECU 174 million in commitment appropriations .
Until now , funding has been executed by the Commission without the adoption by the Council of a legal basis .
However , in 1995 , following an agreement between the Council , Parliament and the Commission on the necessity of a legal basis for budget lines , the Commission made a proposal on this issue .
Unfortunately the Council has not yet been able to adopt a common position on this proposal .
The Irish presidency intends to do all it can to ensure that a common position on the nongovernmental organizations co-financing regulation is adopted as rapidly as possible .
Under Article 7 of the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities annexed to the Treaty , the Commission may conclude agreements for the laissez-passer issued to Members and servants of the Community 's institutions to be recognized as valid travel documents within the territory of third countries .
There is an agreement between the Commission and the Swiss authorities in effect since January 1975 recognizing the validity in Switzerland of the laissez-passer for Members of the European Parliament .
There has been no change to that agreement .
It would appear that the incident in question was an isolated one .
However , may I suggest that the honourable Member put his question to the Commission which , having negotiated the agreement in question , is best placed to give a definitive answer on this issue .
I thank the President-in-Office for his answer .
But , after all , it is also the Council which is competent for countries outside our European Union and especially for a question which has political connotations .
My question is simply : has the Council been informed about the changing attitude in Switzerland ?
It is not the first time this has happened .
Recently it has happened several times .
Would it not be useful to inform the Swiss authorities that they should inform their own people that there has been such an agreement made with the Commission ?
There has been no change in the agreement .
If there has been a change in attitude I will undertake to communicate the concerns of Parliament to the Swiss authorities .
Question No 4 by Thomas Megahy ( H-0531 / 96 )
Subject : ' Irreversibility ' of EU membership
In a summary of proceedings at the Intergovernmental Conference presented to Members of the European Parliament on 5 June 1996 by Elisabeth Guigou ( Fr-PSE ) and Elmar Brok ( Ger-EPP ) , the following statement was made :
' On the issue of a Member State repeatedly and deliberately violating human rights , or ceasing to be democratic , most representatives agreed that it should be possible to sanction such a State ... without , however , going so far as to expel a Member State as this would undermine the irreversibility of membership . '
Does the Council agree that membership of the Union is ' irreversible ' ?
If so , could it indicate where this principle is enshrined in the Treaty of Rome ?
Does it agree with the view that the curtailment of human rights and democratic norms in a Member State would not , under any circumstances , result in expulsion ?
Is the general belief that membership of the Union is a voluntary matter , which can be terminated by the democratic decision of a Member State misplaced ?
In reply to the honourable Member 's question , I should like to emphasize that under Article N of the Treaty on European Union , the Council is not party to the Intergovernmental Conference responsible for amending the Treaties .
Thus , the Council is not empowered to adopt any position on the ideas raised in the honourable Member 's question .
He will therefore appreciate that the Council has never discussed the question of the irreversibility of EU membership .
The honourable Member will appreciate that it is for the Intergovernmental Conference alone to consider any possible amendment to the Treaty in this respect .
Mr President , I must congratulate you on a perfect Council answer .
I wondered what kind of answer I was going to get .
Quite obviously , as you have never talked about it , you do not have a view about it , but it is very , very strange that the representatives of the various countries who are taking part in the preliminaries for this seem to be expressing views , so they must be lurking around in the Council somewhere .
Would the Presidentin-Office take back this message to the Council from me , just in case they ever get around to talking about these things ?
Would he say that this view of irreversibility is totally wrong , is not to be found in any of the treaties , and therefore , as in fact we have already seen in the case of Greenland - part of the Danish State - which has already seceded , there is no legal obstacle , whatever other practical obstacle there may be , to any country deciding voluntarily to leave the Union ?
I would hope also that there might also be a precedent whereby there might be some chance of expulsion of countries exercising undemocratic practices over a long period of time .
I am surprised that this was ever said , because I got the feeling that some other countries were so fed up with the present actions of the British Government at the moment they were actually talking about booting them out .
I dare say that that has never been discussed either in the Council of Ministers .
I am not in a position to comment on the last proposal put forward by the honourable Member , but may I say that the Council of Ministers has been preoccupied not with expelling or allowing countries to leave the Union but with the 12 countries which are knocking on the door wishing to join , so attractive does the Union seem to them .
Having answered the question on behalf of the Council , may I say in a personal capacity that Ireland is open to considering positively the development of sanctions in the event of a Member State consistently violating human rights .
This is a sensitive issue with far-reaching political implications and one which needs further reflection .
I may say also that , as the Irish Member of the Reflection Group , I do recall that matters of this kind were discussed by the Reflection Group and if the Council ever does get around to discussing it , it will be as a result of the report of the Intergovernmental Conference and I am sure that the honourable Member 's views that he has communicated so well here today will be taken into account .
Mr President , I am aware of the concept of irreversibility of membership of the European Union .
The supplementary question that I want to put is this : would the Minister agree with me that it is an abstract term and that it refers to the knitting together in an interdependent way of the economies of the European Economic Union , so that it becomes very difficult for countries to withdraw , while at the same time recognizing that it is a voluntary organization and whoever wants to leave can do so ?
I have often said in reply to people from the United States asking about the lack of solidarity that is observed sometimes in the European Community that we do not have a National Guard that we can call out ; and if we can build a European Union without the necessity to force anybody to stay , then it will be all the stronger and will have a better chance of becoming , in moral terms , irreversible .
I hope the Minister would agree with that .
I have known the honourable Member for a long number of years and I find very little to disagree with him about .
As usual he has crystallized this whole idea and put it very well .
I would like to - just for the sake of debate perhaps - raise one point which certainly entered my mind during the discussions of the Reflection Group .
That is this that the European Union is open to democracies only .
What would happen , for example , either now or some time in the future if a general turned up a European Council meeting in place of the Head of Government or State ?
Should the Union be in a position not only to allow a Member to leave but also to expel a Member because it no longer meets the criterion , which is that it must be a democracy ?
The whole question then of human rights sanctions was also considered by the Reflection Group .
These questions and practices have not arisen so far in the Union and certainly what Mr McCartin has said here today is something that I would very much identify with and support .
As the author is not present , Question No 5 lapses .
Question No 6 by Georges Berthu ( H-0538 / 96 )
Subject : Free-trade area
At the working meeting of the European Union 's Ministers of Agriculture of 7 May 1996 in Otranto ( Italy ) , the President-in-Office of the Council presented a document warning of the risks of a proliferation of free-trade areas while observing , according to the press , that this policy failed to take any account of the sectoral consequences of such agreements , or took it for granted that entire production sectors could survive the opening up of the markets .
Does the Council intend to publish this document and forward it to all Members , and more particularly the members of the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on External Economic Relations ?
Does the Council not consider it appropriate to launch an impartial and pluralist study ( for which the Commission would have no remit in respect of the implementation , award or signature of contracts ) , on the ramifications of the Community 's free-trade policy ?
How does the Council propose to bring the Commission back to its role of strictly applying the guidelines it lays down ?
Could it not take the opportunity afforded by the IGC to remove the ambiguities raised by Articles 113 and 228 on the Commission 's degree of autonomy in this matter , by increasing the transparency of international trade negotiations and by clearly denying the Commission any power of prior signature capable of committing the Community de jure or de facto ?
The document presented by the presidency at the informal Agricultural Council in Otranto , Italy , on 7 May 1996 regarding the establishment of free-trade areas and their effects on Community agriculture retains the status of an informal presidency working document and has neither been adopted not endorsed by the Council .
With regard to the official Community position on the establishment of free-trade agreements with third countries , as adopted by the Council on 22 June 1995 , the Council decided that before taking any future steps the Commission should assess the compatibility of all planned agreements with World Trade Organization rules .
In addition it should assess the impact of such agreements on the common policies and on relations with the Union 's main trading partners .
It was also agreed that such assessments be examined by the Article 113 Committee , COREPER and the Council before approval of corresponding negotiating directives .
Furthermore , the Florence European Council , on 21 and 22 June of this year , invited the Council to present the report on the development of the commercial policy and the preferential agreements of the Community to the Dublin European Council in December .
Finally , the Council is not party to the Intergovernmental Conference responsible for amending the treaties .
Thus the Council is not empowered to adopt any position on any possible revision of Articles 113 and 228 of the Treaty , such as suggested in the honourable Member 's question .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office , for that answer , though I find it only half satisfactory because , underlying the specific points I was making , there was a general question , which is this : at the start of this Irish presidency , has the Council decided to change its policy towards the Commission ?
Has it decided to reassert control of the Commission and no longer allow it to act as it pleases , as it has been doing for several years and especially since the signature of the GATT agreements ?
We can see today that the Uruguay Round contains very substantial shortcomings in monetary , social , environmental and agricultural matters .
We are wondering today how we are going to be able to turn back the clock , and this at a time when the Commission is launching free trade initiatives in all directions and even , as Sir Leon Brittan announced recently in Geneva , seeing a need to go even further in the liberalization of world trade .
Well , Mr President , liberalization by all means , but on a sound basis , taking account of all the unquantified external effects , whether favourable or adverse for the economies , and especially the external effects on employment which Ireland has rightly made the first priority of its presidency .
This , then , is an essential matter , and that is why we believe that Ireland must reassert its grip over the international negotiations and reassert its grip over the Commission .
That is why , for every case of free trade put before us , we absolutely must have a quantified and objective impact study , so that in future the European Parliament should no longer have to deliberate blindfold .
I note what the honourable Member has said in his contribution .
The Florence European Council on 21 and 22 June did invite the Council to present a report on the development of the commercial policy and the preferential agreements of the Community to the Dublin European Council in December .
That will obviously take place under the Irish presidency .
I note that there are concerns .
The respective roles of the Council and the Commission , like all the institutions , are being examined by the Intergovernmental Conference .
In that context perhaps the institutional arrangements need to be examined .
But I wish to point out that there already has been discussion of the increased importance of regionalism within the World Trade Organization .
The WTO has set up a committee on regional trade agreements to monitor new and existing regional trade groupings .
Discussion of regionalism at Singapore has already been called for by a number of World Trade Organization members and will probably be discussed there .
So there is an opportunity to consider this matter in Singapore and at the Dublin European Council meeting in December .
Question No 7 by John McCartin ( H-0548 / 96 )
Subject : The EU wool industry
Has the presidency any plans in the coming six months to place the serious situation of the home-produced wool industry on the agenda of the Agriculture Council ?
I can only stress that at this point the Council has not received any Commission proposal relating to the wool industry sector .
The presidency notes the Member 's concern and will give careful attention to any proposals which the Commission may bring forward .
I welcome the President-in-Office to Parliament officially since it is the first time I have had this direct contact with him .
I appreciate not only his efforts in helping to prepare the Intergovernmental Conference but his long-standing interest in European affairs and his long-term efforts to promote the integration and the union of Europe .
I want to put it on record that he has been one of the most constructive politicians in the Irish Parliament in so far as Europe has been concerned .
It did not just occur when he became directly involved through the presidency .
I have raised this question because representations have been made to me by an organization at European level that is interested in the wool industry .
We had a previous report in Parliament by Mr Hyland , an Irish Member .
I would like to suggest to the Minister that this is potentially an important industry within the European Union .
European Community policies have promoted the development of the sheepmeat industry , but wool is another product that it is possible to develop and add value to .
Within the European Union we have 60 , 000 farmers depending on sheepmeat and milk .
Those farmers get ECU 2 billion from the Union .
Would the Minister think that it might be a good idea to promote the development of the wool industry so that farmers would have a better income and perhaps would need less of the ECU 2 billion subsidization that we pay annually ?
As I have just said , the Council has not received a Commission proposal and if we do the Council will certainly act on such a proposal .
May I say in reply to the question posed by the honourable Member that I am very well aware of the difficulties faced by sheep farmers , not just in Ireland , but in Europe generally .
I am aware of the report brought forward by Mr Hyland which he has referred to .
I will certainly draw the exchanges in this Question Time to the attention of Minister Yates , who is President-in-Office of the Agriculture Council to ensure that he is aware of the concerns of the honourable Member .
President-in-Office , I would like to join Mr McCartin in extending a very warm welcome to you .
We had the opportunity of meeting you in the lead-up to the presidency and we found our working relationship with you quite cordial .
I am pleased with your response , but could I urge you through the Agricultural presidency to make contact with the Commission to ensure that the request is put on the agenda so that it can be dealt with during the Irish presidency .
I say that particularly because of the commitment of the Irish presidency to job creation and , hopefully , also to rural development .
The wool sector provides the potential to generate good employment in rural areas , provided we have proper structures in place .
Can I ask the President-in-Office to initiate a move himself with the Commission to ensure that a proper request is put before the presidency to be dealt with during your term of office ?
I will endeavour to be of assistance to the honourable Members in this regard and I will draw this matter to the attention of Mr Yates , President-in-Office of the Agriculture Council .

I should also like to thank Mr McCartin and Mr Hyland for their warm wishes at the commencement of the Irish presidency .
I very much appreciate this .
As the author is not present , Question No 8 lapses .
Question No 9 by Brian Crowley ( H-0558 / 96 )
Subject : Combating drug smuggling
Is the Council satisfied that Member States responsible for combating the activities of drug smugglers along the Union 's external frontiers , particularly maritime frontiers , are allocating sufficient personnel and equipment to undertake this task , and will the Council consider allocating funding from the EU budget towards assisting those Member States responsible for policing the Union 's extensive maritime frontiers to discharge their responsibilities on behalf of the Union ?
It is one of the major priorities of the Irish presidency to secure more coordinated and effective action at European level against drug-trafficking and drug abuse .
One of the important tasks which the presidency will undertake in this area is to set in motion a thorough review of the adequacy of cooperation in protecting the external borders of the European Union against importation of drugs by land , sea and air .
The presidency has already initiated a discussion on the external frontier customs strategy .
It has put forward proposals on training , technical aids , control equipment , intelligence , risk analysis and improved communications .
It intends to propose a joint action to serve as a legal basis for the allocation of funds from the budget of the European Communities .
These proposals are aimed at achieving a more effective level of cooperation against drug smuggling and will fulfil one of the action points on the list adopted by the Madrid European Council in December 1995 with regard to drugs .
The Council will also give priority to the review of the Naples Convention on mutual assistance between customs administrations and the Customs 2000 strategy programme for the third pillar as well as EU participation in the strategic plan of the world customs organization for implementing an operative measure on the Balkan drug smuggling route .
The presidency will also bring under scrutiny the present arrangements for joint customs surveillance operations at external frontiers .
This examination will be with a view to improving their efficiency .
A global mandate will be sought from the Council for these operations so that Council approval does not have to be obtained each year as at present .
It will also seek to encourage cooperation between Member State customs authorities and private trade and shipping interests in the fight against drug trafficking .
I thank the President-in-Office for his response .
I also congratulate him on ensuring that this matter is dealt with at the highest level during the presidency .
However , it is with some concern that I read in some newspaper reports back in Ireland that the Taoiseach is putting forward a suggestion for a European coastguard .
My fear with regard to this is that monies that are badly needed for the Irish naval service to upgrade its fleet and to cover 140 , 000 square miles of territorial waters , not only protecting the Irish coastline but also protecting a European frontier and European fishing ground , would be diverted into some other area .
Could we ask for a commitment from the President-in-Office that monies will not be diverted from the existing agencies that are operating very efficiently but unfortunately are being under-resourced .
As I said , the presidency and the Council 's concern is with cooperation and the protection of the external frontiers of the European Union .
Drugs come in by land , sea and air .
Different routes are used , depending on the nature and origin of the drugs .
Drugs are brought in by various means - by people in unaccompanied cargo , hidden in cars , ships and containers and , especially in the case of cannabis , in small craft .
That is why it is important that there be a review of cooperation so that we can determine how the resources of the European Union and the Member States can best be deployed .
While thanking Mr Crowley for his kind wishes , which I very much appreciate , may I add that I would see any suggestion which the Taoiseach may have floated as being additional to and not a replacement of existing arrangements .
I might just mention that , for example , for a long number of years , as Mr Crowley knows well , coming from a part of Ireland which has often had maritime disasters , there has been cooperation between the RAF and the Irish Air Corps .
This is very loose but effective cooperation .
So coastguard cooperation might be very loose or it could be something more structured .
But the idea itself is worth exploring .
I emphasize , however , that it is not a question of diverting existing resources .
Any possible evolution in this area will be by way of additional resources and additional assistance .
I welcome our President-in-Office here this afternoon .
I must say that I disagree fundamentally with Mr Crowley .
The fact that the Irish presidency has highlighted the drugs issue and that all of the Members who spoke here this morning , nearly the majority , considered drugs a priority issue to be tackled by this presidency in an effective way gives carte blanche to the Irish presidency to go ahead and deal with this issue as they see fit .
I think the idea of the coastguard for Ireland is particularly important because we are an island .
It has been repeated here so often that is what is needed .
I am delighted to hear that Mr Mitchell has now said that discussions are already in place in regard to the review of external borders and the land , sea and air services , etc .
I would like him to clarify for us now exactly where this funding for the coastguard service will come from .
We had , unfortunately , a terribly long delay with regard to the agreement for the funding on the TENs .
I hope that we do not anticipate the same delay in relation to this very vital service .
I also thank Ms Malone for her good wishes .
On my first day in Parliament the good wishes and support of the Irish Members of the European Parliament are particularly welcome and have been a great source of help to me .
In relation to the question that the honourable Member has asked , as she will be aware , a joint action is an enabling statutory procedure under the Treaties , specifically the second and third pillars as provided for in the Treaty on European Union .
The Irish Government intends to propose a joint action to serve as a legal base for the allocation of funds from the budget of the European Communities .
Of course this is not something that we can act on alone and we hope we will win the support of other Member States for this approach .
It is certainly something which needs to be attended to , in my view .
I said earlier in response to another debate in the House on the common foreign and security policy area that I believe that we need to do much more as a region in a coordinated way to tackle this problem .
Each Member State is trying to deal with the problem as best it can .
The Member States must primarily have the role to respond to Member States ' needs , but collectively the European Union , as a region , is very weak in dealing with this problem .
This is the approach that the Irish Government intends to take in its role as presidency .
Mr President , the battle against crime and drugs is an issue close to the hearts of the general public .
People understand that there is a need for cross-border cooperation in this area .
It is positive that the presidency attaches such weight to these issues and we look forward expectantly to an initiative on drugs , not least concerning police and customs cooperation .
I should like to take the opportunity as a Swedish Member to offer you my good wishes .
My question concerns an area where improvement is possible and which could be included in such an initiative . Why have the same opportunities for practical , everyday cooperation and exchanges not yet been created for police officers as we have for the immigration and customs services ?
As far as customs are concerned , the Mattaeus programme includes some good proposals and if one examines the plan of action in this area it is concerned primarily with exchanges between police training colleges .
Why not consider developing police cooperation to the same standards as represented by the Mattaeus programme ?
I thank the honourable Member for her kind words , which I appreciate .
In relation to the question she poses , the third pillar is very much in an embryonic stage .
It has not been very long in existence .
I certainly hope that with the passing of the Europol Convention we will now see greater cooperation under the third pillar .
The issues raised by the honourable Member have much merit and should be examined and advanced at an early stage .
We need collectively to do much more than we are in dealing with this problem .
I might point out that in the presentation of the European Union priorities of the Irish presidency , which was made by the Tnaiste in the House this morning , one of the priorities which we set out under our drugs and organized crime proposals is an exchange and training of law enforcement officers .
I am very pleased to concur with the suggestion put forward by the honourable Member .


I would like to take questions tabled by Mr Collins , Mr Apolinrio and Mr Torres Couto together as , despite dealing with different aspects of the employment issue , all three questions concern ways and means of meeting the major challenge posed by unemployment .
Europe has benefited from the evolution of a particular model of society on our continent - an evolution achieved often at the cost of great sacrifice .
It is this model which characterizes our free and democratic societies , giving them a special place in the worldwide concert of nations .
The continuation of the European model of society would be strengthened by a successful response to the questions posed by unemployment .
We must wage the campaign against unemployment now so that we do not condemn our children and our children 's children to continuing suffering and injustice .
The employment of young people is particularly important .
In principle , I share Mr Apolinrio 's assessment and consider , like him , that we must do our utmost to promote the employment of young people , for they will take our place and be charged with responsibility for advancing European civilization .
As the Commission has made clear , the Confidence Pact on Employment is a flexible process which aims to enable all those concerned to enter into specific commitments in order to create a macroeconomic framework favourable to employment .
It aims to exploit to the full the potential of the internal market , to speed up the labour market reforms and to make better use of the Union 's policies in the interest of growth and employment .
The European Council in Florence last month indicated its conviction that the trans-European networks , the development of small and medium-sized industries and scientific and technical research can make a vital contribution to job creation and competitiveness .
In this context , it took note of proposals submitted by the President of the Commission to the effect that , firstly , the coverage of the agricultural guidelines will remain unchanged and the structural funds heading will also remain untouched .
Secondly , the expenditure commitment ceiling in heading 3 - internal policies - will be raised by ECU 1 billion over the period 1997-1999 and will be mainly intended for priority transport infrastructure networks .
However , the related budgetary payments will be settled within the current limits of the overall ceiling previously agreed for actual expenditure .
Thirdly , this raising of the ceiling will be accompanied by a further effort to redeploy the available appropriations within heading 3 to help the sectors concerned , allowing an increase in the total available funds of ECU 1.2 bn .
These proposals represent an integrated approach designed to make the best possible use of existing resources in order to achieve tangible results in terms of employment , while also finding new sources of funding .
For the sake of completeness , I wish to add that the aim is to pursue a policy which fully respects and reflects the principle of subsidiarity .
I have already thanked Mr Collins in his absence for his kind words earlier and I appreciate his introductory remarks .
The Irish presidency will progress as far as possible the measures adopted by President Santer in support of job creation in accordance with the conclusions of the European Council .
In addition , a central task of the presidency will be to prepare the second annual report on employment for the Dublin Council in December .
This will analyse the effectiveness to date of the Member State 's implementation of the Essen guidelines to their multiannual programmes on employment .
This will also provide pointers for the future .
In this process particular emphasis will be placed on groups requiring special attention , such as young people seeking their first job , the long-term unemployed and unemployed women .
As a general political philosophy I support the whole concept of enterprise and competitiveness and the need to reward effort and initiative and that has to be at the core of job creation .
But throughout the European Union now , we have unprecedented levels of material wealth , unprecedented at any period during the history of Europe , and yet there are a large number of people who do not share in the progress which has been achieved .
I make no apology to anybody for the second principle which I think has to be present and that is the principle of social justice .
When we create wealth we can distribute it , but we must create it first and we must encourage those people who can create it .
I would commend to the House an examination of the Irish Government 's programme on local development which is an effort to redistribute some of the wealth in such a way that it helps the poorest urban and rural communities .
It is specifically targeted at job creation , education , training , environmental improvement and state management training because the living conditions of people can actually add to their handicap .
This is an integrated approach which I hope to address in a later question by another Member of the House .
I do not think it is all simply down to enterprise .
We must encourage enterprise , we must facilitate enterprise but we must also at the same time have a sense of social justice and those two , so to speak , must go hand in hand .
Certainly this is something which we as a presidency will try to advance as best we can during our six months in office .
I might also inform the House that we are awaiting the Commission detailed proposal on the TENs issue which the honourable Member has addressed .
At the meeting on 8 July , finance ministers agreed to the setting up of a high-level group , as the Members of the House will be aware , to examine this issue .
The Irish presidency will explore through this group the extent to which the basis for an agreement exists among partners and will endeavour to secure a decision .
Mr President , thank you very much , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , for your kind words .
I should just like to follow up by expressing a couple of concerns .
The first one is of a general kind : employment is undoubtedly one of the great challenges for the European Union and it would be by working on the employment aspect that the Irish presidency would attain - or not - its objective .
In the case of young people aged under 25 years I should like to point out that Eurostat data show that the unemployment rate for that category is double the overall rate - April statistics showed 21 , 5 % unemployment for young people aged under 25 compared with 10 , 9 % for overall unemployment - which means we must step up our effort in initiatives for local development and support to small and medium-sized undertakings in connection with questions relating to the environment , social welfare and social benefits , as well enabling special action to be taken to create jobs for young people .
The second aspect of my supplementary question refers to policy on the structural funds and I should like the President-in-Office of the Council to give a fuller explanation of what he said . Am I right in saying that he promised that the Council 's position would be to stick to all agreements already included in the financial perspectives ?
I think that this was the promise which he gave , in other words no changes to the financial perspectives for the structural funds .
I should like him to confirm this .
What I said in reply to the question was that the expenditure commitment ceiling in Heading 3 , internal policies , will be raised by ECU 1 billion over the period 1997-1999 and will be mainly intended for priority transport infrastructure networks .
However , the related budgetary payments will be settled within the current limits of the overall ceiling previously agreed for actual expenditure , that is payment appropriations .
I also said that this raising of the ceiling would be accompanied by a further effort to redeploy the available appropriations within Heading 3 to help the sectors concerned , allowing an increase in the total available funds of ECU 1.2 billion .
Can I say in general terms , that we are all very concerned about employment , but the reality is that we do not do what we should do .
We should make the creating of a job the most attractive thing that anybody with any sense of entrepreneurship can do .
The reality is that if any of us here won our national lotteries the likelihood is that we would invest it in property or something of that kind which we would get a return on and which would not require us to take on the difficulties of employment .
We give tax incentives for machines and we put payroll taxes on employment .
So I think there has to be a fundamental rethink which encourages enterprise and rewards effort and one which has to deal with , as the honourable Member said , some of the structural problems which exist .
Mr President , the question is very simple .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am extremely satisfied with the head-on way in which you tackled this subject and I hope you will forgive me if I am slightly acrimonious in respect of the supplementary question which I am putting - but I have been here for some years now and when these questions are put to the Council about employment it seems to me that they are beginning to become an exercise in sadomasochism because these questions were first put by me and other colleagues when unemployment in Europe was reaching a level of 11 to 12 million .
Declarations of intent and other promises by successive presidencies have been quite solemn and constituted exercises of all seriousness .
But it happens now that we are facing 18 million unemployed and 50 million marginalised citizens in the European Union and I think that this question is well answered by the phrase you uttered at the end of one of your speeches : ' We have to create wealth first and then we have to distribute it . '
But I think that this question has now become a fundamental one .
Do you think that this practical and exclusively monetarist approach which has been taken in relation to employment questions is the way that you have found to be most reasonable and most positive for creating jobs ?
Do you think it will be possible for us to think of a concrete way of fighting unemployment simply by means of monetary policy without taking into account very effective measures in terms of the labour markets , active employment policies , support for small and mediumsized companies or selective aids to dynamic sectors which call for support ?
I think that these are the fundamental questions and there is another one : a few years ago , when Jacques Delors presented here the White Paper on Competitiveness and Employment , he said that there are no national solutions for the problem of fighting unemployment .
What is happening now is that the ideas which are being put to us seem to claim that the solution for fighting unemployment cannot be specifically European but has to be dealt with on a national basis and that the principle of subsidiarity must be respected .
I think that this is what divides us and this is what could lead to yet another failure in the case of the Irish presidency , in relation to the urgent fight against the problem of unemployment .
I do not know where the honourable Member has been for the last few minutes but he certainly has not drawn that conclusion from anything I have said here .
I hope he will forgive my forthrightness because this is an important question .
I have been very clear on what I have said .
I have spoken about employment and entrepreneurship and social justice .
I have spoken about redistribution .
I have spoken about the local development programme in Ireland .
I am sure there are similar programmes in other countries , but the OECD report on local development in Ireland is one which I would commend to Members of this House .
I have not spoken about any monetarist approach .
Furthermore , the local development programme in Ireland is a partnership , first of all between the European Union and the state , and secondly between the state and the social partners : business , trade unions and the rural area 's farmers .
I am sorry that the honourable Member did not pick up what I said on the first occasion but I hope he will now .
Furthermore , we should get it into our heads that we are not running economies , we are running states .
Jobs have a therapeutic value as well as an economic value .
Far from not wanting new ways at European or Member Statelevel of approaching this problem , I am one of the most ardent supporters of new approaches and I am the Minister responsible - as it happens , at the Prime Minister 's office - for local development in my own country .
I would welcome some opportunity to discuss this matter of local development and the contribution it can make , not just to employment creation , but also to tackling social injustice throughout the European Union more generally .
Question No 13 by Jonas Sjstedt ( H-0564 / 96 )
Subject : The ' Journalisten ' affair
In the pleadings it submitted to the Court of Justice in the case , shortly to be decided , between it and the ' Journalisten ' newspaper , the Council explained its position on openness and the principle of public access to official records .

What legal force do the Code of Conduct and the decisions taken by the Edinburgh Council have as regards openness ?
In the Council 's opinion , what force does the declaration on openness made by Sweden during the membership negotiations have ?
The honourable Member will be aware that my response to his question must be somewhat circumspect as the case of the Journalisten newspaper v. the Council , which is currently before the Court of First Instance , renders some matters sub judice .
Nonetheless I would make the following comments .
The statement of defence in question was brought into the public domain by the Journalisten newspaper via the Internet .
Following that incident the Court of First Instance decided to suspend proceedings in the case .
In reply to the first part of the question , I would refer the honourable Member to the judgment of the Court of Justice on 30 April 1996 in Case No C-58 / 94 , Netherlands v. the Council .
In that case that Netherlands sought the annulment of the Code of Conduct concerning public access to Council and Commission documents .
This action was ruled inadmissible by the Court on the ground that the Code of Conduct is a voluntary expression of coordination made by the Council and the Commission and ' is therefore not intended in itself to have legal effects ' .
This is also the case for declarations adopted by the European Council .
The Court of Justice gave a ruling on 13 January 1995 , in Case C-264 / 94P , that European Council declarations are not acts whose legality can be governed by Article 133 of the EC Treaty .
Regarding the honourable Member 's second question , it involves a political assessment which the Council was not required to make .
It simply states that the declaration in question was accompanied by another declaration made by all the Member States .
Mr President , I would thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply which I thought was both clear and unambiguous .
I have here the pleadings , marked ' secret ' , which are concerned in this case .
In this document the Council of Ministers argues rigorously against openness and quite rightly states that the Code of Conduct does not imply any legal right to obtain a document , simply what is called a ' policy orientation ' .
My impression is that you confirm this standpoint .
My question concerning the Swedish declaration during the membership negotiations was whether you regard that declaration as having any legal force whatsoever .
Is it possible to refer to it in the course of legal proceedings ?
Further to this I have two other questions .
The Council writes in its pleadings that in making available a document which is secret within the EU Sweden is violating Community law .
My first question is this . Is it the view of the Council that countries which apply national principles on openness which are more radical than those of the Union are violating Union law ?
My second question concerns the fact that some months after the case involving the ' Journalisten ' newspaper another Swedish journalist asked for the same document which the Council had previously refused to hand over to the ' Journalisten ' newspaper and on that occasion the document was provided .
I wonder why .
Have views changed on the matter ?
On what judgement and on what policy was this based ?
Like many others here I should like to wish the Irish presidency a warm welcome and every success .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , given that the Council 's obligation of transparency differs according to whether it is acting as legislator or as executive , could the Council confirm that when a document is submitted it is without any real political value and can therefore be published , something that did not take place when the first request was made ?

My second question is whether or not the European Union must take into account all of the constitutional traditions of all Member States , on the basis of mutual respect - given that in Sweden there is a greater tradition of transparency - and that when a given Member State receives a document affecting another Member State it should observe a code of ethics , especially if that document is then disseminated over Internet ?
Mr President , I know that the previous questioner received a reply on an issue of some importance to us from Sweden .
The reply is extremely important in that the requirement of openness was included in the Swedish declaration and the question was as follows : does the Council of Ministers consider that Sweden would be violating Union law if we handed over a document classified as secret in the EU ?
It is extremely important that we receive an answer from the Council of Ministers , since it is a matter of whether arrangements made and agreements reached during the negotiations have any force or not .
I am in some difficulty regarding a particular case because it is sub judice .
I know Members are making comments for reasons other than that they expect me to respond .
Can I assure the House , not simply on behalf of the presidency , but also as the Irish Member on the reflection group which went into a lot of these issues , that this matter is being examined in the context of the Intergovernmental Conference and the presidency will do everything in its power to try to advance openness and transparency , while at the same time recognizing the right of Member States to have their business conducted in a way which is agreeable to everybody through a code of conduct .
- The Council attaches the greatest importance to respect for human rights and democracy in Turkey and does not hesitate to condemn violations of them in its contacts with the Turkish authorities .
The Council has repeatedly made it clear to the Turkish Government , and will keep on doing so , that observance of a state of law and basic liberties , to which all citizens of Turkey are entitled , underlie closer relations between Turkey and the European Union .
The Council continues to monitor carefully the situation of human rights and democratic development in Turkey .
I add my welcome and my best wishes to the Irish presidency .
The Scots are here to welcome you as well , President-in-Office .
I am afraid I am rather disappointed in that response .
My supplementary question is : Can the President-in-Office foresee a position where we would go beyond mere condemnation of continued violation of human rights to the point where the Council will actually take some action such as suspending cooperation agreements if violations of human rights continue on the scale which exists at the moment ?
As we speak the Tnaiste Mr Spring is meeting with the Turkish Foreign Minister in Dublin .
I can assure the House that the concerns which Mr Smith raises here - and I appreciate his comments and may I say go raibh mile maith agat - are issues which are regularly raised when meetings of this kind take place .
This is a very fine judgment .
The question really is : can we best advance our influence in the sphere of human rights by continuing to conduct the sort of relations we have with Turkey as we do at present and the judgment has been that we can .
We can have more influence over them through the present vehicle than we could have otherwise .
In other words we can get more from the carrot than from the stick .
The Union has made a judgment in relation to the customs union for example which this House has ratified and endorsed .
By bringing Turkey into the Western way of thinking in relation to issues such as human rights , we can best influence them .
Please rest assured that the matter raised by the honourable Member is very much in the minds of the Council and is being raised at every opportunity .
I should like very much to share in offering congratulations to the President-inOffice , because he is a young man and Irish .
Sadly , however , the answer that he has given me on this matter obliges me to express pity for him , because all he has done is repeat the fairy tales that we have been fed for the last 15 years .
Mr President-in-Office , no part-session goes by without some discussion of concrete instances of violation of human rights in Turkey .
No part-session goes by without mention of the slaughter of Kurds , of the erosion of the Turkish people 's rights , of their not being allowed to form political parties , or of the dissolution of the political parties that they do form if Mrs iller or the military disapprove .
And you come here , as an Irish president-in-office , as an Irishman , and show not one iota of sensitivity , when you ought to be more sensitive than others about such things , and give an answer like that !
Forget about carrots and suchlike - just do what you say . If a general came to the Council and said that he wanted to join the Union , not only would you not listen to him , you would throw him out .
Yet along comes a woman , all dressed up , along comes an Islamist , and you give them the customs union and the MEDA programme with large amounts of funding .
That is what we are getting at .
It is measures like that that we are talking about .
Not carrots and sticks , but the suspension of those measures which benefit Turkey , which benefit that regime .
Can you do that ?
It is your obligation . Forget the fairy tales and all the talk about respect for human rights and observance of a state of law and the importance that you attach to them .
I should inform the House that Turkey is not a member of the European Union and therefore we are not in a position to dictate to them how they conduct their affairs or to share with them , in the way we might share with Member States , a pooling of consensus on the way we approach problems .
It is a very finely balanced question which is a very genuine one and a very important one .
I thank him for his very kind wishes .
I wish to assure him that the aim of the European Union is to encourage progress in the process of democratization and the protection of human rights in Turkey .
While I was speaking I said that the Tnaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs is in Dublin this evening meeting with the Turkish Foreign Minister .
The House can be assured that on every occasion that meetings of this type take place , these issues are raised .
In my view true diplomacy , by opening and keeping open channels , is our best hope of advancing our views in relation to dealing with these problems .
That is the road the presidency intends to continue going down .
Question No 16 by Kirsten Jensen ( H-0572 / 96 )
Subject : The situation in Burma
This week Danish consul James Leander Nicols died in a prison in Burma .
The cause of death is unclear : the Danish authorities are now trying to obtain clarification of the detailed circumstances of the death and have asked for a post-mortem examination to be carried out on the body by forensic experts independent of the Burmese Government .
How does the EU intend to react to this tragic incident and does it intend to implement sanctions against Burma ?
On behalf of the Council I should like to extend sincerest sympathy to the family of the late Mr James Leander Nichols who died on 22 June 1996 whilst in custody for the unauthorized use of fax machines and telephones .
Mr Nichols was the honorary consul of Denmark and he also represented Finland , Norway and Switzerland in Rangoon .
On 5 July 1996 an EU declaration was issued which expressed deep concern at the continuing deterioration of the political situation in Myanmar , Burma .
In that declaration the EU indicated that it expected a full and satisfactory explanation from the Burmese authorities of the circumstances leading up to and surrounding the death of the late Mr Nichols .
In addition , the EU called for an investigation by the United Nations ' special rapporteur on Myanmar into the death of Mr Nichols .
The situation and possible EU action has been the subject of lengthy discussions at the CFSP Asia-Oceania Working Group on 2 July last and subsequently at the Political Committee on 5 July last .
Furthermore , the issue of coordinated EU action is being discussed at an extraordinary meeting of the CFSP Asia-Oceania Working Group in Brussels today in the light of discussions by Ministers at the General Affairs Council on 15 and 16 July earlier this week .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for what has been done so far .
However , the fact is that everything which he described lies in the realm of what might be called diplomatic censure .
The President-in-Office said in connection with Turkey that it was a question of keeping the diplomatic channels open , but in this case the diplomatic channels have already been blocked .
According to a Burmese newspaper , Mr Nichols was a scoundrel who deserved to die .
But he was one of the diplomatic links we had with the regime in Burma .
He is now dead , and what the opposition , the democratic movement , is calling for is that we should take economic sanctions .
I think that the situation is very much as it was in South Africa .
All the opposition is asking for economic sanctions to be applied .
So it is not as if we would be taking them against the will of the people in Burma .
I would therefore ask the President-in-Office once again to consider whether we should not meet the wishes of the opposition in Burma and introduce sanctions against the illegal junta which is now occupying the government .
May I inform the House that this is an issue which has been very strongly raised by the Danish Foreign Minister and with me personally when we had occasion to meet recently in Sweden .
I know it is of concern not only to Danish Members but to the House generally .
Concerning the comments by the Burmese Government , they are wholly unacceptable and uncivilized in the circumstances .
I assure the House that this matter was discussed only two days ago by the General Affairs Council and that it is being pursued by the CFSP Asia Oceania Working Group in Brussels today in the light of what was discussed at the General Affairs Council , and that it will be a matter which we will pursue in every way possible .
Could the President-in-Office be more specific on the question of economic sanctions .
Is he aware that Aung San Suu Kyi , the leader of the democratic opposition in Burma , has called for practical economic measures , which , she says , is the only way that we will see political change in her country ?
Should we not listen to her in the way that we did not listen to the calls from the ANC in South Africa for economic sanctions during those apartheid days ?
In Aung San Suu Kyi 's view , the poor people of Burma are suffering enough already and economic sanctions would just hasten the day when we could see the return to democratic , accountable government .
I would like to ask you , President-in-Office , what your position will be in Djakarta at the Asean Conference next week when the Council will be represented ?
What will you say to the Slorc , who have been given official observer status at that Conference - much to the disgust of the international community ?
What , indeed , will you say to those Asean countries , those neighbouring countries , who are rushing in to reinvest in Burma where Heineken , Carlsberg and others have pulled out ?
The working group is considering all issues : nothing is ruled in and nothing is ruled out , and the Council does not rule out sanctions ; all issues by way of response are under examination .
I can further confirm to the House that the Tnaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Spring , who will be in Djakarta , will raise this matter in a very forceful way and will ensure that the views of both the General Affairs Council and this House and , indeed , the people of Europe are communicated in a strong way so that nobody is left in any doubt as to our rejection and abhorrence at what has happened in these circumstances .
Mr President , can the presidency tell me why it is considering sanctions against Burma , a move for which I have a certain amount of sympathy , whereas sanctions against Cuba , for example , are felt to be counterproductive ?
I should like to know basically whether there is a general political line on sanctions .
We want to enforce respect for human rights .
We have economic interests .
We must strike a balance between these , but we should not apply double standards .
I remind the honourable Member that what I said is that the Asia-Oceania Working Group is examining the issue in the light of discussions held by the ministers at the General Affairs Council earlier this week .
I ruled nothing in , and I ruled nothing out : the matter is still under examination .
Question No 17 by Mara Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0578 / 96 )
Subject : Eradication of drift nets
With regard to the position of Spain and the opportunities for the Member States to table amendments and present proposals , it is apparent that there is an increased possibility of differentiation of the Baltic fishing grounds and that this would change the position of Germany and Austria . The Fisheries Commissioner has publicly called on the Spanish Government to present proposals ; it will undoubtedly seize the available opportunities and incorporate Parliament 's position in its proposal .
Consequently , can a change in the current position on drift nets be expected ?
As the honourable Member will be aware , the current legislation on the use of driftnets prohibiting the use of nets over 2.5 kilometres long in Community waters was adopted by the Council in 1992 .
In April 1994 the Commission submitted to the Council a proposal for a regulation to ban such fishing gear .
The Council has considered that proposal on a number of occasions in the light of the opinion delivered by the European Parliament in July 1994 , without coming to any decision on the matter .
The subject was last discussed at the Fisheries Council meeting on 22 April 1996 when the Commission did indeed say that it wanted to see progress made and would be prepared to welcome any constructive ideas put to it by delegations in order to arrive at a qualified majority on its proposal .
On another point , the discussion also enables the Council to reiterate the importance it attaches to compliance with the present Community legislation and to express its satisfaction at the progress made in the implementation of provisions .
Proceedings on the proposal for a regulation are taking their course and the matter is still before the Council .
It is not possible at this stage in discussions to pre-judge the position that will be taken by the Council .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , could you tell us whether the Spanish Government , if it wanted to , could present a new proposal taking into account the new situation in Italy and taking account of the possibility of differentiating the Baltic Sea and changing the current situation ?
In other words , given that if the Spanish Government has that power and does not use it this is something to be condemned , can the Council state whether the Spanish Government could present a new proposal ?
As the honourable Member will be aware from my reply , the Commission did submit a proposal for the regulation to ban fishing gear .
These proposals have been under discussion .
It is up to any Member State in response to the proposal to make whatever proposals it considers would be helpful in all the circumstances .
I would hope that the arrangements on surveillance on monitoring which operated in the tuna fishery in 1995 ensured that most of the difficulties of previous years were eliminated .
The same arrangements in 1996 will ensure the continuation of at least an orderly fishery and the tuna fishery is now one of the most closely monitored fisheries in EU waters .
So some progress has been made in that regard .
But it is up to Member States , if they wish to respond to the Council proposal , to put forward their reaction for other Member States to consider and for the Commission to react to .
Question No 18 by Susan Waddington ( H-0585 / 96 )
Subject : Irish presidency - social exclusion
The Irish presidency has put social exclusion at the top of its agenda .
Given that the fragmentation of policy instruments across the Commission services ( Employment - DGV , Socrates & Leonardo - DGXXII , Urban - DGXVI ) , and the portfolios of several Commissioners ( Flynn , Cresson , Wulf-Mathies , Fischler ) , is a major obstacle to integrated action , will the presidency ask President Santer to establish an internal ' Task Force ' , of all Commissioners involved , with a common purpose to develop strategies and coordinate resources to combat social exclusion in Europe ?
And does the presidency agree that the Task Force 's first priority should be to present a report to the Dublin European Council in December ?
Social exclusion and long-term unemployment , though not synonymous , are related .
Therefore , policies , both structural and programme activities , which target long-term unemployment , have a direct impact on social exclusion .
As I said earlier , in my own country we have put in place exciting new structures to counteract social exclusion in two ways .
Firstly , by involving local communities and empowering them to address their own needs in partnership with the statutory authorities and the social partners .
Secondly , we are resourcing these partnerships to address in a flexible , targeted and integrated way the complex interaction of factors which generate poverty and social exclusion .
Through a strategic approach which links education , training , enterprise , employment and estate management , especially in urban areas , we are empowering the communities themselves to put a virtuous cycle in place of the vicious cycles of long-term unemployment and social exclusion , and this has both an urban and rural application .
The Irish presidency is supportive of developing in the IGC a more secure basis for tackling social exclusion .
In the short term , we have much to learn from each other and the Irish presidency is very anxious to give a lead in this exchange of ideas and experiences .
I also wish to thank the President-in-Office for the very interesting reply he gave us about the Irish experience .
Will he use that successful experience as a means of persuading the different Commissioners and the different directorate-generals to work together to develop a common purpose and common strategies , using their common resources to combat both social exclusion and long-term unemployment ?
First , I must apologise to the honourable Member .
I gave her the second page before I gave her the first so I am afraid I gave the answer in reverse order .
Nonetheless , what I wanted to say is now on the record and I hope will be of assistance to the honourable Member .
In relation to the question , the Council fully accepts that social exclusion and the marginalization of increasing numbers of people who were previously financially secure is an unacceptable phenomenon which undermines the very foundations of society .
This constitutes a major challenge which will have to be addressed with the greatest determination .
The Council considers that all resources should be marshalled against this corrosive problem .
The Council is of the opinion that a primordial element in combating social exclusion is the reduction of unemployment .
The Florence European Council for its part has noted in its conclusions the possibility of focusing structural policies increasingly on job creation .
As regards the suggestion made in the honourable Member 's question , these matters rest within the sole competence of the Commission because they relate exclusively to the internal organization of the services of that institution .
The Council is therefore not in a position to address this particular issue .
Regarding the whole question of social exclusion and long-term unemployment , these are very much at the heart of the Employment Pact proposals developed by President Santer and the Irish presidency is committed to developing the pact process .
In that sense we are according the highest priority to these topics .
In addition , with the support of the Commission , we are organizing a presidency conference on local development initiatives in Dublin in November during our presidency .
This will provide an opportunity to exchange information , ideas and experiences on how local development strategies , such as those which have developed in Ireland , give an effective response to the problems of unemployment and social exclusion .
This is particularly timely given the emphasis of territorial employment pacts in the Commission proposals .
The Irish presidency welcomes this emphasis .
It is entirely in accord with our own experiences and priorities .
In addition , the Commission is organizing a conference on rural development in Cork during our presidency .
This will provide an opportunity to reflect on the measures which are being developed at both national and European levels to address the problems of rural development .
I note what the honourable Member has said .
I hope she will note my reply that it is mainly within the remit of the Commission .
So far as the presidency is in a position to advance tackling the issue which she has raised , I hope she will take from the reply and from our own experience that this is something we would like to advance as far as we can during our presidency .
I believe one intriguing question concerns the extent to which the presidency considers it possible within the framework of the Essen guidelines to expand the consultations between the Member States on their employment policies to include a discussion of the ways in which structural funds are used .
The second question concerns the part played in these consultations by genuine discussion of the macroeconomic policy options and by the presentation of a new policy mix for discussion , as requested by the European Parliament , a policy mix going beyond the tautological old argument that a sound economic policy will eventually lead to a sound employment policy .
One of the things which concerns me very much is the fact that when we have had phenomenal growth rates , these have not converted into employment .
This is something that certainly needs to be studied .
I hope it is something that will be addressed in the context of the second annual report on employment which will come before the European Council in Dublin .
I reiterate something I said earlier .
A job is not just of economic value .
It is of therapeutic value .
We have to start thinking in new ways because unemployment is not just bad for the person who is unemployed , it creates terrible problems for society and for communities .
It is our job , the job of politicians , not economists , to try to find ways - new ways and novel ways - of raising this particular issue .
The issue of social exclusion is a matter to which the presidency attaches a high priority .
One of the issues which the honourable Member raises is the question of the Essen strategy which included , incidentally , a report on local initiatives and the contribution they can make .
At an informal Council of Social Affairs Ministers on 10-12 July in Dublin the general issue of social protection and long-term unemployment was discussed with particular reference to making social protection systems more effective in helping the most disadvantaged members of society to gain access to employment .
Further debate on these topics will be led by the presidency which will seek to build on the experience and expertise gained to date and will try to construct a common approach to social exclusion and poverty .
In addition , the legal basis for Community action to combat social exclusion is a matter for the Intergovernmental Conference .
It would therefore be premature to draw any conclusions on the outcomes of the deliberations of the Conference .
Nonetheless , I do think that there is a point in the phrase which the honourable Member used .
I do not know whether we should rely on old macroeconomic ways for tackling this problem .
I think we have to look at solutions to the problem without boundary .
To some extent we have a blinkered approach .
It needs more imagination and more innovation .
I certainly would like to see this being explored to a greater extent .
I hope during our presidency we will be able to contribute in some way to that .
As the time allowed for Question Time has been used up , Questions Nos 19 to 28 will be answered in writing .
Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order with regard to the speed with which written questions are replied to by the Council .
I understand that there is an undertaking that the Council will reply to MEPs ' questions within six weeks , but quite often replies come two , three or even four months late .
I know that the Council actually lacks staff perhaps to deal with these questions , but I hope the Irish presidency will give priority to answering the questions as quickly as possible and preferably within the six-week deadline .
This is a matter which concerns me .
I am not too sure that we can solve the problem during the Irish presidency , which is a relatively small state , but we will look at how the situation can be improved .
It may well be that in the context of the Intergovernmental Conference we will have to do something more structural to deal with the problem .
But I realize that a problem exists .
Quite honestly I am not too sure what I can do about it , but we will look at it and see if some improvement can take place .
Thank you very much , Mr Mitchell , for your cooperation .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.35 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Abduction of children ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the oral questions on child abduction in the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the abduction of children is a phenomenon which frequently occurs , and in which the children are the main sufferers .
They are snatched from their familiar surroundings and plunged into a situation of conflicting feelings which may have serious consequences on their further development , which can then be put right only with a great deal of difficulty .
I have had plenty of conversations on this subject with many of the people involved and also with NGOs , and I also know what it is like for the children .
Yet in these various processes the children involved are not sufficiently listened to and taken seriously .
We cannot close our eyes to the fact that very often the family , in the traditional sense of the word , no longer exists .
The statistics in every country , and in the Union , show us that the number of single parents is increasing .
In order to be fair to the children in such cases , statutory provisions are necessary .
I should like to see the Convention on the Rights of Children added to the existing conventions mentioned in this motion for a resolution .
Furthermore , I should like to point out that the existing conventions have not yet been ratified by all Member States and incorporated into their own legislation .
In addition , I would ask the Commission to inform us about all forms of cross-border abduction of children within the Union , and not only about the type that we have been talking about today .
On this subject an appropriate investigation should be set up , financed and coordinated , in order to determine what the results of the European integration process are as far as children are concerned .
I would also ask the European Council , at the 1996 Intergovernmental Conference , to designate children as an independent group of persons .
I believe that it is important that children should be given independent rights .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mary Banotti for having drawn our attention to children and the psychological and physical abuse they can suffer .
The question of appropriate legal instruments to protect children is now being seen as fundamental to the development of our society .
Application of the 1989 Council of Europe Convention on Minors and of the UN Convention on Children is frequently discussed at meetings and conferences and receives regular media attention .
Many national voluntary schemes have , over recent years , increasingly tried to bring the subject to the public 's attention and to offer young people specific and timely help when nothing is organized .
One example , that I should like to mention , is that of ' telefono azzurro ' , a spontaneous Italian initiative run by specialists and volunteers , who , with the help of private donations , have set up a free telephone helpline for all children and young people .
At international level , a great deal of work is being done on legal texts for the recognition of children 's rights and duties , that both offer specific protection and serve as valid instruments for the appropriate protection of human potential .
As promised by the Italian presidency , the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 4 June studied Member States ' positions on a proposal for a common position on the Hague Convention and the protection of children .
The Italian presidency also wanted that Council to examine the progress of work on revising the Brussels Convention on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of foreign court orders under family law .
The proposed amendment provides for , among other things , coverage of cases concerning children .
As national representatives failed to reach agreement , the Irish presidency has undertaken to include the subject on the agenda of forthcoming Justice and Home Affairs Councils , particularly as regards the provision of cross-reference clauses in the two texts to avoid legal overlaps .
These steps are useful and important , but are not enough .
Children need to be seen for what they are : our society 's greatest resource in terms of human capital .
It would be a crime , sheer suicide , to neglect our children .
The problem we are discussing here - the abduction of children - is just one small aspect of the whole issue .
Children are in fact disputed between two people of different nationalities who no longer share the conjugal home ; they have lost the right to the human relationships that are vital to their happy development ; they suffer because of conflicts between their parents ; they have become a kind of ' lost property ' .
In the specific case of abductions , they undoubtedly also suffer both psychologically and physically , and may even be taken by force .
The European Union must be able to look to the future and assume a small but important exemplary role .
I should like to think that this will be just one of the plenary sessions at which European Parliament will truly give its attention to children .
Mr President , a British friend of mine lives in fear that her Greek ex-husband will snatch their small son and take him to Greece .
The child is thoroughly confused and lives shut up in a cellar .
One of my Dutch friends is terrified that his French ex-wife will abduct the children and he will never see them again .
The children are undergoing psychiatric treatment .
These are examples picked at random .
That we , as adults , make a mess of things is our problem . But we must not make the children suffer and we must limit the damage as far as possible .
Children are entitled to both parents .
Also in our frontier-free Europe where the parents are resident in different countries after a divorce .
Our own Irish colleague , Mary Banotti , as a European conciliator , is snowed under with all the desperate problems she has to deal with in such cases .
For this reason too the Liberal Group believes that Europol must be empowered to keep a register of children who have disappeared and been abducted .
I urge the Irish presidency , jointly with the Dutch , whose turn it will be next , to take this initiative and set up structures for cross-border cooperation and information exchange between police and justice authorities .
I was pleased to hear such positive noises this afternoon from both Minister Quinn and Commissioner Gradin .
We would also like to see harmonized procedures and specialized courts to implement the conventions of The Hague and Luxembourg . And then European legislation containing procedures for the automatic enforcement of court orders .
Here too it is splendid that a new Brussels II convention is currently in the making .
The sooner the better .
But this must also include European legislation on visiting rights for natural children and guarantees of legal aid .
Lastly , we want a clause on cooperation in abduction cases to be included in agreements between the European Union and third countries .
Prevention is better than cure .
Through clear and harmonized legislation , cooperation between police and justice authorities and Europol , we can prevent an awful lot of misery for an awful lot of children .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Banotti for raising this very important issue in the House .
There are few more traumatic experiences for children than to be the subject of disputes between parents .
If , added to that , is the experience of being taken from one jurisdiction to another and denied access to a mother or father - indeed , to grandparents and extended family - then the trauma is magnified .
The European Union would make an important contribution to taking the deepest concerns of people everywhere in the Union seriously if it could produce a binding framework for the Member States .
Let me put on record that it is important that we tackle issues of real importance to people in Europe , not just the global issues , not just the grande politique , but real issues that affect real people 's lives .
If we regard these issues as merely domestic , as has been reflected in national legislation on many issues regarding the family , then we do ourselves and the people of Europe a gross injustice .
I am pleased that Mrs Gradin said that the Commission would deal speedily with this , but I am dismayed that the Council says that it has no timetable in its agenda .
That is no reflection on the current President-in-Office of the Council .
I realize the situation but , for the sake of people everywhere dealing with this issue , please speed this up .
I have experienced this myself and I know how urgent it is to get this resolved for people in Europe .
Mr President , as is highlighted in the resolution on the protection of children , child abuse - from maltreatment to the abduction of , and even trade in , children - is often associated with poverty and social marginalization .
As a recent European Parliament report showed , poverty in Europe is on the increase , and worryingly so , and it is the weakest social groups , and especially women and children , who are the first to suffer the consequences .
In Italy , for example , there are 1 200 000 poor children , that is , one child in six is living in absolute poverty , in families that are often families only in name .
It is , therefore , vital that the Commission and Council should , in collaboration with individual Member States , promote a set of measures to combat poverty and , of course , to combat unemployment .
As regards the specific issue of child abuse , the first thing we need to do is to draft serious European regulations to protect children 's rights , with particular attention being given to legislation on adoption .
Secondly , we need to launch an information campaign to increase awareness of the causes and results of child abuse .
Thirdly , we need to provide economic support to ensure that children who are the victims of any kind of abuse , as well as their families , receive the health care , psychological support and legal help they need .
And finally , we need to encourage the forces of law and order in the various Member States to work out a joint plan for collaboration to contain , at international level , the problem of child abduction and , as I said before , the trade in babies and children in general .
Mr President , this debate deals with the harrowing and distressing circumstances of tug-of-love , transnationally abducted children of separated parents living in different countries .
We have had over the years a number of petitions from people affected by this .
Many MEPs have raised cases from their constituencies and those cases are increasing .
The European Parliament has no powers in this area and should not pretend to , but our handling of this issue has been improved by the appointment and work of Mary Banotti who has a serious and realistic approach .
Movement on the Brussels Convention is important , as has been said .
We need to ensure that custody orders in the court of one Member State are not defied by the illegal abduction of children to the jurisdiction of another country , sometimes even another Member State .
Putting it bluntly , why should , for instance , British courts cooperate in the removal of transnationally abducted children from their Britishbased parent , if the court of another Member State contravenes the spirit - and sometimes the words - of the Hague Convention and the Luxembourg Convention and refuses to do the same when a child is abducted to its jurisdiction ; or , as we see quite often , when the police and authorities do not seriously seek out the kidnapped children and their abductors .
The welfare of children must come first , not nationalism , not machismo but the welfare of the children .
Everything should be done so that children of separated parents have the best possible chance of contact with both their parents , providing one of the parents is not going to try and abduct them , with the likelihood of a loving and secure upbringing .
The work that Parliament and its appointed mediator , Mrs Banotti , do in this area needs the serious encouragement of all Members , and I hope that the response we heard from the President-in-Office and that of the Commission point us in the right direction and that the powers-that-be will take this issue seriously for the benefit of our children .
Mr President , I welcome the initiative by Mrs Banotti on this issue .
This debate on the abduction of children is very important .
However , I want to concentrate on another aspect , namely , violence against children .
I urge Parliament to hold a full and open discussion on violence against children in the autumn .
Violence against children takes many forms .
It is a shocking indictment of our society .
Revelations about the abuse of children are now all too frequently the subject of media headlines .
Some who were entrusted to be guardians of our children have shamefully betrayed that trust .
The European Union is now engaged in a fundamental reassessment of the Treaties .
Appropriately , today I call on the President-in-Office to indicate what he plans at EU level concerning not only the issue of child abduction but the protection of children against all forms of violence , including the sexual exploitation of children , child abuse and the misuse of technologies , such as the Internet , by paedophiles who have furthered their own discreditable actions through the new technologies .
In addition , I ask the presidency to give a clear commitment today that , through the IGC negotiations , it will work for the inclusion of a chapter containing provisions relating to the human rights of minors , whereby they will be entitled , in the same way as any other citizen , to enjoy fully the fundamental rights and freedoms recognized by the Community - barring those restrictions , of course , laid down by law specifically where children are concerned .
We need a crusade for children aimed at ensuring that their rights as European citizens are fully safeguarded .
Finally , I take this opportunity to welcome my constituency colleague , Gay Mitchell , to the presidency of the Council and I wish him every success in the coming six months .
Mr President , in the European Parliament , the room for young people and children is still , even now , equipped in only a very Spartan fashion .
The rights of the next generation are weak , and the political realization , on the part of Member States , that the European Union should be given more powers in this field , is only growing slowly .
I think that the Intergovernmental Conference offers us the chance to make progress here .
One particularly sensitive area is that which concerns all forms of force used against children , and particularly the abduction of children , which we are discussing here today .
When marriages break up , there is often considerable dispute about custody rights , and often this escalates into a power struggle between the parents .
In binational marriages , there is an additional potential for conflict arising from differences in tradition , language , culture or even religion , and in this emotional stress situation extreme cases , in which children are actually abducted , are increasing at an ever more alarming rate .
Back in 1991 , in my report to the Committee on Youth and Culture , I pointed out this phenomenon and asked for a record of children who had disappeared , and I gave a warning about the lack of cooperation between Member States .
In the 1993 report on measures to prevent the abduction of children , it was again proposed that there should be better coordination and use of the International Conventions of Luxembourg and The Hague .
Since the completion of the internal market and as a result of increasing mobility , which is also linked to international migration patterns , the number of binational life-partnerships is increasing , but so are the cases of conflict .
Mrs Banotti , as the person specially responsible for this question , has given a very graphic report on this situation .
But now we want to see some results at last .
We are asking the European Commission to give us information on all aspects of cross-border child abduction , and also on the measures that can be taken with regard to third countries .
Here in Parliament , we have on several occasions put forward very specific proposals concerning various aspects , including the harmonization of procedures , facilitating the return of abducted children , support measures for selfhelp organisations , better information , and the automatic provision of mutual assistance between courts .
As far as the people involved are concerned , they need help , and they need it now .
We are placing great hopes on the initiative announced by the Irish presidency of the Council , which aims to set up a corresponding EUROPOL register .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate Mrs Banotti .
I shall begin be referring to the fact that this very serious problem of the abduction of children , which has got worse in Europe in recent times , is a consequence of the break-down of families which itself is a result of a worsening social situation , a moral , cultural , economic and social crisis , which has affected us all and which has not been paid the proper attention it deserves by Community authorities .
I think this is a challenge which is facing us all and which imposes on us especially serious responsibilities .
I should like to say , in fact , that facing this new situation , it would be very hypocritical for us to stand by and hope that problems of this type and with such impact can be dealt with by national legislation .
It is fundamental that there should be considerable effort for convergence and extremely close cooperation in the scope of the third pillar .
I think that this problem , which is covered by the Brussels Convention , is one way which could help in fact to give a new legal framework to safeguard the essential rights of children to prevent situations of this kind from continuing to develop , with all the tragic consequences for children 's upbringing - as they suffer irreparable damage in these situations .
It is obvious that we need a new legal framework and I also think that , in debates of this kind , we should not be prisoners of legal solutions because these problems also call for a fresh approach to economic and social questions on a European scale .
Families have been deeply affected and it is families which are at stake as an essential kernel of a dynamic and healthy society . Therefore we must create all of the right conditions so that families stop suffering the kind of attacks that they have in recent years .
Initiatives like Mrs Banotti 's are fundamental .
I think that we are on the right track and the Council and Commission must , on the basis of our debate , waste no more time . They must create a proper legal framework to deal with problems of this kind .
Mr President , we have had a lot of valuable debate today on issues such as CFSP , HelmsBurton , the IGC and so on - very important issues in their own right .
But this issue , concerning the physical , psychological and physiological safety of the Union 's children must be seen by our citizens to command a priority position on the Union 's agenda .
I have practised in family law myself for a number of years and I have seen the difficulties and delays suffered by couples of mixed marriages involved in child-abduction cases .
While the rise in the number of bi-national marriages within the Community is certainly to be welcomed - indeed they promote cultural links between Union citizens - it is very clear that this increase in bi-national marriages - and this has been mentioned by many speakers - has led to a corresponding rise in the level of child abduction within the Member States .
For example , statistics from Ireland - the country that myself and Mr Mitchell represent - reveal a significant increase in such cases , with 70 children abducted from the state last year , and I understand that 16 of these cases have yet to be resolved .
From my experience , the main problems stem from a lack of uniformity of laws under the two existing international conventions in this area , together with a lack of cooperation at intergovernmental level .
On this latter point , I note that Belgium is the only Member State still to ratify the Hague Convention of 1980 on the civil aspects of child abduction and I would urge it to do so immediately .
Finally , it is clear to me that , due to wide divergence in national laws , the resolution of this type of case requires expensive , specialist , legal advice .
While I welcome the current Commission proposals concerning consumer access to justice , I am very disappointed to see that family access to justice , which is a human right , has not yet received the same level of attention .
So I would ask the Commission and the Council to address this issue of the harmonization of national laws on access to legal aid for all .
I look forward to heaving from the Council .
I just hope he is going to heed the calls from many of us .
He has already responded in a most clear and positive way .
I wonder whether he hopes to come back to Parliament before the end of the presidency with some clear indication that action has been taken .
He has committed himself to that and I hope he will .
I am particularly interested in the issue of a central registry where all children abducted - whether they are parental or criminal abductions - will be notified and action taken .
As I mentioned in my own speech this needs to be done with great speed .
With every day that passes it becomes more difficult to find these children .
Mr President , I have very little add to what I said in response to the debate earlier this afternoon except to say that Mrs Ahern must have missed by speech .
She clearly did not get the points I made earlier on .
I should like to join with those who have thanked Mrs Banotti for the way she has pursued and raised this issue and to thank Mr Andrews for his kind words of welcome and encouragement .
I have listened to this debate with great interest .
I understand the sentiments and concerns expressed by those interested in this matter .
It is an important and sensitive issue and it is one on which the Council is taking action , as I said earlier in the debate .
I will report what I have heard here today to my colleague , the Minister for Justice , Mrs Nora Owen , who is President-in-Office of the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
I know that she will be reporting in detail to the relevant committee of this House in the coming weeks .
I have no doubt it is one of the issues that will be raised .
I will draw her full attention to this debate .
I hope it is not a sexist remark to say that I was very struck by the number of women Members who contributed to this debate .
As it happens , we have a woman Minister for Justice in Ireland who is President-in-Office of the Justice and Home Affairs Council and would be particularly sensitive to the issues which have been raised here .
It would fall to her to ensure that the response of the presidency and the Irish Government will be made to the relevant European Parliament committee .
I will certainly ensure that this is drawn to her attention .
I do not know if the House knows that Mrs Owen is Mrs Banotti 's sister and that is a happy coincidence .
It is very useful on this occasion that the Member who is pursuing this so vigorously has the ear and direct access to the Minister .
I have been very taken with the debate today and I will be sure , on behalf of the presidency , to make sure that what has been said here today is drawn to the Minister 's attention .
Mr Andrews raised a broader question which in turn is worthy of examination .
I would encourage him in his endeavours to raise this matter again in the autumn .
Proposals coming forward from Parliament in this regard would be welcomed by the presidency .
It is an issue which for far too long we have either chosen to ignore or for one reason or another have not been aware of .
The debate today has been a very useful and helpful one and it will inform the presidency in our approach to pursuing this issue in the Council of Ministers .
I assure the House that the President-in-Office of the Justice and Home Affairs Council will be made fully aware of the concerns of the House by me and by my department following tonight 's debate .
Mr President , I would just like to say for clarification that I wanted Council to set a timetable .
They did say earlier that they could not do that .
I am glad that the Minister has now given assurances that it will be dealt with speedily and perhaps in view of the exchanges that we heard just now , the relevant Minister for Justice could appear before this House to give her personal assurances on the issue before December .
I thank Mr Mitchell for his sensitive reply .
This House looks forward to having him with us during the Irish presidency .
I have received two motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Customs union with Turkey
The next item is the report ( A4-0197 / 96 ) by Mr Kittelmann , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council Decision laying down the procedure for adopting the Community 's position in the Customs Union Joint Committee set up by Decision No 1 / 95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council on the implementation of the final phase of the Customs Union ( COM ( 96 ) 0018 - C4-0126 / 96-96 / 0020 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , first of all I should like to present the Kittelmann report , and then I should like to explain the position of the Committee on External Economic Relations with regard to that report .
On 1 January 1996 , the Customs Union with Turkey came into force .
It has now been operating for almost seven months .
Today , Parliament is being asked to approve a Council Decision laying down the procedure for implementing the Customs Union , a decision which we should actually approve .
This will take place in a committee known as the Customs Union Joint Committee , which was set up by Decision No 1 / 95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council , on the implementation of the final phase of the Customs Union .
It is a question of making sure that the Customs Union operates in accordance with the rules , and of guaranteeing the free movement of goods between the two partners .
The Council is to be responsible for defining the Community 's position , while the Commission is to define the Community 's position on the technical provisions and on anti-competition practices , so as to be able to negotiate with our Turkish partners afterwards .
Both the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on External Economic Relations have unanimously approved the proposal .
I would just like to emphasize once again that the purpose of this procedure is to ensure that the Customs Union operates correctly from the point of view of trade policy .
In doing so I should like to make it quite clear that this particular procedure has nothing directly to do with financial cooperation or with issues of a political nature , for which it is not the Joint Committee that is responsible , but the Association Council .
What we are looking at here is a technical regulation , in other words a provision for the implementation of the Customs Union .
As far as the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations is concerned , the committee also regards this Council Decision as a technical measure , but a measure which is necessary in order to implement the Customs Union .
It would like , by means of its opinion , to help to make the work of the Customs Union Joint Committee as correct and as transparent as possible , and at the same time to give the European Parliament a comprehensive update on the technical aspects .
The opinion contains two amendments proposed by me , as rapporteur .
On Article 1 , the Committee on External Economic Relations proposes that reference should be made not only to Article 113 , i.e. trade policy , but also to the various other relevant statutory provisions , for example those concerning intellectual property and industrial property .
It therefore seems to me to be necessary to propose a slightly different form of words for Article 1 , laying down that a Council decision should be adopted in accordance with the procedures laid down for the adoption of internal rules for the area in question . The other amendment concerns Article 2 .
Here , a sentence should be added to the effect that the European Parliament should be kept regularly informed of the decisions taken by the Joint Committee .
I would remind you that in all aspects of the Customs Union the European Parliament 's controlling and advisory function should be guaranteed .
Both amendments have also been approved by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and included in Mr Kittelmann 's report .
As the draftsman of this opinion , may I therefore ask you to adopt this report , and in doing so I would deliberately emphasize the technical quality of this proposal .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I can say that the report on the Community 's position in the Customs Union Joint Committee presents no special difficulties and can be supported provided the amendments are adopted .
However , I wish to take this opportunity to emphasize that adoption of the customs union with Turkey by the European Union has been made subject to a number of political conditions relating to respect for human rights , the democratic process , the rule of law and international law and for the maintenance of good neighbourly relations and the territorial integrity of the Member States .
In other words , if that country wishes to benefit from cooperation with Europe , it must operate within the framework of the international legal order and not outside it .
Unfortunately , Turkey 's conduct so far has been very disappointing .
In addition to continuing with violations , it is persisting with provocative political claims against Greece and Cyprus - the one a Member State and the other a candidate for accession to the Union .
This behaviour , which poses a threat to the peace and security of the region , must change .
To assist towards that , the Council , in approving the MEDA programme a few days ago , issued a stern warning to the new Turkish government of Mr Erbakan .
We await its reaction , and our action in the European Parliament and any possible initiatives will be dependent on that reaction .
In that regard , Mr President , I think that it would be advisable for the Council and Commission to keep us informed about the progress of implementation of the customs union with Turkey , particularly now when the government of the new prime minister of Turkey has expressed reservations about the customs union , whereas previously it supported a renegotiation of the agreement .
Mr President , Mr Kittelmann , I know that this is really more of a technical report , but nevertheless we must also look at the political background , as the previous speaker has already said .
Last December , we , the European Parliament , took an important decision regarding the EU 's relations with Turkey .
That decision was based only partially on real changes , for example in the constitution .
Much of it was based on promises and hopes which the European Parliament expressed at the time .
Mrs iller , who was then the Turkish Prime Minister , appealed to us to support her in keeping the fundamentalists out of power .
Yet now all that has been forgotten .
She shares the government of the country with them , and is now Foreign Minister .
Promises , such as respect for human rights , and the positive revision of proceedings against those members of parliament who were condemned on the basis of a very problematical law , have been forgotten .
How will Turkish women retain their equal rights ?
Why are people still being tortured ?
Why do people disappear , and why are people still dying after being tortured in police stations or after being interrogated ?
What , if anything , has changed , and what , if anything , has improved ?
I feel that Mrs iller has disappointed my hopes of a Europeoriented Turkey .
If things go on like this , I shall no longer need to worry about what basis the Joint Committee should work on , but I have to ask myself whether the money that the EU is making available might not be better invested in other countries .
Mr President , we could agree to the changes to the Commission 's text proposed in Mr Kittelmann 's report , but only if we ceased to be aware of their context , i.e. the customs union with Turkey .
In this false framework , however , such proposed technical improvements , which in practice are sensible , would not produce any better result in substance .
I can still remember very well how seven months ago , in this house , we voted in favour of a customs union with Turkey .
Now the Islamic fundamentalists are in government , and Mrs iller has helped them to get there .
So what lessons have those who once recommended the customs union learned from the failure of their strategy ?
It seems to me that instead of drawing certain conclusions they are now simply sticking their heads in the sand and acting as though nothing has happened .
But this ostrich-like policy , this strategy of going ahead with our eyes firmly closed , is probably something that we shall very soon come to regret .
There must be no preferential treatment for a state which does not even respect the most elementary fundamental rights , such as the right to freedom of opinion , and which is waging a dirty war against a section of its population , namely the Kurds .
The European Parliament should therefore take no further steps in the wrong direction , and should forget about any decisions to push ahead with the customs union - and here I am talking only about the financial protocols - until democracy and peace have been restored in Turkey .
I would ask all those who agreed at the time to review their decision again , and to think about the reasons for their agreement .
Mr President , the Kittelmann report touches on legal and institutional questions .
First of all , it expresses the desire for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights to be consulted about the legal basis .
I deplore the fact that this did not happen . Next , the report refers to the consultation of Parliament .
However , following the example of previous speakers , I would like to speak mainly about political aspects .
I recall the arguments that were put forward at the time the customs union agreement was ratified .
I personally , and the whole of my group , were opposed to that ratification for four reasons : the non-recognition of the Armenian genocide by the Turkish government at the time , the Cyprus situation , the human rights situation and , fourthly , the fact that Turkey , however hard it might try , could not become part of the European Union , whereas customs union was apparently perceived by many of its sponsors as a first step towards accession as such .
There has been no fundamental change , and I regret that the majority in the House failed to stand by its initial position , which was to refuse consent to customs union .
Today there is an Islamic government in Turkey , although we were told that by voting in favour of customs union we would prevent the Islamic faction from coming to power .
The Turkish Government has adopted an aggressive posture towards two Greek islands .
Has the situation changed , or were those who expressed their opposition to customs union right after all ?
I could have simply read out the explanation of vote which I gave at the time . It ended in these words : I am not unaware of the commercial aspects of the agreement before us , but I cannot in all conscience vote in favour of it , for the reasons I have just mentioned .
For the same reasons , further reinforced by the events of recent months , our group will be voting against Mr Kittelmann 's report .
Mr President , the report - and Mr Schwaiger has emphasized this point - says that this is primarily and exclusively a technical regulation .
Of course we should agree with that definition , and therefore I shall also give my full agreement to this decision .
However , I did not , at the time , agree to the customs union with Turkey , and I feel that subsequent developments have more than vindicated my decision .
I am sure that many of the people who said yes at the time must now be looking at their decision with increasing doubt and growing dissatisfaction .
Let us just remember , it was made emphatically clear to us at the time that the conclusion of the customs union would be a crucial argument in preventing large sections of the Turkish electorate from giving the fundamentalists the majority in that country .
And yet that politician , who at the time stated so emphatically that she wanted to halt this fundamentalist upsurge , has now formed an alliance with that party , which in spite of everything was successful in the elections .
I do not know whether it is true , as a Turkish opposition politician has stated , that this is a joint venture , the main purpose of which is to prevent the surprising wealth of both party leaders from being investigated by parliament .
One thing , however , is clear : what is being done is to make possible all those things that we were told , before the election , were going to be prevented .
We have already been told how many promises Turkey has failed to keep , and it is now time that we asked ourselves seriously whether the present government really wants to take Turkey along the path to Europe .
Mr President , the customs union with Turkey is a reality .
And I can only agree with the previous speaker in saying that I am already experiencing a certain amount of disappointment , when I hear that the current prime minister , an Islamic fundamentalist , believes that he no longer needs this customs union , this agreement with the European Union .
I therefore believe that , in addition to the technical adjustment that the present decision is concerned with , we should ask ourselves what the customs union with Turkey has actually achieved , in economic terms , in the last ten months .
I believe that in setting up this customs union we have failed to grasp the problem of increasing unemployment in Turkey .
I also believe that this customs union as a whole has helped only a part of industry and a part of the economy , but has not , to a large extent , helped the entire national economy of Turkey .
The technical adjustment that we are dealing with today must therefore be examined from this angle , and we shall have to see whether this amendment , this technical adjustment , and the continued operation of this customs union with Turkey , will really ensure prosperity and freedom in that country .
Mr President , the resolution before us relates to the technical realization of the customs union which has been concluded with Turkey .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs has decided to support this proposal while at the same time putting forward two amendments , one of which relates to Parliament 's right to be informed of the decisions of the Joint Committee .
Although the decision at issue here relates only to the technical aspects of the customs union , it is appropriate in this connection to state our well-founded concern at the human rights situation in Turkey .
It is unfortunate that the progress which the Turkish authorities hoped to demonstrate at the time of the heated debate in connection with the adoption of the customs union , has proved short-lived .
The news which we have received concerning prisoners in Turkey is disturbing .
However , in the debate on the situation in Turkey it needs to be stated plainly that the outside world must respect every country 's election results and a religious trend must not in itself be a ground for disapproval .
At the same time , I cannot approve of terrorist acts in any form .
However , we must state clearly that continuing human rights violations give reason to think seriously again about our cooperation with Turkey .
It is impossible to work together if one side continually takes an indifferent attitude to the conditions for cooperation .
Mr President , in his report Mr Kittelmann proposes two amendments which the Commission cannot , however , approve .
The reasons are these : regarding the first amendment , we must remember that the Joint Committee on the customs union is purely technical and commercial in nature .
It monitors compliance with the free movement of goods in the area of the customs union and ensures in particular that Turkish legislation is constantly harmonized with Community legislation in those areas relating directly to the activity of the customs union .
The Joint Committee can make its recommendations to the Association Council , which makes the necessary decisions while observing the procedures in accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community .
The powers of the Joint Committee fall within the scope of Article 113 .
Therefore , in confirming the common position of the customs union in the Joint Committee , the Council does so by qualified majority .
In its second amendment , Parliament asks to be given information on the decisions of the Joint Committee .
It should be noted that Parliament is already given information .
When the Commission sends the Council a proposal for a common position , this is also sent to the European Parliament for information .
The same procedure is followed in cases in which proposals for a common position are discussed in the Joint Committee .
It should also be stated that the recommendations of the Joint Committee approved by the Association Council are published in the Official Journal of the European Communities .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Draft supplementary and amending budget No 1 for 1996
The next item is the report ( A4-0245 / 96 ) by Mr Elles and Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft supplementary and amending budget No 1 for the 1996 financial year .

Mr President , can I thank both rapporteurs , Mr Elles and Mr Miranda , for the reports they have put in front of us .
Can I especially thank Mr Miranda for being here .
I want to talk to the general budget rather than Parliament 's budget .
Three things are worth mentioning when we look at the figures within that budget .
It will be remembered , certainly in my mind , for three areas .
We could actually call it the UK rebate budget ; the UK gets its rebate of about ECU 2.8 billion , but this has been corrected downwards .
Within that rebate was hope of a payment from the social lines B3-4004 and B3-4003 .
Thankfully , a touch of genius from our colleagues in the Social Affairs Committee has meant that the Budgets Committee amendment that will be put forward will ensure that the people who those lines are aimed at are not disadvantaged .
The Commission did their best to make sure that they were not disadvantaged but the tactic that has been adopted by Parliament is to be commended .
Even though the UK will get its rebate , and quite rightly so , those lines will not contribute towards that .
Secondly , we can say that it is the ' mad cow ' supplementary and amending budget .
The fact is that ECU 1.2 billion will be reallocated within Category 1 because of the effects of the mad cow disease .
That is a lot of money , which in one sense , could have gone back to the Member States .
In another sense , if the Commission had succeeded in what it was trying to do , it could have been reallocated to trans-European networks , to research and development and to small and medium enterprises .
That was not to be and therefore we have a supplementary and amending budget where we see a figure of ECU 1.2 billion being reallocated because of mad cow disease .
The third aspect of this particular budget is that it could be called the Member States jackpot budget because the Member States really have landed lucky .
When we look at the carry-overs from 1995 , we have something like ECU 9.2 billion of unused resources in 1995 , now being carried over into 1996 , which means that when Member States have to pay their own resources there will be ECU 9.2 billion less that they have to pay for this year 's budget .
This sounds fine and I am sure the Member States will welcome that .
The tragedy is , certainly in one area , that we find that the structural funds are underspent in 1995 by ECU 4.4 billion .
Whilst it might be the Member States jackpot budget it is not something we should be celebrating when we look at the structural funds .
Mr President , this supplementary and amending budget was born under the star of the decision on own resources , which has now finally been ratified , and we have ECU 81.94 billion at our disposal in the 1996 budget .
At the same time we have a balance of ECU 9.21 billion left over from the previous year .
This money either does not need to be paid by the Member States , or else it goes back to them .
However , that is still more than 10 % of the present year 's budget .
If we had not had BSE and a number of corrections in individual categories , for example those that were made necessary by enlargement or by the newly created Ombudsman 's Office , then the figure would have been far more than 10 % .
Now it is not Parliament that is responsible for this fact .
Surely it is mad to commit resources to the agricultural sector and the structural funds , and then not use them , whilst in sectors which are important for the future of Europe , and which require close cooperation between undertakings within the region and the citizens of Europe , both the Commission and the Council are being stingy .
And this is particularly true in Categories 3 and 4 .
The Commission and the Council must ask themselves the following question , " Can 't you do any better , or is it just that you don 't want to ? '
As far as the 1997 budget is concerned , there are signs that it is indeed a question of not wanting to .
Our group will be approving the supplementary and amending budget , and it emphasizes that in so doing it is also expressing its solidarity with those affected by BSE and its consequences .
One of the main points of interest to our group is also the supervision and control of expenditure on projects under the MEDA , PHARE and TACIS programmes .
However , the Commission should know that we would not fall in with its proposals if it were to use the room to manoeuvre , provided by us , in order to re-introduce mini-budgets .
The administration of the European Parliament should also know that decisions by the Committee on Budgets and the European Parliament - and I am referring here to the Miranda report - are law , and should not be open to interpretation .
Our group will be approving this supplementary and amending budget .
Mr President , at the time of the vote on the original budget for 1996 , my group could only protest against a draft budget that was irresponsible because it was constantly increasing .
For the same reasons , we cannot support the supplementary and amending budget which is now before us .
Let me cite just three examples .
First , the use of this supplementary and amending budget to distribute , in the first instance , an additional ECU 31 million , adopted by Parliament , to reduce the extent of property investment .
This end-of-year bonus sanctions a ruinous property policy ( ECU 217 , 900 million for 1997 ) , which is still being pursued on the sly through year-end transfers and supplementary and amending budgets .
This approach is intolerable for Europe 's tax payers , and anything but a credit to Parliament .
A second example : the report envisages , as we previously complained at the time of the discussion of Parliament 's draft estimate , giving the Ombudsman - yet another supplementary institution created by the Maastricht Treaty - three additional jobs , although negotiations on this matter with the Council and the Commission have barely begun .
Finally , my third and last example illustrates the principle - endorsed by this House - of a continuous and continuing increase in the Community budget at a time when the governments of all our countries are struggling to reduce public spending .
We note that more than ECU 9 , 215 million out of the 1996 budget has not been spent : it is high time to stop this spending spiral and pay more attention to existing and underused resources .
A word , too , about the Brinkhorst report - somewhat previous , but I hope you will forgive me - to deplore the rapporteur 's intention to reduce the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditures .
Mr President , you seem to be trying to tell me that my time is up . So I shall leave it to other Members of my group to say what they think about this second report .
Mr President , I , too , should like to thank the rapporteur for his report and make a comment on the general budget , focusing on the specific aspect of social dialogue , to which my colleague , Mr Wynn , has already referred .
As the Commissioner well knows , the UK 's opting out of the social protocol has this year already blocked execution of the budget line concerning transnational meetings of workers ' and employers ' representatives ; as in the case of the preliminary draft budget for 1997 , the executive committee is therefore proposing to divide the line in the amending budget , with the specific intention of distinguishing meetings involving representatives of fourteen Member States from those involving representatives of all fifteen Member States .
But the European Parliament cannot accept this approach , for various reasons .
On the operational level , it would be extremely difficult to manage and the social partners have already pointed this out .
Furthermore , by introducing into the budget the possibility of ' made-to-measure ' funding based on the interests of the various Member States , it represents a dangerous challenge to the principle of solidarity of the Union .
The Committee on Budgets is , therefore , asking Parliament , which will tomorrow be voting on the amending budget , to adopt an amendment that avoids these problems and most importantly makes it possible to use the available funds .
There are already plans for meetings of workers ' and employers ' representatives , which are simply waiting for the go-ahead from the competent Directorate-General of the executive Commission .
It would , therefore , be absurd for the Union not to be able to allow this .
Certainly , we attach considerable importance to social dialogue , but we must also demonstrate that in our choices concerning budget management ; I believe that this amendment will enable us to do that .
Mr President , I have to tell you the bad news that I am also deputizing for the author of the report , Mr Elles , who is supposed to be introducing the joint Elles-Miranda report .
Since Mr Elles cannot be present , he has asked me , as chairman of the Committee on Budgets , to introduce his report , but the debate on that report had already started before I was able to reach the building .
I should therefore like , before I go on to give my comments as a representative of the Socialist Group , to make three comments on behalf of Mr Elles .
You have seen how good the cooperation is between the Christian Democrats , the Socialists and all the others in this Committee on Budgets .
The first comment is that I should point out that this budget makes a spectacular repayment , which might have been even bigger if we had not had to take BSE into account .
Therefore all the balance sheets and calculations that are being drawn up in the Member States on the subject of the net-payer function will now have to be scrapped .
Because with this repayment , which amounts to more than ECU 9 billion , my country alone will receive 28 % net paid back into its national budget , or 28.2 % to be precise .
And this applies to all the other Member States as well .
Therefore the balance sheet will not be correct until these repayments , which are not one-offs , but will also play a role in future years if spending develops as anticipated , are taken into account , and a balance sheet is drawn up on the basis of this repayment .
Secondly , I should point out that the rapporteur is very anxious to expressly draw attention to the fact that , following the Council 's decision on the MEDA , TACIS and PHARE programmes , to delete the expanded comments which were intended to make it possible to evaluate the projects being carried out in these countries , we disapproved of this deletion of the comments and therefore the rapporteur has proposed that they be reinstated .
Therefore - and I shall explain this tomorrow before the vote takes place - there is a mistake in the motions that we adopted on Monday , namely an expression in brackets , in which the headquarters is named .
This was not intended , but we shall correct the mistake early tomorrow in the various language versions .
Thirdly , I am to point out that the apportionment of resources between 14 or 15 Member States - as Mrs Ghilardotti has just explained - is not in line with this House and with the ideas of this House .
We have therefore thrown the ball back to the Commission , by drafting two budget lines , one for the 14 Member States with a p.m. and one for the 15 Member States with the total figure in the column .
We have amended the comments accordingly .
However , I would like to make one thing clear . We could have made things so difficult for the Commission that it would have had to ask us if it thought it should have entered a figure in the p.m. column .
Then we would simply have put the p.m. column into another chapter , and then there would have had to be a transfer from chapter to chapter , with the corresponding transfer of resources by us .
We did not want to go that far - we trust the Commission .
And therefore we put the p.m. column in the same chapter .
But we expect that the Commission is very much in line with the new comments , which no longer make any reference to the Directive on joint works committees , or to the Euro-Works Commission , but make it clear that we carried out this activity at a time when there was neither a social protocol nor a Directive on Euro-Works Committees .
We therefore expect that this will be taken into consideration for the 15 Member States in the corresponding column .
Now , as speaker on behalf of the Socialist Group , let me just make a comment on the accusation levelled against the Socialist Group by Mrs Mller .
Mrs Mller , I should like to say to you quite clearly , that we are now standing , in fact , at a critical point in the development of the Community 's spending policy .
And it is just resorting to cheap polemics to try to give the impression that the great Group of Socialists in this House is of the opinion that we should not support the proceedings before the Hague Tribunal .
The Hague Tribunal is an organ of intergovernmental cooperation .
It is run by those who are responsible for the intergovernmental financing of this undertaking .
We in this House - and that includes your group , Mrs Mller - have always emphasized the fact that we only participate in matters in which we as the Community have decision-making powers .
And this is the difference between , for example , financing projects via Echo for the UNHCR , where we have the final say as to whether we are prepared to make these funds available , and a case like the present one , in which , if we leave the door open for the financing of intergovernmental organizations where we would be making our contribution in the form of a blank cheque , in which case we would be doing precisely what we are constantly accusing the Council of doing , and what has now proposed again as a transfer of resources , in which the OSCE is to be given a subsidy of 3 million , without the competent staff of the Commission having to change anything , except for the handing over of the cheque .
Yet this cannot be the purpose of our work .
Therefore we have said that we are against this amendment , not because we do not want to support the work , but because we do not want to open this door any further .
I will immediately support you if , in your amendment , you demand that we should invite the Member States of the European Union to make the necessary resources available intergovernmentally , so that the Hague Tribunal can carry out its work properly .
I believe that this is an invitation that the whole House - or my group at any rate - will support .
Mr President , as previous speakers have pointed out , by means of this proposed supplementary and amending budget we shall , as it were , be paying back to the Member States over ECU 9 billion .
Since we , as the elected representatives of these Member States , know all about the budgetary problems that all our governments are having to cope with - amongst other things in order to meet the much-quoted Maastricht criteria - I welcome this enormous sum which we are in fact making available to our countries .
By so doing we are also clearly demonstrating the fact that there is no such thing as a Brussels operating quite separately , but that we can , and will , bring about the construction of Europe only on the basis of our Member States and only with those States .
I should also like to emphasize the fact that we , the European Parliament , are trying to bring this about as quickly as possible , inasmuch as we have made it clear that we do not need a second reading in order to adopt this supplementary budget .
I hope that the Council , as the representative of our Member States , will give a correspondingly positive response to this signal .
What strikes me , however , when I read the Elles-Miranda report , is the listing of the resources not used in 1995 , according to the various budget categories .
When I read , for example , that over 15 % of Categories 3 and 4 was not spent last year , then I ask myself whether the Commission is unwilling to carry out the wishes of the budgetary authority , or incapable of doing so .
I hope that on this point the Commission will be able to give us a satisfactory explanation during the current consultations on the forthcoming 1997 budget .
Mr President , I will be brief and just give a few elements of the supplementary and amending budget for 1996 .
First , this supplementary and amending budget for 1996 will finally implement a new own-resource decision which goes back to the Edinburgh European Council in December 1992 .
With the new decision , burden sharing among the Member States is fairer and the Union now has a significant margin of resources to finance its current obligations and quite a few future ones as well .
It has been a very slow process , and without pressure from the European Parliament we might still be waiting .
But the slow ratification process also shows that it becomes more and more difficult to convince national parliaments of the additional financial needs of the Community .
This experience underlines the importance of using the resources which the Community now has available as rigorously and productively as possible .
Secondly , the SAB makes it possible to budgetize significant reductions in the estimated needs for a number of agricultural sectors .
These reduced needs have so far made it possible to finance the meat measures which were decided to address the BSE crisis while respecting the agricultural guidelines .
Further , with the SAB , the Community also fulfils its obligations under the Treaty of Maastricht - whatever we think of this part of the Social Protocol - to provide a mechanism permitting the financing of actions based on the Social Protocol by those Member States signatory to it .
As long as the United Kingdom is not a participant these measures have to be taken over by the other Member States .
Finally , the additional budgetary commitments for PHARE , TACIS and MEDA will improve transparency and permit improvement in the quality of execution of these programmes as well as their control .
Experience will show whether the formulations to be adopted will correspond in all respects to these objectives .
If problems remain we must come back to this in future budgets .
The Commission will also support the budgetary authority in its review of ECHO operations in order to assess the effectiveness of the existing monitoring procedures as requested in your resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
1997 budgetary procedure
The next item is the report ( A4-0246 / 96 ) by Mr Brinkhorst , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the ' ad hoc procedure ' for the 1997 budget provided for in Annex II on interinstitutional collaboration in the budgetary sector to the Interinstitutional Agreement of 29 October 1993 on budgetary discipline and improvement of the budgetary procedure .
Mr President , I refer to paragraph 11 of the motion for a resolution of the Brinkhorst report .
While the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development certainly considers it necessary to review some of the Commission 's forecasts , we will comment on the draft budget after 25 July , when it is published .
The Committee on Agriculture has not discussed the actual draft budget and , therefore , cannot concur with the figures in Annex II .
However , we agree that there ought to be a reserve and monies from lower forecasts be put in this reserve with any money which becomes available from wherever we can get it .
Any surplus money in a reserve should be reallocated to aspects of rural economy by Members of the European Parliament .
I congratulate Mr Brinkhorst for his efforts to include all interests in his decisions and I feel we have developed areas where agriculture interests and budget interests can combine to negotiate with the Commission and with the Council when they attend .
He has improved procedures .
We should thank him .
Mr President , no-one should underestimate the importance of this report , because when Parliament votes on it tomorrow , we may well kill the idea that it is just the budget mafia that comes forward with these proposals - it will be Parliament that gives its backing to what Mr Brinkhorst has put forward .
The Council of Ministers may well have thought that this issue was dead and buried last December when the Court of Justice made its ruling .
Whilst Parliament did not win its case , it did not necessarily lose it , because what the Court of Justice said was that Parliament and the Council together have to reach an agreement on what is and what is not compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure within category 1 .
Unfortunately , the Council has just ignored that ruling and has gone on its own sweet way and that means that it has ignored the ad hoc procedure .
What Mr Brinkhorst is now proposing is something which , in effect , says : look , Council , we are serious about this issue and unless you begin to take the ad hoc procedure seriously we are going to have major problems again , as we had with the 1995 budget .
Do not take them as veiled threats : they are actual threats , because we need a resolution to this .
I hope we will get a reserve , as proposed , and will be able to allocate that reserve from the resources within category 1 and that we will get cooperation with meaningful discussions with the Council when we are doing this .
But the Council has to realize that this is a genuine fight on behalf of Parliament - a fight for what we believe to be right .
What is right is that not all expenditure in category 1 is necessarily compulsory expenditure .
We have to bear in mind that expenditure which is non-compulsory has a direct effect on the maximum rate of increase , which has a direct effect on other areas of all our policies .
This report will be voted on tomorrow .
I am sure it will be successful .
Once we have that backing from Parliament , I hope the Council will take note of that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament , at the initiative of its general rapporteur , has thus instituted the ad hoc procedure , on which we are now being asked to pronounce , since we indicated our disagreement with the Council on the preliminary draft budget for 1997 .
The main argument put forward by the rapporteur , our colleague Laurens Brinkhorst , is based on the substantial volume of unused appropriations in the compulsory expenditure sector which lead him , through the device of a global appropriation reserve intended exclusively for agriculture , to foresee even today that the price situation in 1997 could be as favourable as in 1995 and that , consequently , the possibility exists of accepting immediately that , since some of the appropriations are of no use , these could be transferred to a special , single reserve from which funds could be drawn in due course .
I am bound to say that I am impressed by the way in which the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has gone along with this brilliant reasoning , to the point of having accepted the establishment of this reserve .
Even so , I would like someone to tell me how appropriations , which cannot be carried forward , can be placed in reserve , since the financial rules of our institutions forbid it .
It might be as well to recall from time to time a few fundamental budgetary rules , such as the yearly-review rule , which will not be observed .
This House does in fact have a degree of latitude with regard to non-compulsory expenditure , although it has none with regard to compulsory expenditure , which of course includes agricultural expenditure .
I hope that in plenary session tomorrow , at voting time , the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will get a grip on themselves and see how seriously they have been misled .
As far as our group is concerned , we have no intention of accepting the idea that this reserve is possible on the grounds that part of the EAGGF guarantee would not be compulsory .
We are therefore firmly opposed to the setting-up of a general reserve , the legal bases of which seem to us to be highly dubious .
I would now like to consider the question of the 1997 budget perspectives as a whole , because I believe this is the crux of the debate .
Next year is a crucial year for all the fifteen nations that constitute the European Union . Because it is upon that budget year that the definitive arrangements for certain States to move forward to the single currency will be based .
Each nation has therefore embarked upon an extremely rigorous budgetary policy , and it is hard to conceive that the union 's budget - which is exclusively fuelled by money raised from the tax payers in the Member States - can be significantly increased at a time when the national governments will be unable to look any further than just doing the best they can .
In recent years , the strategy of placement in reserve has become the guiding principle of the Committee on Budgets , by hunting down wrongly estimated appropriations and underutilization .
This praiseworthy effort now reaches its apotheosis in the Council 's intention of reducing appropriations because there is no point , at a time of restrictions , in retaining obvious overestimates in a budget .
This is an illustration of the principle of the punishment fitting the crime .
In conclusion , let me make one final observation .
The Edinburgh decision of December 1992 gave our Parliament a power of codecision which is valuable in principle though difficult to implement .
I would like to caution the general rapporteur about his responsibility in the conduct of affairs during this year .
The pass that we have to negotiate is littered with pitfalls .
Our group , naturally , as you will have realized , is going to reject his report .
Let him draw the appropriate conclusions and , in particular , let him understand that a period of crisis is no time to launch a vigorous attack on the foundations of the structure .
As we see it , the common agricultural policy is one of those foundations .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that I am extremely critical of this report .
I should also like to emphasise straight away that if the vote which was taken in the committee is repeated in the Plenary and if the vote which we held in the Plenary is repeated in the vote on the 1997 budget there is no way that we shall have a budget .
I would draw attention to this aspect and the need for greater consensus on this matter .
What is at stake with the Brinkhorst report is not only the important question of classifying expenditure or the question of our positive influence on the management of agricultural spending .
What is at stake is a matter of far greater importance , ranging from enlargement to the question of EMU , from structural funds to economic and social cohesion - that is what is at stake in this report and it is necessary for us to deal with this question clearly .
The first question which arises is this one : How is it possible for us , without any transparency , to discuss issues of this importance by means of an ad hoc process .
Of course , I cannot accept this situation .
This is obviously the wrong way to do things and obviously I cannot accept it .
But more than this : the very substance of the report .
By this I mean that this is the first time I have had to face such a question in ten years of activity at the European Parliament .
The central question of this report is not set out in the resolution but is put into the appendix , where of course it is placed as an indicative question .
This I find unacceptable ! I cannot accept that the substantial question of this report is in the appendix and put as a mere indicative question .
I think that this is a total perversion and this has never happened before as far as I can remember in the ten years in which I have been a Member of this Parliament .
I , therefore , think that the whole process has been contaminated by a lack of transparency and was bound to go off the rails as I suggested in the committee , in particular , now that we know the intentions of the Council following this report , the only correct position for us to take would be to stop even looking at this report and not go down this dead-end , which only covers up the fundamental fact which is at stake at the moment .
Not even the rapporteur himself had the courage to speak openly about what is really at stake in relation to this report .
Dear Mr Brinkhorst , it is not true that , for example , two new budgetary lines were created for enlargement .
What are the intentions lying behind this attitude ?
It is so that by means of an ad hoc process what has to be discussed in another way has already been politically conditioned when instead we should be having a much more serious and rather more transparent debate on the same subject .
Obviously , this means we are going to oppose this report .
We are going to oppose it because of its implications as I have already said and , in particular , the reactions to it from the Council in particular the intention to reduce the structural funds by one billion ECU , something which we are not going to accept and something which actually stems from this report .
This is something which has to be said ! We cannot accept the withdrawal of one billion ECU in this underhand way .
This is the issue and we are calling into question this lack of transparency and we think that the whole matter calls for a re-think .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , no one should be under any illusion about the rapporteur 's intentions : not the Commission , unless it is involved in a conspiracy or , better still , on the lookout for a few budget economies that can be paid for by the Member States , but since it says so , we shall draw the obvious conclusion ; not the Council which , in its great wisdom , will reject the rapporteur 's arguments ; and not Parliament , the honourable elected defender of the European Union 's agriculture interests , great though the temptation may be to transfer a few compulsory agricultural appropriations to other sectors that are more politically productive and so prepare the actors of the future , quite legally , for their integration .
That leaves us with the deliberate intent and the Machiavellian determination of the rapporteur , who is trying , with a great deal of literary and mathematical subtlety , to prove that some of the EAGGF Guarantee expenditures are not compulsory expenditures , so that innovation is appropriate .
Taking as his starting point a fact which is nothing particularly unusual in the context of agricultural production and prices , the rapporteur demonstrates that regular overestimates of the order of 10 % take place at the end of each financial year , and that it is therefore not desirable to retain such a large safety margin for the purposes of administration .
Hence the opening of new budget lines , where the objective is nothing other than to create a logic of non-compulsory expenditure in the EAGGF Guarantee spending block .
Hence the deletion of the BSE temporary reserve , at a time when the financial consequences are known : a really bad bit of timing .
And hence , too , the creation of a general reserve , the obvious sign of a first step towards a transition to the status of non-compulsory expenditure .
All this , ladies and gentlemen , is of dubious objectivity , its purpose being nothing but enabling the European union to establish , at the expense of the Member States , a healthy kitty to be used for purposes other than agriculture .
We cannot accept this , and that is why we shall be rejecting the rapporteur 's suggestions .
Mr President , the Brinkhorst report stubbornly continues along the line adopted by the majority in the Committee on Budgets : proposing economies or the establishment of reserves in areas where the Treaties give Parliament no jurisdiction and , by contrast , proposing additional expenditures in sectors where Parliament does have jurisdiction .
Thus , while the Maastricht criteria compel the Member States to pursue rigorous budgetary policies , the European Parliament is heading off in the direction of ever-increasing expenditure .
Because agricultural expenditure , where 95 % of the appropriations were used up in 1995 , is not the only area in which major economies could be achieved .
If there is a need to seek out and find potential economies , the place to look is among the structural activities , where only 81 % of the appropriations were used ; in internal policies , which are generally contrary to the principle of subsidiarity and where only 85 % of appropriations were used ; and in external schemes , often delegated without control to NGOs , experts and private firms , where only 82 % of the appropriations were used .
So , instead of indulging in legal squabbles with the Council of Ministers , the European Parliament would do better to defend the tax payer by suggesting realistic economies in areas where it has jurisdiction - non-compulsory expenditure .
There are plenty of promising avenues to pursue there : savings on the countless micro-subsidies ; savings on the expenditure on expert reports , congresses , expenditure scattered over more than one hundred budget lines ; better arithmetic in awarding the structural fund appropriations ; reconsideration of the value of certain internal policies which , once again , are contrary to the principle of subsidiarity ; and finally , better control of external schemes .
In other words , our Parliament can fulfil its function as a defender of the tax payer , but only by taking action in areas where it has jurisdiction , and not in areas where its jurisdiction is limited by the Treaties .
Mr President , Mr Sonneveld should have been speaking now , but unfortunately he is unable to be here and has asked me to give his speech for him .
So if I appear to know a lot about agriculture the credit is Mr Sonneveld 's and not mine .
Under the interinstitutional agreement July is the time when we must debate the 1997 draft budget , when the institutions responsible must look at compulsory expenditure .
The judgment of the Court of Justice confirmed that both arms of the budgetary authority must , on this occasion in particular and on the basis of their powers , deliberate and reach agreement on compulsory expenditure .
This year Parliament has prepared more carefully than ever before for this ad hoc procedure .
This is thanks to the determined and laudable work of the rapporteur , Mr Brinkhorst - and I am anxious to say that this evening because he has been the target of a lot of criticism - who undertook to bring about a consensus between the Agriculture Committee and the Committee on Budgets .
Rapporteur Elles initiated this procedure during the 1996 budget debate .
This year the procedure has worked fully for the first time .
The big question is whether the other arm of the budgetary authority will take the same notice of the Court of Justice 's judgment .
Parliament has said what it wants , namely a more up-t-date estimate of compulsory expenditure , to be reached in close cooperation with the Commission .
On the basis of that a reserve of 556 million ECU has been agreed , available for programmes for the development of agricultural markets and support for rural development .
It should be borne in mind that it is still difficult to estimate a large proportion of compulsory expenditure .
And certain savings , on export refunds for example , will certainly not improve the lot of farmers in the European Union .
Anything but ; the cutting of export refunds for cheese will cause cheese prices in the Union to fall and put greater pressure on the dairy industry .
So diversification remains a permanent imperative .
It is thus necessary for all the different elements of agriculture policy to be integrated .
My Group would like to see important instruments of agricultural and rural policy from the other budget categories also regarded under category 1 .
Ultimately European policy on rural development will have to apply to the 15 current Member States and later to the new members .
That requires a creative approach .
This is the essence of the position agreed jointly by the Agriculture Committee and the Committee on Budgets .
I fear that the Council is thinking along totally different lines , namely a sizeable curtailment of the farm budget .
This would be a singular move which would not help the development of agriculture .
It would be even more remarkable to see a number of French Members siding with the Council and thus depriving agriculture of even more money than the Commission is proposing .
If that does not happen spending will fall short of the ceiling for agriculture .
The European Parliament 's Agriculture Committee will then be swift to come up with initiatives for rural development and market developments during the budget negotiations in October .
Mr President , Parliament seems to be willing to help Member States to pass the EMU test at the beginning of 1998 by accepting cuts in the budget for 1997 .
General rapporteur Brinkhorst has introduced a number of new elements in his coverage of the subject : a more effective ad hoc procedure , early involvement of the committees and the concentration of all agricultural activities in category 1 . Initiatives of which I approve .
But I do not feel the same enthusiasm for his efforts to make savings by reducing compulsory expenditure and putting part of those savings into the reserve .
I agree with the rapporteur that the sizeable surpluses there have been in the budget on several occasions suggest that these appropriations need critical scrutiny .
But it would have been reasonable to expect that we would be told exactly what caused these surpluses .
A reserve might then be used to absorb effects such as changes in the market situation or exchange rate fluctuations .
But there is nothing about this .
More important than this question is the question of whether it is in fact possible to make savings in this way .
The expenditure in this category is after all compulsory and I find nothing in the reports about inappropriate spending .
Surpluses are now being given back to the Member States , but the Brinkhorst report wants all appropriations for the reserve spent under heading I. This makes the reserve a fixed element of the budget which may perhaps be used to fund less vital activities .
So there is no saving here .
There is a considerable risk that the Council will use this fixed element as an excuse for immediate cuts in the budget .
Lastly I object to the idea that appropriations in the reserve can only be released after Parliament has been consulted .
Last year the Court ruled against the European Parliament on the matter of compulsory and noncompulsory expenditure .
Manifestly Parliament is now seeking compensation for that defeat by arrogating new powers to itself via the budgetary reserve .
I cannot condone that tactic .
Mr President , maybe I am wrong but I have the impression that we are discussing this important issue without a representative from the Council .
Is this true ?
If so , I think this is lamentable and lament it .
Mr President , our group supports the Brinkhorst report , as Mr Pronk has already said .
We consider it to be sensible .
We know that in agriculture things are not so predictable as in other areas .
For many years it has emerged that the Commission has always grossly overestimated requirements .
It is therefore sensible , if we are making another proposal regarding the uncertainties that continue to exist , to set aside an appropriate reserve .
That is a precautionary measure and at the same time it is a realistic measure , because the figures that are used here have not simply been plucked out of the air .
I find that Mr Giansily 's complaint about the Committee on Agriculture misses the point , because as long as something is put into the reserve , then we have a guarantee that , if expenditure is increased - and this could certainly be a risk in the wake of BSE , and in fact is highly probable - then we shall still have funds available .
In the case of a general reduction , however , such as the one being considered by the Council , this is no longer possible .
Therefore this is a sensible procedure , which we go along with , and therefore we support this report .
Mr President , last year , Mr Wynn , the rapporteur on the budget , tried to convert compulsory expenditure into non-compulsory expenditure .
I personally was opposed to it . The Council had to appeal to the Court in Luxembourg .
This year , in practice , we are facing the same situation .
The tactics have changed , that is all .
The arguments are different , but the objective is the same .
I am firmly opposed to this reserve , quite simply because the calculations carried out by the rapporteur in the preparatory documents drawn up are , to a large extent , highly random in nature .
After all , can he tell me , for example , what the size of next season 's wine harvest will be ?
The wine growers themselves cannot yet answer that question .
Does he know , for example , that for two years there has been virtually no compulsory distillation because of the drought that occurred in Spain and Italy ?
Another example : does he know what the world cereal prices are going to be next year ?
If he does , all the world 's traders would be glad to know .
Does he know , for example , that since December 1995 there has been a tax on cereal exports , which now amounts to ECU 45 per metric ton ?
These exceptional revenues are the result of very high prices . Forecasts are impossible , therefore .
All this is unrealistic .
Our rapporteur should know that the first thing a farmer does , every day , is to see what the weather is like , because agriculture is one of those rare activities that depend on the vagaries of the climate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 11.30 a.m. tomorrow .
Guarantee to EIB for loans
The next item is the report ( A4-0205 / 96 ) by Mr Tomlinson , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council Decision granting a Community guarantee to the European Investment Bank against losses under loans for projects of mutual interest in Latin American and Asian countries with which the Community has concluded cooperation agreements ( Argentina , Bolivia , Brazil , Chile , Colombia , Costa Rica , Ecuador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua , Panama , Paraguay , Peru , El Salvador , Uruguay and Venezuela ; Bangladesh , Brunei , China , India , Indonesia , Macao , Malaysia , Pakistan , Philippines , Singapore , Sri Lanka , Thailand and Vietnam ) ( COM ( 95 ) 0742 - C4-0100 / 96-96 / 0015 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , as you said this report concerns a communication from the Commission and a proposal for a Council decision on the renewal of the Community guarantee to the European Investment Bank against losses under loans for projects of mutual interest in Latin America and Asian countries .
The current lending programme which was agreed on 15 February 1993 amounted to a maximum of ECU 250m and had a duration of three years and expired in February 1996 .
At various meetings of Heads of State and Government - at Corfu , Essen and Cannes - the European Council expressed its support for a continuation of these programmes .
The lending in Latin America and Asia has been successful .
It is an area where there is economic growth , where it has been strong and where it is expected to strengthen .
In those circumstances , the bankers had no difficulty in reaching the annual ceiling of ECU 250m and could have executed loans to a much higher level than that .
The demand was sufficiently strong .
The projects have been successful and it is against that background that we have today the report on the proposal for a renewed loan and a new guarantee arrangement .
The present Commission proposal calls for a continuation of lending .
It is under the usual terms and conditions of the first mandate .
But the loans signed through the Guarantee Fund will grant a guarantee in respect of 100 % of all loans signed but they will remain within a ceiling of ECU 410m over an indicative period of one year , the one year presumed to be beginning from February 1996 , the point at which the previous arrangements expired .
Concerning the amount of ECU 410m , the Committee on Budgets generally welcomes this increase in the loan activities in the Asian and Latin American countries , particularly against the background that I have already described where the demand for loans has already exceeded the available funds and major cooperation agreements have been concluded .
There are , however , quite clearly a couple of problems .
The Commission and the Committee on Budgets are equally well apprised of the problems , and in five minutes it would be expecting too much for us describe fully the difficulties the proposals - as they are formulated - present for the Guarantee Fund .
Suffice it to say that in the explanatory memorandum of my report paragraphs 8 through to 12 adequately describe the difficulties there are in relation to the Guarantee Fund , though some of those difficulties may well be capable of being resolved in the light of the report that has recently become available .
This report has not taken into account a report that had been requested by the Council and just become available on the basis of a study undertaken by the Commission .
However , the present position is that there is the major problem about the suggestion in Article 1 of the proposal that the loans granted by the Bank , if they have not attained the overall amount referred to in the one-year period , could automatically be extended by six months .
We think this is superfluous because there has never been a shortage of demand for the available funds and so we do not want that hypothesis actually contained within the proposal for a decision .
That is reflected in the amendments which I turn to briefly .
Just before doing so I would express my thanks to both the Committee on External Economic Relations and the Committee on Development and Cooperation for their opinions .
The REX Committee opinion is very clearly reflected in the amendments - this is invaluable advice .
There are now six amendments tabled to the report .
Five are tabled by the committee and reflect the advice of the REX Committee .
However , I am not commending the sixth amendment to the House and I want to say just a few words about it .
The amendment expresses a worthy sentiment , and for the sake of clarity I shall read it : ' This guarantee may only be granted subject to respect for the principles and decisions relating to human rights and compliance with the obligations entered into under international law ' .
But that is both a very subjective and highly political condition and to put it as something that the European Investment Bank should have to form a judgment on is , in our opinion , an obligation being placed on the Bank that is outside its competence .
It is a political decision , not a banking decision .
So , although it expresses a worthy sentiment , the recommendation of the rapporteur will be to oppose Amendment No 6 .
With those brief remarks , I commend the report to the House and look forward to the debate .
Mr President , we support Mr Tomlinson 's report .
We must admit that this is only a temporary solution , and the rapporteur is right to point out that it is questionable , and indeed to be doubted , whether the European Investment Bank will in any case be in a position to make this loan available within the pre-set time-limit .
He also indicates , in points 12 and 13 , that in November 1995 the Council had already asked the EIB - and also the Commission - to set up a study regarding a new guarantee system , and in doing so to take into account considerations concerning the sharing of risks between the banks and the guarantee fund .
This has not happened .
It is not available .
Therefore I should like to say , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , that we think that there are two measures worth considering . On the one hand , where it is possible in the cooperating countries , and also where the projects allow , the 100 % guarantee should be reduced to a 75 % guarantee .
Secondly , as far as payments into the guarantee fund are concerned , these should be based on a risk analysis that is appropriate to the banks concerned .
With the present automatic payments , all at the same level , there is a risk that the fund will be eroded , and in particular the high credit levels for Russia and the CIS countries make this danger a very real one .
It would therefore be sensible to switch to a system of graded contributions , determined on the basis of a risk analysis carried out as appropriate to the banks .
Those are our proposals , and with them in mind we support this report .
Mr President , my compliments to the rapporteur on his report and his presentation this evening .
We are dealing with an important subject here .
It is good that more cooperation agreements have been concluded with countries in these regions , in the event Latin America and Asia .
But my Group believes that the Union has to play a far more visible role in projects .
This will give people in these countries a clearer understanding of the Union 's role in carrying out investment projects .
The Commission and the European Investment Bank must devise a method for achieving this .
But I have one small word of criticism of this report .
The report deals with an extension of loans which were originally for the period 1993 to 1996 .
The sum for this three-year period was set at 250 million ECU per year .
The Commission now tells us that in the first two years a total of 277 million ECU has been spent .
An excess of 27 million ECU .
And that is not counting loans for the final year .
In effect the Commission is assuming that this excess will offset against loans to be granted for the new period of February 1996 to February 1997 .
That is of course no way to do things .
The European Parliament approves a given amount for a period of three years .
After that we have to look again to see how much loan capital is available for a subsequent term .
One cannot jump the gun , before the decisions have been taken .
So I think the rapporteur was rather too gentle in his verdict on the sums approved by the EIB as loans .
I know John Tomlinson always takes that as a compliment .
I would appreciate an explanation from the Commission and the EIB of how it is possible for loans to be given to a value greater than initially envisaged .
A further criticism is that the European Parliament was consulted very late in the proceedings .
The previous loan period expired in February of this year .
And in February Parliament was asked for its opinion on the new loan period .
That is cutting it very fine indeed .
The loan periods have been fixed for three years now .
So the Commission knows when the time is approaching for a new decision to be taken .
This late consultation raises the question of whether 410 million worth of loans can now be granted .
Or has the Commission already offset these against the previous period ?
A last point is that the Commission has decided to place all loans to third countries on the same footing as of the beginning of 1997 .
The Commission chose that time because this is when loans to countries in Central and Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean will run out .
It is a good thing to have just one policy for loans to third countries .
But the Commission is now proposing to extend its loans to Latin America and Asia by another six months if the 410 million ECU have not been allocated in full .
The question of course is what exactly does the Commission want ?
It is quite right that the rapporteur comments on this .
My compliments on the report .
But I think the Commission is very late with all these proposals ; it puts us in a difficult position and has briefed us too little and too late .
I urge the Commissioner to improve things .
It is not just a question of this report .
I have had a few reports myself .
All rapporteurs come up against this problem and it would be better if the Commission anticipated rather more and planned ahead .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the inclusion of Mr Tomlinson 's report on the agenda for this part-session .
I can tell Mr Pronk that this report has not come too late : to my knowledge , the decision is still far from having been taken .
I congratulate Mr Tomlinson on the quality of his report .
This is an important subject , because the mandate given to the European Investment Bank for operations in Latin America and Asia expired at the end of February .
That mandate , as you know , allowed for a review at the end of the period , in other words at the end of February 1996 , of the annual ceiling of ECU 250 million which is guaranteed by the Community budget .
In its proposal , presented on 12 January this year , nearly six months ago in other words , the Commission suggests to the Council that the total EIB loans to these regions should be increased to ECU 410 million for an initial period of one year .
These loans granted by the Bank , on the basis of its usual statutes and criteria , would be one hundred per cent guaranteed by the Community , in accordance with the conclusions of last November 's Ecofin Council , and I can assure Mr Knig that the Commission is sparing no effort in order to obtain from the Council an agreement to revise this hundred per cent guarantee downwards .
For the present , I must admit that the division within the Council has not allowed us to reach a conclusion on this point , but we will spare no effort to progress in the direction you desire .
I would like to make two brief comments .
The first relates to the ceiling on the loans .
The ceiling of ECU 410 million , proposed for a period of one year , is admittedly a substantial increase over the previous mandate of ECU 250 million over three years .
But , as was quite rightly emphasized by your rapporteur , Mr Tomlinson , this increase is justified because the activity of the EIB is reinforcing the European Union 's policy of cooperation in Latin America and Asia , and also because the activity of the EIB is a response to the invitation issued to the European Investment Bank by the European Council in Madrid to intensify its activities in Latin America , and finally because the activity of the EIB supports European enterprises in their efforts to penetrate these emerging markets , many of which , incidentally , are a long way away .
My second comment concerns the duration of the mandate .
The initial period of a year proposed last January by the Commission is exceptional .
Mandates for such operations , as you know , are generally multi-annual .
As far as the Commission was concerned , it was necessary to gear the renewal of this mandate to the multi-annual budgets for EIB loans to other third countries , such as the countries of Eastern and Central Europe , and the Mediterranean States .
Well , this renewal , for these two categories of country , will take place towards the end of this year .
The Commission 's objective is to achieve a fair breakdown of the loan arrangements over the various regions , having regard to the room for manoeuvre available for these loans within the framework of the guarantee fund , which you mentioned just now , Mr Tomlinson , for the Union 's external activities .
I would like to conclude by emphasising that the Commission has no problem at all in accepting Amendments Nos 1 and 4 of your report .
Amendments Nos 2 and 5 cause no problem in principle , but no longer seem to me to be of any essential value .
On the other hand , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 3 , relating to the clause to extend this mandate by six months , quite simply because such a clause traditionally exists in the EIB 's other mandates , and because the EIB considers this clause necessary to ensure , in particular the flexibility which is essential to the commitment of the loan programmes .
Mr President , we do not want to become difficult about Amendment No 3 , but I merely ask the Commissioner to reflect upon it before we come to the vote tomorrow .
It is all very well to say that this clause traditionally exists but traditionally we are not in the process of trying to align dates .
And it seems nonsensical simultaneously to try to align dates and then also provide for the possibility of a six-month extension of the period which will then unalign them .
I hope that he might reflect on that because Parliament will persist in its vote on Amendment No 3 tomorrow .
It is rather late in the day , Mr Tomlinson , to embark upon a debate on this interesting subject .
What I can promise you , because I have myself carefully considered all the loan budgets and all the periods in question , is that there will be no problems , whatever the date on which the Council reaches its decision .
We shall therefore act so as to ensure that there will be consistency between the three regions concerned by the loan programmes .
That is why I do not believe that the possibility of a six-month extension should cause you any problem , bearing in mind the objective you are trying to achieve , because we are aiming at that same objective .
I believe that , as far as the Bank and the other countries are concerned , excluding this clause could possibly have a discriminatory effect which might be unpleasant .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Market organization for sheepmeat and goatmeat
The next item is the report ( A4-0221 / 96 ) by Mr McCartin , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Court of Auditors ' Special Report No 3 / 95 on the implementation of the intervention measures provided for by the organization of the market in the sheepmeat and goatmeat sector ( C4-0592 / 95 ) .
Mr President , my report is about counting sheep .
When I was brought up in the west of Ireland if you could not sleep late at night it was recommended that in your imagination you should count sheep .
But , at this time of night , our staff and interpreters here will not need any sheep therapy to go to sleep .
I do not think the Members who are here ever sleep .
I will be as brief as I can .
This report arises out of a report by the Court of Auditors on the sheepmeat regime , which was quite critical of the way the regime was policed by the Member States and critical also of the policy itself .
I just wish to recall that the common organization of the market came into existence in 1980 and was intended to stabilize prices and provide a reasonable standard of living for the people engaged in the production of sheep and goatmeat .
At the time the Union was only 60 % self-sufficient in sheep and goatmeat ; today this figure has risen to 82 % .
There are about 0.7 million producers in the Union and the cost of the regime is about ECU 1.8 billion , which comes to about ECU 200 per month , per individual producer .
It is a relatively small amount of money : less than a single payment of social welfare to a single person .
The UK , Spain , Italy , Greece , France and Ireland - in that order - are the main producers .
The aid is paid by fixing a guide price , and if the market turns out lower then compensation is paid .
This compensation is called a premium .
If sheep are used to produce milk , as well as meat , then only 80 % of the premium is paid .
The premium works out at between ECU 17 and 25 per annum .
Since 1991 a special premium has been introduced which gives an advantage to the poorer areas of the Community .
I just wish to make the following points in support of the policy .
80 % of the producers live in the less-favoured areas and , therefore , have very limited possibilities for land use which is , by definition , mostly mountainous and always poor land .
Sheep and goat farming is always carried out by extensive grazing systems and is , therefore , environmentally friendly .
Given the level of profitability in the business , we can say that without this system of aid the entire production would cease .
The Commission estimates that between 80 and 90 % of sheep and goat farmers ' profit comes through the premium , which means that without this premium there would not be anything left .
The Court of Auditors , in a special report on this sector completed in the middle of 1995 , was critical of the control system by the Member States , and this criticism is accepted in my report .
Indeed , we find that in spite of efforts by the Commission and the improvements it has made , there are still some improvements that can be made .
The system can never be made perfect without the assistance of some electronic device which makes it possible in difficult conditions and difficult terrain , to count the sheep and to record them accurately .
At the moment a system has been researched and is being tried out in Spain and Portugal in the hope that it will introduce a lot more accuracy into the system .
Another criticism was that , by comparison to the cost of beef , it costs three times as much to subsidize sheepmeat .
But , of course , the Court of Auditors missed the point that is not a food subsidy : it is an income supplement for farmers and an effort to maintain population in the rural areas .
The Court of Auditors also felt that the premium was interfering with the market for beef and veal .
That criticism is not valid .
If you take away the premium from sheep and goatmeat , then it will not be consumed any more and the slack will be taken up by very intensive systems - poultry and pigs - which are less environmentally friendly and will employ a lot less people than the sheep sector .
The Court of Auditors said that the numbers and cost have been continuously rising .
That was true in the 1980s .
In fact , the numbers have started to reduce and have already gone back 6 % in recent years , which bears out what I say , that it is not a very profitable business ; it is not very lucrative .
The Court of Auditors also makes the point that this should be confined to the hill areas .
When we remember that the hill areas are getting an extra subsidy - they already have 80 % or more of the entire production - the element that is left for the lowlands is very small .
In any case , it is not a matter of accounting : it is a political decision and , as such , it is for the politicians - Parliament and the Council - to make decisions on whether this subsidization scheme applies to the lowlands or not .
In social and environmental terms we get good value out of this policy .
It does no harm to recall that in the early years when it was first introduced - because Britain was a major producer - it was seen as a policy which would help to redress the imbalance which the United Kingdom always claimed existed in the finances against their particular state .
So it served a number of purposes : to help the disadvantaged mountain regions , to keep people there , to maintain environmentally friendly farming and to solve that political problem of giving back a little bit of money to Britain for a particular form of production in which they specialized .
I commend the report to the House .
Mr President , we are doing very well to be here at just after half past eleven on a Wednesday evening when we could probably be doing other , rather more pleasurable things .
I should like to thank Mr McCartin for his very erudite presentation .
However , in his review he is concealing a little - applying legerdemain - with regard to the sheep and goatmeat report .
Certainly the provisional cost for 1995 was ECU 1.78bn.
I know , as a member of the Committee on Budgets , that this is going to increase by another ECU 94m next year .
Perhaps we could look at the Court of Auditors ' criticisms particularly .
They highlighted that there was a problem in distinguishing between milk and non-milk producing sheep which poses a problem for the Committee on Budgetary Control and also in terms of payment of premiums .
Secondly , there is a problem with the definition of less-favoured area .
The Court found that only Scotland and Ireland had clear land registers and this allowed the definition to be checked .
Therefore there was a problem in counting the size of flocks in other Member States to work out the payments .
The Court of Auditors quite rightly , in my group 's opinion , said that this posed a problem as regards abuse on the part of Member States .
Thirdly , the Court also found that statistical information forwarded by the Member States was inadequate .
I have had conversations with Member States which operate a counting regime on the basis of regional , Lnder or local accounting methods .
There were problems here in terms of accumulation and accounting .
This has to be addressed and I am sure Mr McCartin appreciates that .
Finally - and Mr McCartin has touched on this - one kilo of sheepmeat costs ECU 1.7 to produce .
That is three times the cost of beef .
That seems incredible in terms of the subsidy we offer under the common agricultural policy .
In terms of the amendments , the Group of the European People 's Party has tabled two amendments which are designed to weaken the report .
Probably the Socialist Group , the Green Group and the Liberal and Democratic Reformist Group will oppose them .
The first amendment seeks to weaken the criticisms of the cost of the whole project and the second seeks to keep all areas eligible for aid , not just the less-favoured areas .
We cannot support that .
But apart from those two criticisms , our side will be supporting the McCartin report .
But in terms of the common agricultural policy , I find it difficult to be broadly supportive of the use of European taxpayers money for programmes like this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like the section of the Minutes concerning the vote on the calendar for part-sessions in 1997 to be corrected regarding my vote on Amendment No 27 .
I voted against , and so informed President Hnsch yesterday in writing .
I voted against deleting the Strasbourg sittings for the week of 6 October , like all my fellow citizens and many others .
An error in transmission ascribed the opposite vote to me .
Since machines are said to be infallible and humans are said to make mistakes , the mistake would therefore be mine .
I disclaim all responsibility for the mistake , but I should like to stress that I have no wish to stir up controversy about it in Parliament .
The vote , apart from this mistake , apart from this single vote , quite clearly proves that Strasbourg should remain the seat of Parliament and should retain its rights .
Besides , it is only a point of law , as several of my French colleagues reminded us and demonstrated to us before the debate .
Thank you , Mrs Fouque .
I have noted that you intend to vote against Amendment No 27 to the calendar of Parliament 's part-sessions for 1997 .
Your intention was duly recorded in the Minutes ( Minutes of previous day 's sitting ) .
However , I have to say to you - as I shall probably have to do to other Members - that the outcome of the vote does not change given that Rule 123 ( 5 ) states very clearly that ' the President shall decide whether the result announced is valid .
His decision shall be final ' .
Mr President , the draft Minutes distributed to us cannot be approved as they stand because they contain an obvious contradiction as regards the roll-call vote on Amendment No 27 concerning the calendar of part-sessions for 1997 .
It has rightly been pointed out that Mrs Fouque wished to vote against , but this is not taken into account in the result of the vote , which , may I remind you , was decided by a single vote .
This being so , I request the addition to the Minutes of a sentence stating that Amendment No 27 cannot be adopted , failing which we would be forced to reject the Minutes .
Mr President , what we have just heard is a challenge to us .
I am ready to admit that the rules should be applied to the letter and I am even in favour of doing so , but is the machine superior to human intentions ?
In this particular case , a roll-call vote was taken .
In such cases each Member of Parliament casting a vote is committing him or herself .
As for the statement just made by Mrs Fouque , there is not the slightest doubt about the way in which she wished to vote .
She has just made this declaration publicly .
She herself only discovered a mistake had been made when she looked at the list of voters .
Thus , her intention is clear and her good faith not in doubt .
This being so , I believe it should be possible to rectify the vote .
It seems to me that generally speaking in electoral disputes - even if the case is not exactly the same - in all Member States , when a material error is discovered , the courts reinstate the vote and , sometimes , change the outcome of an election .
Here , we have not an election but an important vote .
I believe Parliament would do itself credit if , in view of Mrs Fouque 's very clear and unambiguous statements , it rectified the vote .
Thank you Mr Striby and Mr Pasty , I have taken note of your remarks .
Mrs Fouque 's intention and good faith are obviously beyond doubt .
She in fact made the point yesterday , immediately after the vote .
As regards any mechanical error , I have to state that the technicians have checked Mrs Fouque 's voting machine and have established that it was working properly ; it is only right that Parliament should be given this information .
Mr President , I should like to intervene in application of Rule 133 of the Rules of Procedure .
You have just taken a stand on the subject of disputes .
But when there is a dispute about the Minutes , it is for Parliament to decide .
I challenge paragraph 12 in its entirety ; in other words , from the end of page 9 to the middle of page 11 , the whole of paragraph 12 .
In accordance with Rule 133 ( 3 ) , I request that , since these Minutes are challenged , Parliament should decide on the following change : ' Delete Item 12 in its entirety in application of Rule 133 ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) ' .
I should like Parliament to decide on this request for an amendment to the Minutes .
Mr President , you have made reference to the rights of the President of a sitting .
Such rights , as Mr Fabre-Aubrespy has said , are exercised under the provisions of Rule 133 .
It is for Parliament to ratify the Minutes .
As regards our colleague Mrs Fouque , who is handicapped but has always very clearly shown her very positive attitude , I should add that it would seem to me deeply offensive to distort her wishes by making her cast a vote contrary to what she always intended .
Mr President , I should like to mention the varying rules that seem to apply in this Parliament when accepting or rejecting changes in roll-call votes .
Yesterday , in connection with a vote , I went to the President 's office to ask them to take into account a roll-call vote that I had not been able to cast in time .
There was no problem about that .
It was accepted .
Why then , cannot Mrs Fouque 's vote be accepted today ?
Mr President , I believe this Parliament is at grave risk if , to protect the interests of a party - in this case , not a political party , but a Member of the House who has taken a specific position on a certain issue - moves are made to bend one of the fundamental principles of the way in which this Parliament functions .
Of course , there may sometimes be a need to rectify , note or record in the Minutes the statement of a Member who , claiming to have made an error in voting , fails to find his or her intended vote in the Minutes - especially in the case of a roll-call vote - or , as our colleague has just said , may not have expressed his or her true opinion because of a brief misunderstanding .
It is nonetheless obvious , as all the precedents of this House make clear , that , when there is a roll-call vote , or electronic confirmation of a vote , and when the difference between one position and another , between a yes and a no , whatever the subject of dispute , is determined by a very small number of votes - whether in the case of a qualified or some other form of majority - the result of the electronic vote must be honoured when it is proven , as you have just stated to be the case , that the machines are working properly .
In the past , there have been hundreds of cases of Members who have made a mistake in voting , have had it recorded in the Minutes that they have made a mistake , without it changing the result of a vote .
I should like to remind my colleagues that , in defending today a legitimate position that was obviously not shared by the majority of Members yesterday , they are bending the basic principles governing the functioning of this House .
Ladies and gentlemen , I understand very well the importance of the discussion we are having here , but I should now like to close the vote on the Minutes .
Since there are still three Members who wish to speak , I shall , with your consent , invite those three Members to speak and then make a proposal .
Mr President , I would like to endorse what Mr Vecchi has said .
The House has rules and it has precedents , and some of us who have been here a little longer have been through all this before .
It is very important that we stick to the rules , as you stated them , taking note of what Mrs Fouque had to say .
The fact is that the result stands and should be recorded in the Minutes .
I just wish to say to colleagues who may not like the result : we have been over this ground before , practically every year when the same subject has arisen .
I stand by your decision , and we should support it .
Mr President , it would have helped if the leader of the Europe of the Nations Group , Sir James Goldsmith , had actually turned up on time .
I should like to suggest that in future , when he makes one of his passing visits , we ask the Visitors ' Service to show him his seat !
Mr President , I have been a Member here ever since we first introduced electronic voting , and during that time there must have been hundreds of mistakes .
I am very sorry for any Member who makes a mistake on an important vote .
I myself have made dozens of mistakes of that kind .
It is unfortunate , but there is no alternative but to stick clearly to the rules laid down .
That was the result of the vote as it was announced yesterday .
Of course , Members have every right to indicate what their intention was , but it was the result of the vote that counted , and I do not think we should seek through the Minutes to try to rectify mistakes .
As Mr McMillan-Scott said , every single time we have this discussion almost every trick in the book is called - every possible way in which we can change the vote .
We made a decision and we ought , in fact , keep to that decision .
Mr President , just a word to say that I have noticed that my name did not appear in the Minutes whereas , as the roll-call votes testify , I was in fact present yesterday .
This is undoubtedly an omission on my part .
I feel I must repeat what I said earlier about Rule 123 , which is very clear and has always been followed , as several Members have pointed out .
There is a difference between intention and act : there have been frequent occasions when Members have said they made a mistake , but this has never led the House to change the result of a vote .

However , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy and Mr Gollnisch have put forward a request under Rule 133 .
I accept their request and , since voting is due to start at 11.30 a.m. , I shall ask the President in the Chair to put the Minutes to the vote at 11.30 a.m. , at the beginning of voting time .
This is my proposal , which I think can be taken as a decision .
Mr President , I shall say nothing about what has just been said .
I shall simply express an opinion about the proposal you have just made .
You are sovereign , Mr President , but you are sovereign within the limits of the Rules of Procedure .
Rule 133 ( 2 ) , to which I refer you , says that ' at the beginning of each sitting the President shall place before Parliament , for its approval , the minutes of the previous sitting ' .
A clearer paragraph does not exist and I am sure that you would agree with me about this for you are , I am certain , an honourable man : Parliament must decide at the beginning of the sitting , otherwise the vote would be null and void .
Thank you , Mr Gollnisch , for your suggestion and for the precise reference to the Rule .
As you so rightly say , Paragraph 2 states that : ' At the beginning of each sitting the President shall place before Parliament , for its approval , the minutes of the previous sitting ' .

Paragraph 3 adds that : ' If any objections are raised to the minutes Parliament shall , if necessary , decide whether the changes requested should be considered . ' It also adds , and I quote for everyone 's benefit , that : ' No Member may speak on the minutes for more than one minute ' , but that is of secondary importance .
Now , let us be precise : the Minutes are placed before Parliament , for its approval , at the beginning of the sitting , and it is then up to the President to decide , if any objections are raised , whether a vote should take place at voting time .
There are already precedents in this respect .
Mr President , what is being objected to here is not the Minutes themselves , though these provide the pretext ; the aim is to challenge yesterday 's vote in favour of Strasbourg at all costs .
Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure says that the President shall decide whether the result of the vote announced is valid .
I would make the point to the honourable Members concerned that I have not heard the President himself challenging the result of the vote .
So as far as we are concerned this means there is no need to amend the Minutes .
You approved the vote yesterday .
We all did and we must stand by that .
The result is your doing .
Mr President , for myself , I simply want the Minutes to be clear for people outside .
When referring to the Minutes , we read ' October I , Amendment No 27 , approved by roll-call vote , 544 voting Members , 269 for , 268 against , 7 abstentions ' and in brackets it is clearly stated ' Mrs Fouque wished to vote against ' .
Mrs Fouque is deducted from those who voted for .
Then we have a Minute saying that the vote was declared valid but that one Member of Parliament has very clearly stated that she made a mistake .
In that case , I have to say that this throws some discredit on the votes cast in this Parliament .
That is why I have not asked for the vote to be retaken but for it to be rectified .
In other words , for the Minutes to be brought into line with what has been stated by a Member of Parliament early enough for it to be recorded in the Minutes .
The Minutes should be consistent with the intentions of the votes cast .
What we ask is that the Minutes be made consistent .
Thank you very much , Mr Pasty ; however , in responding to you and other Members , I should like to take up the point made by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
We have two separate issues here : the Minutes are one issue and the result of yesterday 's vote is another .
This is the whole point !
The outcome of yesterday 's vote is no longer an issue , in accordance with Rule 123 : it cannot be changed , and that is final .
We cannot change the Rules simply to suit ourselves .
As for the Minutes , I repeat what I said earlier : they will be put to the vote at 11.30 a.m. , at the beginning of voting time .
Mr President , yesterday evening we saw on the news pictures of the memorial service for those killed in the accident involving a military aircraft at Eindhoven airport at the beginning of the week .
This morning we learned with horror that TWA Flight 800 en route from New York to Paris had crashed into the sea off Long Island after an explosion .
More than 200 people are feared dead .
May I ask you , Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , to convey the condolences of the European Parliament to the victims ' families .
These tragic accidents require all of us to give greater priority to improving aviation safety .
Thank you , Mr Cornelissen .
On behalf of Parliament as a whole , the President would like to offer condolences to the families of the victims .
Mr President , during the May sittings , Parliament adopted , as I assume that everybody remembers , a resolution condemning the violations of human rights in Tunisia .
This resolution drew particular attention to the case of Mr Khmas Chammari , member of parliament , head of the Mouvement des Dmocrates Socialistes , who had been arrested and committed to the civil prison in Tunis .
I have just learnt that Mr Chammari was sentenced yesterday evening to five years imprisonment .
This is a new violation of human rights , which particularly hits opposition parties , journalists and activists in human rights organizations .
The need to combat fundamentalism should not be used as a pretext to undermine freedom of opinion and expression .
Mr President , I propose that you use Parliament 's resolution to protest to the Tunisian authorities against the sentencing of the member of parliament , Mr Khmas Chammari .
Mr President , as the originator on behalf of my group , of the resolution on Tunisia to which Mrs Pailler has just referred , I should simply like to say that , in a personal capacity , I associate myself with her request .
Mr President , I should simply like to appeal to the Rules of Procedure to indicate that , for Amendments Nos 1 to 7 , block II , I did not cast a vote against , but a vote for : in other words , I was in favour of them .
I wish this to be recorded in the Minutes .
The necessary correction will be made .
Mr President , I propose , in order to put an end to a debate which threatens to drag on indefinitely , that , notwithstanding the reservations that have been expressed about the Minutes , we immediately pass to a vote on them in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
Thank you for your suggestion , Mr Le Pen , which is not the first I have received . However , I have already said how we shall proceed : the vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.

Mr President , you have called on certain Members to speak several times : you may of course call on anybody several times .
But you are calling on some speakers several times while we are discussing one item on the agenda .
Exercise your role as chairman properly .
We come to one item on the agenda , then we pass on to the next .
I wished to make it clear to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten that the request I made referred to Item 12 in its entirety and not just to Amendment No 27 that we have talked about .
And if I contest the whole of Item 12 , it is also because , as I said yesterday at the sitting , even though I asked to speak before the vote on the amendments that I had tabled on behalf of my group , I was not called .
I wished to speak to withdraw some of the amendments which were then put to the vote .
This was a basic infringement of the right of every Member of Parliament to speak before the vote on amendments .
I therefore ask , Mr President , for the vote to be taken on the whole of Item 12 in order to withdraw it and you should put this to the vote immediately because you have opened discussion on the adoption of the agenda and if you alter the agenda you must have the agreement of Parliament .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I have already answered your question and my answer has not changed .
Mr President , I would ask you to bring this circus to an end now , whereby French Members are deliberately harassing Parliament in its work .
There is so much we have to do , and we cannot go on listening to people who are just deliberately hindering our work .
I would ask you to let us proceed with our agenda and stop listening to this nonsense .
Mr Blak , in some particularly delicate situations , a little patience is required .
Cooperation with South Africa
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0214 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on development cooperation with South Africa ( rapporteur : Mrs Gnther ) .
. ( DE ) Mr President , I am grateful now , albeit half an hour late , to be able to introduce this item on the agenda and will not hide my feeling that , with all the interest shown in the preceding debate , it might not have been such a bad thing to cut it short .
We now come to the Regulation on arrangements for cooperation with South Africa , which forms part of a series of similar regulations under which we place development cooperation on a legal footing .
This recommendation for second reading is concerned with the regulation of the favourable relations that exist between the European Union and South Africa .
In line with the negotiating directives adopted by the Council in June 1995 , the European Union and the Government of South Africa have agreed that future financing for development projects will be channelled through a special financing facility of the European Union and not through the European Development Fund .
This gives Parliament other possibilities of involvement in the process .
The explanatory memorandum to the draft regulation at the time recognized the key role played by the European Parliament over the years in support for South Africa .
Excuse me , Mr President , but it is extremely difficult to speak when an argument is going on in the background .
Could you please ask the colleagues concerned to hold their debate outside the Chamber ?
You are quite right , Mrs Gnther .
Some Members are behaving particularly badly at the moment .
I invite you all to pay attention or , if you do not wish to listen , to leave the House .
South Africa has undergone gratifying development in recent years and has largely achieved its re-entry into the family of nations .
Hence it is also important to remedy the existing deficiencies in our cooperation as quickly and as completely as possible in order to clear the way for a course of sustainable development .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation has endeavoured to bring about a long-term solution which measures up to the significance of this cooperation .
The earlier draft for the Regulation itself was to a large extent satisfactory .
A number of changes have been made , however , in order to bring the Regulation more closely into line with actual needs and , more especially , in order take proper account of the situation that has arisen since the free elections in South Africa and under the new government since April 1994 .
It had become apparent early on that priorities different to those of the past needed to be applied , in the use of resources too .
From this point of view , it is to be welcomed that the common position already contains a number of the amendments proposed by Parliament on first reading .
That applies in particular to the demand that the measures pursued be geared not only to lasting development , but also to environmentally sound development , and that environmental protection projects also be systematically covered by the Regulation .
In the development field , we are occasionally confronted with the fact that the resources available are not always used quickly enough .
Hence , from the point of view of Parliament , it is to be welcomed that the demand for an indicative programme is formulated in a more detailed manner than was the case on first reading .
A further amendment that , in our view , can be accepted consists in the fact that the involvement of the South African National Development Agency has been broadened to the point where we can now speak of a permanent dialogue .
A key point , however , which had been demanded by Parliament but does not appear in the common position , is that more powers should be given to the Head of Delegation in South Africa .
With a budget line of about ECU 130 million a year - and that is not really a huge sum - it makes little sense , in my opinion , to make practically every project subject to approval in Brussels and to leave part of the decision-making to people in the field .
The Regulation in any case covers everything precisely and in detail , so that it would certainly be possible to ensure proper monitoring here too .
I strongly urge the Commission to back Amendment No 4 , perhaps with a reduced amount in order to show willingness to compromise here .
This point is not without relevance to the effective implementation of the proposed Regulation .
The improvement of the financial management of aid programmes must quite simply be taken more seriously .
The European Parliament has repeatedly pointed out that staffing needs to be increased for the implementation of programmes in South Africa .
At the same time , it is necessary to streamline decisionmaking procedures .
The Court of Auditors has also raised this matter and has given a clear indication of the importance of programmes in South Africa .
I am completely at a loss to understand why the Council decided to reject Amendment No 6 from first reading .
Again and again we hear that decisions taken at European level are incomprehensible and often impossible to implement for those concerned .
Through the amendment tabled on first reading we had called for more transparency - in vain , as it turns out .
In the cumbersome procedure laid down in Article 8 of the common position , decisions for prompt action will certainly not be capable of implementation , and the text has been so radically altered in its new formulation that , in my opinion , the conciliation procedure should be brought into operation if no amendment results from the second reading .
In this context , I would like to thank the coreporting committees once more for the constructive dialogue .
Their contributions should , in my opinion , also have been reflected in the common position .
For the reasons stated , I urge support for the amendments we are now proposing for the second reading .
Mr President , as Commissioner Pinheiro will be well aware , there are many stories coming from South Africa of bureaucracy , confusion , delays and , indeed , of missed opportunities in our dealings with NGOs in that country .
We know , in fact - and I spoke to NGOs in South Africa only yesterday - that the first provisional decisions concerning expenditure in the 1996 budgets were only taken this month .
We know too that the transitional National Development Trust which is responsible for working with NGOs in South Africa only received its first tranche of money on 24 June .
That means that the money will not get through to NGOs until August .
South African NGOs are going to the wall .
They are extremely confused and the EU 's proceedings are misunderstood , as you know , Commissioner .
They are in desperation , forced to take out loans with high interest rates , and that increases their difficulties .
The lessons for us are clear and the amendments which Mrs Gnther has referred to reflect the concerns we have about our work with South African partners .
Our amendments are aimed , above all , at ensuring that the European Union can be , as it should be , a properly responsive partner .
Our first proposal is that the European Commission delegates in South Africa be given the power to authorize expenditure on projects up to a maximum ceiling of ECU 500 , 000 .
One facet of this is that it would mean that we would have a much more rapid response and it would be a more effective European Union relationship with our NGOs .
The Development Committee is also extremely concerned with the imposition of a III ( a ) committee procedure by the Council .
It is quite clear that this will cause enormous difficulties and the situation will undoubtedly deteriorate even further .
The limited staff resources available to the Commission in this area will indeed be stretched to breaking point .
The paper work will mount even as the lines of responsibility and decision-making in the Commission become even more confused .
I see only one outcome to the Council 's determined and obstinate insistence on maintaining its pre-eminence in every single decision .
The outcome , I think , clearly will be further delay and damage to the European Union 's reputation in South Africa .
For many years the Union has worked to give the poorest people in South Africa the best kind of support .
The proposal before us today provides us with a much valued opportunity to take this work forward .
I certainly hope the Commission will play its part in persuading the Council not to undermine the possibilities we have here to make that kind of contribution in South Africa .
Indeed , as Mrs Gnther has said , I call upon the Council to come to conciliation in order to negotiate with Parliament on these matters .
I can keep it short , Mr President .
Mrs Gnther 's report is an excellent one .
She did a very good job in the first round , receiving very broad support in the Committee on Development and in our Group too , of course .
Nevertheless we are not happy with the situation as such .
I refer not to Mrs Gnther 's splendid report , but to the way in which the European Commission handles aid funds for South Africa .
The situation in South Africa is good at the moment , but it is certainly not without its dangers and that means that a lot of effort is required to improve prosperity in the country quickly so that potential political risks for the future can be eliminated as far as possible .
It is thus a serious matter that there are so many delays in the aid projects being managed by NGOs and that European Union red tape is responsible for adding to those delays .
We really must urge the European Commission to be more flexible and more helpful here and to ensure that projects are moved forward faster .
My second point is that the approval of small-scale projects is most important .
The Netherlands has many years ' experience of this practice .
Embassies can approve small-scale projects on their own initiative and it always works very well .
It also works often when bridging arrangements are needed .
So we think this provision should be available .
My third point is that transparency is exceedingly important in all aid projects .
This is needed not only in South Africa itself , where in general it is very good , but also in the decision-making processes of the European Commission .
It is these which pose a number of problems , and it is these which Mrs Gnther rightly highlights .
We are with her on this and we call on the Commission and the Council to ensure that these kinds of procedures and these kinds of aid programmes are carried out better and in a more flexible manner .
Mrs Gnther 's report , on which I too must compliment her , deals with the setting of the legal basis for development cooperation between the EU and South Africa .
The problems so clearly outlined by Mrs Kinnock are very real and I thus hope that a large majority of the House will support the amendments so that we can secure a change in the EU 's policy and introduce greater flexibility into its workings with the NGOs in the field .
But one of the most important points to be considered at present in our review of development cooperation overall is the specific status which South Africa should have vis  vis the Lom Convention .
In this context we would point to a problem raised a few weeks ago in the Committee on Development and Cooperation , namely the apparent desire amongst some of the South African negotiators to seek exemption from Article 39 of the Lom Convention which bans the importing and exporting of toxic waste .
There have been great problems with this in South Africa in the past , with the British multinational Thor Chemicals in particular playing a dubious role .
It would be most regrettable if South Africa did not sign up to Article 39 because despite the claims of official spokesmen at the talks she really cannot guarantee to manage toxic waste adequately .
There is no adequate legislation .
1000 of the 12000 dumps are illegal and thus not subject to licensing controls .
I call on Parliament to put pressure on the Commission and the South African Government to end this situation .
Mr President , in March of this year I was privileged to be in Lesotho and to visit South Africa , Namibia and Botswana as a European Parliamentary representative .
It was tremendously encouraging to go back after 20 years and see the transformation that had taken place in South Africa .
It behoves us all to do everything possible to encourage the process of economic regeneration in South Africa so that the democratic gains which have already been made and which have so delighted us are not put at risk .
That is a fundamental point .
In a month in which we have seen Nelson Mandela fted - and rightly so - in London and in Paris there is all the more reason to be pro-South African and do everything we can to support South Africa and the neighbouring countries , which are very much dependent on the prosperity of South Africa .
I would like to make one particular point in support of Mrs Gnther 's excellent report .
It seems to me to make all kinds of sense to delegate the responsibility for small-scale projects to the Commission 's representative in South Africa .
This is the kind of thing , as Mrs Kinnock has rightly said , that will make a tremendous difference .
Instead of these horrendous delays , waiting half the year to know if your project is going to get the go-ahead , let that be given to our man in Pretoria , Cape Town , or wherever he is , so that he can authorize and they can get on with development .
I am delighted to see the broad support in the House across the political groups for this .
I hope the report will be totally supported .
We thank Mrs Gnther and should back all her amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Gnther 's good report shows up what , to me , is a significant weakness in the implementation of all cooperation projects with third countries , namely the need for an increase in staff resources for the conduct of programmes in South Africa .
The implication of this , of course , is that many projects which have been put into effect were not carried out efficiently enough .
The conclusion that an improvement in financial management is needed is to be welcomed .
I think it right to demand that responsibility for approving commitments and payments in respect of projects be transferred to the Head of Delegation in South Africa , but that alone will not solve the problem .
It is much more important only to release projects for implementation when human resources are up to proper strength .
I therefore oppose the proposal of the Commission to create a special South Africa committee , since such a committee can do no more than the Court of Auditors , i.e. to note in retrospect that project resources were not used efficiently enough .
Mr President , I think that only when we have fewer commissions and , instead , more competent implementation capacity will it be possible to achieve the necessary efficiency .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Gnther for the high quality of her report which , of course , we expected .
The world has been inspired by the courage of the people of South Africa and the decisions that they have taken during the last few years .
We have been especially inspired by the quality of the political leadership in South Africa which , I have to say , is in contrast with the performance of some politicians in Europe and the behaviour of some Members in the European Parliament this morning who attempted to change their votes : I have often had cause to complain about people abusing the right of one-person-one-vote in this way .
I say that with some feeling , having spent a lot of time travelling backwards and forwards between Europe and South Africa over the last 25 years and had the privilege of being an observer at the elections .
The European Union , and Parliament in particular , has a proud record of support for the democratic process .
It is important that we make the best use of our resources and contacts and do everything to make our work more effective and more efficient .
The special programme for the victims of apartheid has been the most successful programme of the European Union .
It was our biggest programme and the biggest overseas programme for South Africa itself .
It was administered very efficiently by the Commission , particularly in the early days , supporting small projects - including , for example , small projects supporting an independent media .
Cooperating with our partners , we built up an incredible fund of experience of working with churches , trade unions , and a special trust .
Many of us are anxious that experience should not be squandered or put on one side , but should be built on .
But clearly there are areas where we need to be more efficient and more effective .
The amendments that we are tabling seek to ensure that our Commission team in South Africa , which is very impressive indeed , is given a free hand in a new and very difficult situation .
Whilst we are celebrating the visit of Nelson Mandela to Europe , which has been an inspiration in so many ways , it is very important that we continue to show solidarity with the people of South Africa .
Unfortunately , he is returning to South Africa in many ways empty handed , partly because of the lack of progress that has been made in the trade agreement .
I would like to ask Mr Pinheiro , in particular , to use to the full all his experience and ability and knowledge on the college of Commissioners and in the Council itself .
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Gnther on the work she has done on this report .
I share her worries which were also expressed by Mrs Kinnock .
President Mandela recently visited London , and it was one of the most moving state visits the United Kingdom has seen for decades .
The humility of this man is an example to the world of how someone who has endured so much suffering over so many years can show so much forgiveness and become such a respected world leader .
He needs total support .
South Africa - and its peaceful future - is the key to stability for the whole continent of Africa .
If we can see a steady transition from the old oppressive regime to a new democracy supported by the European Union , not just in financial terms , but in genuine moves to rebuild a fair , equal and peaceful society as an example to the other African nations , then the European Union will have played its part in that new stability .
The whole question of the future of Lom is in the melting pot .
South Africa 's position is being carefully examined .
But South Africa is already in cooperation with her neighbouring states on a regional basis , and I look forward to a strengthening of those frameworks .
Careful consideration will have to be given to see how South Africa will fit into any new organization that replaces Lom if this can be negotiated .
It is a major step forward that funding will be channelled through a special financing facility and not through the European Development Fund .
This improves budget control and transparency .
The whole emphasis of the new government must be to provide basic provisions for the people and this is what they are trying to do under difficult constraints .
This means a rapid development in housing , health and education if the expectations of the people after the elections are to be fulfilled .
NGOs will still have a major role to play .
I support this report but I believe that further discussions should take place .
Mr President , I also wish to go along with those who have congratulated Mrs Gnther on her brilliant work . From my point of view , her work is also an ideal legal basis and not only in order to set up a framework for a harmonious and efficient regulation of the relationship between the European Union and South Africa .
South Africa is a country where , in recent years , fantastic changes have taken place which deserved our applause and which have been a source of great emotion . But it would be foolish and irresponsible of us to think that what has happened so far in South Africa is already enough to guarantee the future and stability of this great southern African nation .
What has been done is huge . But what still has to be done is a Herculean task and we are all responsible and are obliged to set up a framework for a pragmatic relationship as well as one which is flexible , rigorous and transparent .
In order for all of this to take place it is fundamental , in a new type of relationship , that the European Union should , if possible , pay even greater attention to ensure that bureaucracy is not a factor of restriction and impediment and that , with our cooperation , we achieve swift and effective results .
Nor shall we forget that , after the success of President Mandela 's visit to Europe , the situation in South Africa is at this moment in time full of uncertainty and a great number of imbalances .
We also know that , from a political point of view , President Mandela is preparing for his own succession and consequently it is necessary for us to create all of the objective political conditions and also to orient our relationship in the field of cooperation . Europe must lead the way in terms of the support that the western and developed world must give to a country which has undergone fantastic changes and which has a fundamental role to play , not only in the development of southern Africa , but also in effectively helping this country to play a part in tackling many of the problems which exist in the African continent and which must be eradicated .
I think that , despite resistance by the Council , the work done by Mrs Gnther , together with the sense of responsibility shown by Commissioner Deus Pinheiro ( he is a man who has dedicated much of his political life to the subject of South Africa and has done so with a great sense of responsibility ) , is essential .
We must give them all of our backing right now so that Europe can make a positive response , as is required and vital for this great South African nation and for the people of South Africa who are our friends .
Mr President , for the great majority of European citizens , South Africa is no longer a problem : having got rid of the odious apartheid system , it has irrevocably committed itself to the path of multiracial democracy and economic development under the leadership of an outstanding man , President Nelson Mandela .
Having myself visited South Africa several weeks ago in order to launch a policy of partnership between French and South African towns , I became aware , however , that the situation was in some respects disturbing and that the future was threatening .
For although the black population representing 75 % of the total population , now enjoys civil rights , its living conditions have not improved very much and the average income of Whites is eight times that of Blacks .
I believe we can say , without lapsing into pessimism , that , if the living conditions of the black population do not improve significantly in a reasonable time as regards security , employment , housing , public services and education , we can anticipate some unrest .
This would be serious , not only for South Africa , but also for the whole of the African continent because many Africans , both peoples and governments , are turning their eyes towards South Africa .
They expect South Africa to be a model for democracy and also to contribute actively to the economic development and political stability of the African continent .
This means that what is at stake in South Africa is more than the future of South Africa : the European Union should take full responsibility for giving South Africa every opportunity to accept the challenge of building a new democracy , so that it can respond to the expectations of the African continent .
What is at stake in South Africa is a good part of the future of the African continent in the years to come !
I very much appreciate the work put in by Mrs Gnther and , of course , I approve her report .
Mr President , the instruments the European Union is setting up for cooperation with the new democratic South Africa are of two-fold strategic significance .
Firstly , because South Africa is an African country that has actually experienced , and is still living , the drama of under-development .
A considerable proportion of the black population is living in terrible socio-economic conditions , has difficult and sometimes nonexistent access to basic services and is concentrated in suburban areas with very high unemployment and crime rates .
Secondly , because South Africa is nonetheless the continent 's strongest economic unit and is in a position to serve as a driving force for development in neighbouring countries and , more generally , throughout Africa .
This role is , of course , an important one as regards its positive impact on political stability .
The European Programme for Reconstruction and Development , like the special programme before it , is , together with the trade agreements currently being negotiated and South Africa 's accession to some parts of the Lom Convention , the basic instrument for cooperation with South Africa .
The legal basis we are discussing is obviously broad enough to include interventions of various kinds .
But two basic requirements must be met during the operational phase .
The first concerns the need to continue to involve not only the South African Government and authorities but all the possible agents of development , that is , non-governmental organizations , local authorities , grassroots associations and even European non-governmental organizations , because of the important contribution they can make , both on the technical side and in terms of partnership .
The second is that , in contrast with what has happened in the past , management of the programme must be marked by maximum publicity and transparency , which means that , as our amendments propose , there is a need to reinforce the European Parliament 's democratic control of the programme .
Finally , I should like to thank Mrs Gnther for her exceptional work .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
Respect for human rights in the European Union in 1994
The next item is the report ( A4-0223 / 96 ) by Mr De Esteban Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on respect for human rights on the European Union in 1994 .
Given the short amount of time left for the debate on respect for human rights I should like , as rapporteur , to hear from Members about how to proceed on this report .
Do you have any proposal to make ?
I would prefer first to hear from the political groups .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as I can see , we have twelve minutes left to debate this very important report .
We could then continue the debate this afternoon , and possibly vote this evening .
Another variant I have just heard mentioned would be not to have a debate , only a vote .
It is out of the question that we should only vote on such an important report without previously debating it .
Now I know that the secretariat has great problems with the agenda .
We lost half an hour of our time this morning because of a completely pointless debate , and that again encroaches on the quality of the work we should be doing here .
We really should spare ourselves the kind of rubbish we had to listen to this morning .
It is an impossible situation when we are put under such pressure of time to discuss a problem that has been under lengthy discussion between the groups in this House , a process extending back over a period of several months , including three committee meetings , and when this problem should now be driven through the House at such breakneck speed .
I therefore officially request , on behalf of our group , that the debate and vote be deferred to the September part-session in Brussels .
I know that will give rise to difficulties , but the groups must decide amongst themselves what priority is to be assigned to the human rights report .
Another topic may simply have to give way .
There is a proposal for referral to committee .
Does anyone wish to speak in favour ?
Mrs Roth .
Mr President , I wish to support the request of the previous speaker from the Socialist Group because I think that the subject of human rights , especially human rights in the European Union , which is covered by Mrs Laura De Esteban Martin 's report , is of great importance to this House , also that it has great relevance to our own credibility .
Having experienced a fair amount of agitation over this issue in the past , this House should not now fail to attribute the required degree of importance to such a report , even if only for the sake of form .
It would be completely unacceptable if Mrs De Esteban Martin were to start the debate in the quarter of an hour now remaining , followed quickly by a contribution from a PSE spokesman , and the debate were then to be suspended in order to be continued this evening just before the summer recess ; we would end up voting on it tomorrow , perhaps with many fewer Members present .
I do not think that would do any justice at all to this subject : the world looks not only at how the European Parliament deals with human rights in Iran , Turkey and elsewhere , but also at how we handle what happens in our own Union .
For that reason , I request that this debate be adjourned to the Brussels part-session .
But I appeal to you , Mr President , when we meet in September , let us not debate this matter at midnight , but after Question Time with the Commission ; in other words it should be given a prominent position on the agenda .
Thank you very much , Mrs Roth .
Since nobody has spoken against , I put the request for referral to committee to the vote .
( Parliament decided to refer the matter back to the committee responsible )
Mr President , if I may take up your time once again , I am glad we have adjourned this report .
But I appeal to colleagues from all groups to exert their influence on the Bureau in order to ensure that the matter is not simply tacked on to the end of the agenda in Brussels , but that the report can be debated at a prominent stage in the proceedings .
I consider that to be very important .
Also , Mr President , I ask that this be recorded in the minutes and that you take the matter up with the Bureau .
Mr President , I think it would be quite all right to start the debate now .
Reconstruction aid to former Yugoslavia
The next item is the report ( A4-0247 / 96 ) by Mr Cars , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation relating to aid for Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( COM ( 96 ) 123-8256 / 96 - C4-0333 / 96-96 / 0096 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , the report by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy on which Parliament is now to adopt a position concerns the rules which should govern the disbursement of EU resources for the reconstruction of the former Yugoslavia - just that , nothing more and nothing less .
Our starting point is the Council of Ministers ' preliminary decision on the issue .
This in turn is based on a proposal from the Commission .
In accordance with the Union 's decision-making procedures the Council should , before reaching a final decision on issues such as this , seek the views of Parliament .
It is surely good for us in Parliament to be reminded of the fact that ultimately it is the Council alone that takes the decisions .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs ' proposal contains some valuable ideas , including those on the political conditions for EU aid , on the option of withdrawing aid if the recipients cease to meet the conditions , and on a whole range of issues for which I , as rapporteur , would not be so bold as to take the credit .
It would almost be true to say that many of the amendments which were approved in the Committee on Foreign Affairs are more the result of the knowledge and the willingness of certain well-known and prominent members of the committee to improve on even the smallest details .
Please permit me also to express my appreciation of the efforts made by the others who worked on the report with me and by the committee they represent .
Nevertheless , Mr President , it is one issue and one issue alone which really dominates the present report .
I know that what I am now saying has the support both of the people who worked on the report with me and of a broad majority of the committee .
It is a matter of which countries should be given the right and the opportunity to submit tenders and obtain contracts as part of the current aid programme .
Let me remind you that for the years 1996-1999 this amounts to ECU 400 million , a far from insignificant sum .
At the suggestion of the Commission the Council of Ministers ' preliminary decision was that only companies and organisations in EU Member States and from countries in the former Yugoslavia should have the right to submit tenders .
Following a proposal made by myself and the others who worked on the report with me the Committee on Foreign Affairs would like to extend this right to include the PHARE countries as well , that is to say those countries of Central and Eastern Europe which have concluded Europe Agreements with the EU and which are now seeking membership .
There are three strong reasons for this proposal .
Firstly , tenders could come from PHARE countries which would make it possible to provide more assistance using EU funds for the reconstruction of the former Yugoslavia .
Secondly , companies and economic development in Central and Eastern Europe would receive a boost , and thirdly , some of the funds which the EU is now using for aid to the former Yugoslavia came out of resources which were originally intended for countries in Central and Eastern Europe .
I should stress that the Committee on Foreign Affairs attaches very considerable importance to this matter .
The Committee calls for a conciliation procedure to be opened with the Council of Ministers on its amendments .
However , the Committee has , at my suggestion , unanimously agreed that if the Council can accept what the Committee and Parliament propose concerning the PHARE countries there would be no further need for the conciliation procedure .
If , on the other hand , the Council is unable to agree with Parliament on this issue , it would be particularly appropriate for representatives of Parliament immediately to be informed of the Council 's reasons and to have the opportunity to discuss the matter with the Council .
All the amendments now being put before the House have already been tabled in committee , debated there and rejected .
I therefore propose that the House rejects the amendments and approves the proposals made by the Committee on Foreign Affairs and myself as rapporteur .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the way the European Union organizes its reconstruction aid to former Yugoslavia leaves much to be desired .
We have discussed this problem many times before , and it crops up again in the draft Regulation before us .
The Regulation seeks to provide the legal basis for rapid and effective aid .
Not only has it come rather late , when one considers that the money has been available in the budget since the beginning of this year and it has not been possible to spend it !
Worse still : this Regulation will make it difficult to provide really prompt and effective aid .
Anyone who wants to act meaningfully and effectively in aiding former Yugoslavia must seek cooperative and trustworthy partners at local and regional level .
For example , anyone wishing to help Mayor Radic of Banja Luka to hold out against Karadzic must find a way of supporting him directly .
That is something the Regulation does not make provision for , and it is a fundamental design fault that it gives precedence to an aid programme directed centrally and organized on a centralized basis .
The reasons for this can be traced back to the underlying policy .
The theory is apparently that this is the only way to make the political conditionality of the aid effective .
I have nothing against this conditionality .
It is an unavoidable necessity .
The only thing is that this approach overlooks the fact that the basic prerequisite is missing .
There are no central political structures and central administrations in operation .
It is to be hoped that such structures will ultimately be present , as a result of the reconstruction process . But they cannot and must not be made a prerequisite of reconstruction .
Hence conditionality must be applied in a meaningful way in Bosnia-Herzegovina , in particular on a local and regional basis .
For that reason , a high profile on the ground , in terms of the presence of Commission agents , is absolutely indispensable .
The Committee on Budgetary Control unanimously adopted a proposal to amend the Regulation on those lines .
Unfortunately , it did not attract majority support in the main reporting committee , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
My group has therefore reintroduced the amendments in question , and I appeal to you to support them .
The same applies to our amendment on the annex introduced by the Council , which will turn the Regulation into a complete monster of bureaucracy .
Instead , the Committee on Budgetary Control recommends that the rules of the Financial Regulation should apply without restriction where invitations to tender are concerned and should also be considered sufficient .
Thank you very much , Mr Wiersma .
The debate is suspended and will resume at 3 p.m.
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Votes
For reasons of which some of you will be aware , the approval of yesterday 's Minutes was postponed .
I therefore put them to the vote now .
( Parliament approved the Minutes of the previous sitting )
Madam President , given the importance of this subject I should like to make a few specifications about the Spanish version .
In paragraph 12.4 of the Spanish version there is a sentence missing from the beginning which in Spanish would come out more or less as ' toda actividad de investigacin sobre embriones humanos , as como la produccin ... ' .
I should also like to draw attention to the translation of Amendment No 21 which was originally drafted in German , for which the translations into Spanish and Italian , at least , are really quite strange and cannot be accepted .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , thank you for your intervention .
The same perhaps arises for other language versions , particularly for the Swedish version which also requires several corrections .
It should be made very clear that all the versions will be checked and brought into line with the original version , i.e. to the German version .
After the vote on Amendment No 32 :
I should like to say , Madam President , that my machine is not functioning and that I wish to vote for .
Mrs Poisson , that was only an electronic check and most fortunately has no effect on the vote .
Having said that , I would be obliged to you if you would let me know immediately when the machines are not working before I declare the vote closed .
Madam President , I think that Mrs Poisson 's remark , if you will allow me to say so , poses a more general technical problem .
We are seated in a semicircle and no President , given the normal arrangement of the eyes in the human anatomy , can scan the whole of our Assembly .
This poses an often irritating problem , namely , that requests to speak on points of order , coming mainly from the right of the Assembly , escape the attention of the President .
In order to overcome this problem , our national parliament , which you know very well Madam President , has provided an official on each side of the President whose function is to observe requests for the floor .
I believe it would be extremely useful to proceed in this way in this Assembly .
I do not understand why colleagues are trying to interrupt me .
There is nothing extraordinary in wishing to defend the rights of the minority .
Mr Gollnisch , I can tell you that the President takes great care to look carefully in all directions .
The best proof of this is that I have just called on you to speak .
Madam President , I am very pleased to propose this oral amendment but have to make it clear that it concerns more particularly Amendment No 11 from the Liberal Group .
The principle of the oral amendment is that any research on the embryo must be forbidden unless its aim is to help the embryos development .
And , since I heard just now another oral amendment which must have been submitted to you the words ' and it is forbidden to destroy the embryo ' could be added .
Thus , the oral amendment becomes : ' research on the embryo is forbidden unless it allows the later development of the embryo ' , which is logical from the time when only three implanted embryos are authorized .
And there should also be added : ' destruction of the embryo is forbidden ' .
Mr Pompidou , let us take one thing at a time .
You are proposing an oral amendment which in reality applies to all the amendments and to the whole paragraph .
I think , ladies and gentlemen , that it is preferable for me to ask you if there are any objections to this oral amendment being considered .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
Madam President , as this is a fundamental question which concerns the conscience of each individual , my group has decided that everyone should vote as he thinks fit .
Very well , Mrs Gebhardt , it is true that this is an important problem and we are all voting according to our consciences .
Madam President , our main concern through this report and through this vote was , once more , to make it clear to the Commission that we will not accept further cuts in spending on development .
We see from the supplementary and amending budget that the agreements we reached with the Commission are simply not being applied .
We have reinstated the budget lines which had been deleted - women and the Third World , environment and the Third World .
We had agreed with the Commission that further posts should be filled in DG VIII and that the money for these posts , on which we cannot take a decision , should be used by the Commission for DG VIII , so that NGO projects , which at present cannot be implemented because of lack of staff , can go ahead .
We have to note that these posts have not been created .
On the contrary , in the next financial year these very posts are to be transferred to DG I. I think that these arrangements must be queried once again in the supplementary and amending budget procedure .
They conflict with what Parliament has discussed with the Commission .
This whole process suggests that we are being drawn into something we prevented last year : the Commission is cutting back on funds for development policy in order to promote what I would call a militarized foreign policy .
Our group does not want that , the Committee on Development and Cooperation does not want that and I personally was opposed to it . I have therefore cast my vote accordingly .
Brinkhorst report
Madam President , I voted against Mr Brinkhorst 's report because in reality it seeks yet again to call in question the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
Contrary to what has been said , both by the Committee on Budgets and in this Assembly , the decision of the Court of Justice does not mean that the Council is obliged to come to a decision and to reach agreement with Parliament about this classification .
By creating a EAGGF reserve of close to ECU 1.4 billion , the rapporteur 's real aim this year was in reality to allow the redistribution of unspent appropriations to programmes qualifying for non-compulsory expenditure .
Now , the wish of the Council of Ministers , which is to cancel these unspent appropriations , should be supported at a time when considerable sacrifices are demanded of Member States - ECU 1 billion refunds for the all 15 Member States , a billion francs for France for example - should be supported , I repeat , in order to play a part in the overall effort to reduce public expenditure .
Mr Brinkhorst 's report has unfortunately the same objectives as Mr Wynn 's report last year .

Its technical objective is simple : rapporteur Brinkhorst wishes to create a reserve from the unused funds of the EAGGF ( Guarantee Section ) .
This is a disguised transfer of compulsory expenditure to non-compulsory expenditure , in spite of the opinion of the Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
Politically , the consequences of creating this reserve are disastrous for agriculture and fisheries .
In effect , the European Parliament wishes to be the decision-maker for part of the budgetary funds of these two sectors , accounting for more than 50 % of Union expenditure .
We all know that agriculture now represents no more than 5 % of the electorate in the Union .
As a result , Members of Parliament will tend to favour interests other than those of agriculture .
We have to insist here , to all Members present , that agriculture has always been a pillar of Europe .
Of course , the Common Agricultural Policy is not exempt from criticism .
Far from it !
But would no agricultural policy at all be any better ?
We do not think so .
Rather than take away agricultural funds to the advantage of other policies , it is absolutely necessary to use all available Community funds and to use them to best purpose , so that the European Union can continue to be a major world agricultural power and at the same time preserve the unity of its rural communities .
The balance of our society is at stake .
Like the rest of my group , I voted against the whole of Mr Brinkhorst 's report because it follows the deviant line that part of Parliament is seeking to impose and that we denounce : a deviant line whereby more and more compulsory expenditure is slipped into the category of non-compulsory expenditure and the distribution of powers laid down by the Treaties is surreptitiously changed .
After all , it is not up to Parliament to replace the Council in deciding the allocation of agricultural and fishery budgets .
The composition of the European Parliament is such that farmers and fishermen are under-represented in it , whereas the importance of these social categories in terms of direct and indirect employment , economic production , social equilibrium , national and regional development and preservation of the countryside , is absolutely decisive for some of our countries .
There is thus a great risk that the majority of Members of the European Parliament will give priority to interests other than those of the rural and coastal communities .
I have a second reason for firmly rejecting the principle of creating a reserve : this is a proposal based on preliminary documents whose data are completely arbitrary : they do not , and cannot , take into account uncertainties in the weather , variations in world currencies and the results of free trade agreements .
Kittelmann report
As we voted against the establishment of a customs union between the EU and Turkey we have , for the sake of consistency , abstained from voting on this report .
We see no reason to reverse our decision since we can see that political prisoners still exist in Turkey and that the torture of political prisoners continues there .
The establishment of the customs union has unfortunately not moved Turkey to cease its violations of human rights .
The EU should impress upon Turkey that it is bound to carry out the pledges it made concerning democracy , human rights , freedom of expression and the release of political prisoners , in response to the requirements set by the EU in connection with the approval of the customs union with Turkey .
I voted against the customs union in order to have some leverage in negotiations with Turkey on the issue of human rights .
The conditions imposed on Turkey by the European Parliament when it voted for the customs union on 12 December 1995 must now be met .
The conditions imposed on Turkey by the EU in connection with the customs union have not been fulfilled . I have therefore voted against the report .
The Green Group in the European Parliament voted against Mr Kittelmann 's report , not because we are against the amendments to the Commission text proposed by the rapporteur , but because we are more than ever opposed to a Customs Union with Turkey .
Technically the amendments , which the Committee on External Economic Relations also approved in its opinion , are perfectly sensible , if we do not wish to leave the Commission and the Council free to take autocratic decisions on the Joint Committee , but seek to ensure a minimum degree of control by the European Parliament .
But these proposals for technical improvements , which make sense within the framework stated , do not alter anything of substance in the politically wrong premise of this Customs Union .
The last time this House voted on the Customs Union - seven months ago , in the middle of December last year - is still fresh in my memory .
The chorus of voices from almost all political groups , including the Social Democrats , was in favour of the Customs Union , because it was the only way to support the iller Government in the elections and to prevent Turkey from sliding into Islamic fundamentalism .
Today the Islamists there are in the government - and Mrs iller has smoothed the path for them into it .
Even before the passing of power to the Islamists , Turkey was a police state with some of the distinguishing marks of a military dictatorship .
Now it is becoming a religious dictatorship as well .
A further factor of oppression has been added , but it is apparently not thought that that will have any consequences .
I was in Istanbul myself from 1 to 3 June , with a delegation of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the occasion of the HABITAT II Conference .
We wanted to shield the Human Rights Association , which seeks to highlight the brutal repression of the autonomy movement in Kurdistan , by our presence and support it publicly .
Even as parliamentarians , we were constantly spied upon and harassed in Istanbul .
Claudia Roth was questioned by the police for over an hour after she had held a press conference .
One group worker was detained for over an hour because she had distributed information about our events at the NGO Forum .
There must be no customs union with a state which does not respect even the most basic rights , such as freedom of opinion , and which wages a dirty war against part of its own population , against a whole region .
The European Parliament should therefore take no further steps in the wrong direction and wait until democracy and peace have returned to Turkey , before taking any decisions that will give effect to the Customs Union .
Pelttari report
Madam President , its failure to adopt the Pelttari report brings shame on the European Parliament .
This is a black day for Parliament .
The fact that the House has failed to address a question of such importance as the draft Bioethics Convention is a disgrace .
The draft Bioethics Convention , as originally conceived by the steering committee , meant a relativization of human rights .
It rightly unleashed a wave of revulsion in the Member States .
It is a sign of moral destitution that we did not take a stand on a convention under which , for example , research on persons incapable of consent would continue to be allowed .
For this opens the way to the circumvention of human rights .
There are also no clear provisions in the draft Bioethics Convention to prohibit research on genetic determinism .
This leaves the door wide open to the breeding of laboratory human beings .
Also , the draft Bioethics Convention allows scope for disposable embryo research by the back door .
Of course , it is only to be permitted when adequate safeguards are provided .
This does not go beyond vague assurances , however , since the draft convention says absolutely nothing about the form these safeguards would take .
The Pelttari report would have been a chance to send a very clear signal to the parliamentary assembly and to the Council of Europe , saying that this draft convention must be rejected .
By failing to adopt the report , we have unfortunately thrown away this chance .
We could have made it clear through our resolution that we intend to oppose the devaluing of human rights , for established human rights must not be called into question .
The draft Bioethics Convention , on the other hand , does not safeguard human rights ; on the contrary , it positively legitimizes their devaluation .
Hence I think it is a scandal , a sign of moral destitution and a disgrace to the European Parliament that we have failed to adopt this excellent report , which would have sent a clear signal for the rejection of the convention .
Madam President , it is a great pity that Parliament has not adopted the Pelttari report , which expressed reservations about this draft convention , so very dangerous in its present state .
There are undoubtedly some excellent principles to be found in this draft convention , but it refers the most important questions to protocols whose ultimate contents are not known to us and which arouse the deepest concern , particularly as regards the consent of incapacitated people .
Parliament had expressed reservations , which the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights supported , and it is a great pity that , when we voted , we did not endorse these reservations in order to protect the consent of incapacitated people .
Similarly , in the case of the protection of embryos , the question is again referred to the protocol .
So what will the CDBI , the body responsible for drawing up the protocol , do ?
We do not know .
I associate myself with what is said in items 3 , 4 and 5 of paragraph 12 : these should be used as guidelines in drafting the protocol , failing which there would effectively be a real violation of human rights in a matter of the greatest importance .
In the case of artificial insemination , the Pelttari report emphasizes a very important point : only embryos for implantation should be generated , otherwise it will really be a matter of the freezing , or frozen preservation of human beings , of actual experimentation , even though we know that , for mice themselves on which experiments are carried out , there are after-effects and problems resulting from the freezing .
As for the genome , here again it is not possible for a few human beings , be they experts or scientists , to have the outrageous power to intervene with the germ line , thereby calling into question the very future of the human species .
As regards action on genes concerning organs , we are in total agreement but , for genes involved in the transmission to descendants , it is unacceptable that any human being whatsoever should have the power to act .
This is exploitation of human by human and is much more serious than economic , social or any other type of exploitation .
In conclusion , I should like to say that , here , it is really a question of civilization , of basic human values , on which the European Parliament , like the Council of Europe , has a duty to take a stand .
We should not err by doing nothing .
Science and our consciences are at one on this issue : the Pelttari report made it possible to honour both .
As a result , I am expressing great regret and great sorrow on behalf of my group .
As politicians we have a responsibility to pose the questions and to suggest answers but the implications of human gene technology reach into every corner of people 's private lives .
These are not matters which the European Parliament or the Council of Europe can simply pronounce upon from on high .
They are matters which require the consent of society .
The report calls for the widest possible public debate and participation in order to form a consensus .
This debate should take place before , not after , we produce a statement of what is right and what is wrong .
The debate has shown that the issues go to the core of the way society chooses to view itself and the conflict which this technology introduces .
Reproductive rights , abortion , genetic testing , embryo research , gene therapies , genetic privacy , the rights of incapacitated people - all these and more are delicate and sensitive questions .
We will be offered simplistic solutions to problems that we may not even know we had .
Genetic determinism - the concept that everything about our physical and mental make-up can be identified by reference to our DNA - is a most dangerous road .
We will be under pressure to use the technology to ' normalize ' humankind by selecting only those characteristics and traits which reflect some ' ideal ' notion of humanity .
We risk creating a ' monoculture of humankind ' .
It is unacceptable to trade in human embryos or to create embryos for research .
Research on human beings without their consent must only be carried out for their direct benefit .
The rejection of this report by Parliament is shameful .
The use of biology , biotechnology and medicine and research in these fields confronts us human beings with some difficult ethical questions .
In biotechnology developments are proceeding extremely quickly and it is a field which is so complex and advanced that there is no public debate on the subject - dialogue and debate remain the exclusive preserve of researchers ( who often disagree ) .
If we are to have a broad public debate - and this is essential in respect of an issue as crucial for humankind as genetic engineering - more time will be needed - a moratorium , especially as regards applied research in genetic engineering .
The precautionary principle - concern for future generations - must weigh more heavily than the rapid development of genetic engineering .
Biotechnology is one of the fastest growing industrial areas in Europe .
It also gives rise to difficult ethical problems .
What , for example , happens to those human embryos which are ' left over ' from artificial fertilization ?
Is it permissible to use them for research purposes ?
Or can the genome be changed by any specific gene ?
How far dare we or should we go in genetic testing ?
Under the Council of Europe 's draft declaration , the parties are supposed to protect the dignity and identity of the human being and guarantee a right of self-determination for all in the areas of biology and medicine .
However , immediately afterwards , the declaration states confusingly that the welfare of the individual should be paramount alongside the exclusive interests of society and science .
How can these two be placed side by side in the same sentence ?
Does this mean that if the results of research are of great importance , greater risks can be taken in carrying it out ?
The articles of the declaration also take up a position on consent procedure .
The individual should give his or her free consent to experiments .
However , there are people who do not have sufficient mental or physical capacity to understand the experiments .
There is also a problem that it is in any case not healthy always to understand what the doctor is saying .
The Green Group voted in favour of the report because it is important that we now take up a clear critical position towards this international agreement .
Nevertheless , Mr Pelttari 's report could have taken up a much firmer position .
For example , the lack of any reference to genome research is dangerous .
There is a need for agreement and a bioethical guideline to prevent us from creating human beings as uniform , functional monsters , in the same way as we do with animals , such as the bundle of muscle in Belgium vaguely reminiscent of a cow , barely holding up a mass of beef on wobbling legs .
We need a public debate on bioethics now .
I am voting for the report , which deals with very important ethical issues surrounding an area of research which is expanding extremely rapidly .
If the new technology concerned is not to escape from our control it is now high time that a proper , strict framework was established for the conduct of the research involved .
Research involving embryos in particular is an area where ethics and not technology must determine the limits .
It is also totally unacceptable that genetic screening should be carried out in order to produce offspring with ' desirable ' aptitudes .
Undoubtedly genetic engineering can help people with serious , at present incurable illnesses , but to modify human beings ' genetic make-up for other reasons is completely reprehensible and risks undermining the principle that all people are of equal worth .
The precautionary principle should obviously be applied in the genetic engineering field .
Finally , I should like to stress that the debate on bioethics which concerns so many people must be conducted openly and with the involvement of the public at large , so as to ensure that any committee of experts which may be established does not drift away from generally accepted ethical principles .
There was a time when people were the masters of technology and when the needs of mankind controlled the development of technology and research .
Today , in 1996 , the situation is often reversed .
Technology and research lead a life of their own - often irrespective of whether any real need has been established .
Research into genetic engineering is one example of this .
It is also a cautionary example of a ' development ' , the consequences and risks of which we today have no way of knowing .
Perhaps our children and grandchildren will have every right to curse us in the future .
In the current situation a moratorium would be the best way of creating the time and space for a broad , public debate , before any further decisions are taken .
The Pelttari report was an attempt , in the present situation , to curb and gain tighter control over developments and I therefore voted for it .
It is extremely regrettable that the report did not receive the support of Parliament .
The subject on which the European Parliament has to vote today is a very delicate one that has , in various ways and at various times , stirred the imagination and , of course , also the conscience of many scientists , artists , philosophers and writers .
The story of Faust and his pact with the devil , the tale of Frankenstein , the wizard 's apprentice , and the film ' Blade Runner ' all come to mind as just a few of the more outstanding examples .
And a passage of the Bible also comes to mind : ' Be fruitful , and multiply , and replenish the earth , and subdue it ; have dominion over the fish of the sea , and over the fowl of the air , and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth ' .
Of course , new experimental techniques based on a deeper knowledge of the qualities and weaknesses of our genes and those of other animals open new and enticing horizons for medical research .
But they also allow the possibility of aberrant developments that are a threat to humanity and the entire earth and are difficult to control .
For this reason , I welcome any attempt to establish a code of conduct in the field of bioethics .
And the Greens have , in committee , made a practical contribution to adjusting the sights .
More specifically , we believe :
that the production of human embryos should be absolutely prohibited on all grounds and not just for research purposes ; -incapacitated people must be guaranteed protection against all forms of exploitation ; -as regards antenatal treatment , women must have the ultimate and sole right to decide ; -the intimate genetic make-up of each individual must be rigorously respected.Hopefully , the Bioethics Convention will help ensure that the ' gothic ' fantasies I mentioned earlier remain nothing more than powerful literary inventions .
It is because of our knowledge of history that the establishment of rules for bioethics is still a problem for society at the close of the millennium , and a most passionate problem , because it touches the unconscious roots of life and death and , especially , the view that human beings have of themselves .
The future path of human gene technology is full of ethical and practical problems .
In the next few years we will have almost complete technical knowledge of the make-up of the human genome , but we will probably still not have an understanding of the complex interactions of the human mind and body or of the inter-relationship between people and their living environment .
The debate has shown that the issues go to the core of the way society chooses to view itself and the conflicts which this technology introduces .
Reproductive rights , abortion , genetic testing , embryo research , gene therapies , genetic privacy , the rights of incapacitated people - all these and more are delicate and sensitive questions .
We will be offered simplistic solutions to problems that we may not even know we had .
Genetic determinism - the concept that everything about our physical and mental make-up can be identified by reference to our DNA - is a most dangerous road .
We will be under pressure to use the technology to ' normalize ' humankind by selecting only those characteristics and traits which reflect some ideal notion of humanity .
We risk creating a ' monoculture of mankind ' .
It is a feature of our obsession with technical progress that if we have information and new techniques , we must use them .
It is true that we cannot unlearn knowledge , but in a mature society it would be good to think that we can exercise a high degree of responsible choice over what we do with it .
Put simply , even if we can do something , should we ?
As politicians we have a responsibility to pose the questions and to suggest answers but the implications of human gene technology reach into every corner of people 's private lives .
These are not matters which the European Parliament or the Council of Europe can simply pronounce upon from on high .
They are matters which require the consent of society .
The report calls for the widest possible public debate and participation in order to form a consensus .
This debate should take place before , not after , we produce a statement of what is right and what is wrong .
I believe that we have only just begin to scratch these issues and although this report defines some of the ground , it is a long way from producing an ethical and philosophical framework which will guide us into the next century .
For all these reasons , it was of paramount importance for the European Parliament to take up a position on this subject - even though I was not unreservedly happy with every point in the report .
The disappointment at the fact that , once again , we stand without a voice before a subject on which we should have been heard loud and clear is consequently great .
And I do not understand the reasons why those colleagues , particularly from the ranks of the PSE , who voted against it , have denied this House a critical standpoint on the draft Bioethics Convention of the Council of Europe .
As a result , the convention has gained validity , and the painstaking detailed work to improve it has suffered a grave setback .
Despite this , that work will continue .
I should like to express my vote in favour of the Pelttari report on the draft Bioethics Convention , or rather , on ' human rights , biology and medicine ' , and stress the need for further clarifications and significant amendments to the draft text .
In particular , I should like to stress the need to guarantee the free , conscious and sufficiently informed agreement of any person undergoing medical intervention , especially in the case of biomedical experimentation .
And more especially , when the intention is to treat an incapacitated person who cannot give that agreement , intervention is acceptable only if it is advantageous to the person directly concerned and only if due agreement is given by that person 's legal guardian .
It is also essential to emphasize that human experiments must never be performed in return for payment , because any commercialization of the human body is inadmissible ; and the same should apply to donations of organs and tissue .
Experiments on embryos should perhaps be banned , and the production of embryos for experiments should certainly be banned .
The only acceptable experiments are those whose objective is to protect the health of either the unborn child or the mother or both , without prejudice to the woman 's right to decide .
No intervention should have the purpose of eugenic selection or manipulation .
And finally , no experiment should affect the genetic line , with altered characteristics being passed on to later generations .
For these reasons , the draft convention will need to be amended .
This means that the Pelttari report needs to be supported as a way of keeping open the debate on these issues , whose importance for the future of humanity means that we must not make any vague or hasty decisions .
The discoveries and perspectives laid open by scientific developments and their applications create an urgent social need to protect human rights and dignity .
This necessity applies particularly to scientific achievements in the field of biotechnology , especially in the field of genetics , which on the one hand offer vast possibilities in the area of health for the prevention and treatment of disease , but which at the same time harbour significant dangers of deviating from the true mission of medicine and science , with incalculable consequences for the future of mankind itself .
Interventions in the genetic code aiming to develop selected properties for the creation of individuals and populations suitable for particular uses and services can be described as a form of eugenics and create huge issues of deviation from mankind 's destiny , with unforeseen results for the future of humanity , since the results of scientific experience so far are not enough to be considered trustworthy in relation to the compatibility of genetically modified organisms with the environment .
It is of particular concern to us that a subject such as this , with extremely serious consequences and ethical dimensions , is mainly approached from the standpoint of economics and commerce .
Biotechnological products are used not solely on the basis of scientific criteria , but also to serve the need for movement of the available capital and to make profits .
Biotechnological development is already taking place in major centres of large economic potential where the participation of specialist scientists determining in the final utilization of discoveries is not always definitive .
The procedures and legal framework are formulated on the basis of business criteria and are essentially concerned only with the multiplication of economic activities , the creation of a market and the securing of competitive investments .
We think it is essential that in parallel with biotechnology , branches of research should be developed and supported to assess and study the probable risks associated with biotechnological and genetic discoveries in relation to man and the environment . Detailed studies should be carried out and ethical rules formulated , which govern both research and applications in the field of biotechnology , and regulatory orders should be established within the scope of a legal framework that will protect humanity against unreasoned and improper use of the results of biotechnology and genetic engineering .
The European Union is a moral entity with heavy responsibilities to its own citizens and the citizens of other countries , both those countries which have applied to join the European Union and other regions of the world , which look towards it .
Given that the respect of the human being lies at the very heart of the democratic spirit of the West it is unjustifiable that we should continue with a situation whereby the European Union is not a party to the European Convention on Human Rights or the Bioethics Convention .
Laws and treaties exist to serve people and not the contrary .
If the Treaty does not allow for accession then the Treaty should be changed and this is the moment to do so .
What is important is that we should not continue to put on for the world the sad spectacle where the Union is very swift to defend its interests but very slow to defend its principles .
The vote against by the European Parliament , given that this text is unsatisfactory , should not be confused with our duty to make an active contribution to the regulation of a vital matter for European research in the coming years .
Many a colleague , particularly from the south of the EU , will find it unenlightened to argue in terms of categories such as respect for creation , the humanum , and the like when discussing this question .
I on the other hand - after the emergence of the ecological paradigm - consider it to be quite the opposite : a central category of an enlightenment , which also strives for enlightenment about itself and which , in respect of the dangers and risks incurred by it , can no longer rely on a metaphysical belief in future technological problem-solving .
Rather it is important , here and now , to furnish sufficient proof that illimitable risks can be positively excluded - instead of being somehow concealed within the ill-defined category of the residual risk .
The core of responsible scientific rationality lies precisely in this conscious and responsible acceptance of the burden of proof - not in taking comfort in some blind faith that future technical advances will be able to solve all problems !
Caudron report
The dramatic situation in the steelmaking sector , which was in the past one of the cornerstones of the development of Europe 's economy , cannot be doubted .
During the past twenty years over 500 , 000 jobs have been lost in the branch , and thousands of enterprises have closed down .
In my country , just recently , within the scope of a new and broad restructuring , the largest firm in the branch announced the closure of two departments and the redundancy of 250 workers , with the result that those still employed number only 500 , compared with 3 , 000 before the successive restructurings that have taken place .
There are also fears that the company may close down entirely .
What is the attitude of the EU towards this situation ?
In this sector too , the EU is pursuing a policy of non-support and essentially contributing to the dissolution of the branch , to the benefit of major monopolistic interests in third countries .
On the other hand , it forbids Member States to adopt a branch policy .
Within the framework of the policy on State support , it makes approval of such support depend on the adoption of restructuring programmes whose basic aim is to reduce further the productive capacity and to bring about drastic cuts in jobs .
At the same time , it adopts no measures to deal with the problem of uncontrolled steel imports from third countries that are implementing dumping policies , with the result that situations of unfair competition are created to the cost of Community production .
Action to deal with existing serious problems , such as the development of productivity and competitiveness , cannot be used as an excuse to do away with any notion of protection for working people , or to justify widespread recourse to part-time working or subcontracting .
Experience shows that restructuring which does not take into account the rights of working people , can have no substantive results .
The EU must adopt direct measures to deal with the problem of mass imports of steelmaking products in the branch from countries that implement dumping practices , either by concluding related agreements or by applying the defensive measures recognised in the context of international trade exchanges .
It must make use of the possibilities existing at an international level to develop exports , mainly to the developing countries .
It must adopt measures to support investment in the branch , mainly in sectors related to the production of new products , and measures to encourage demand for Community steel products , mainly in sectors such as building and public works .
The stubborn continuation of practices and choices condemned by experience can only result in an exacerbation of the crisis and in the withering of one of industry 's most dynamic branches .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Caudron , that a restructuring of the steel industry is necessary , inter alia in order to solve environmental problems and the social dumping and unemployment which accompany industrial decline .
However , it is my opinion that it is up to each Member State itself to judge and decide whether it wishes to support its steel industry or not .
Member States must be able to draw the dividing lines as regards social , regional and / or production support .
Fernndez-Albor report
Madam President , I was forced to abstain , although in my opinion the basic premise of the report is correct .
The European Union 's power to act in the areas of foreign and security policy must be reinforced , as the sad example of Bosnia shows .
However , the report suffers from two failings : firstly , it does not admit NATO 's position as the cornerstone of Europe 's security structure .
It is rather remarkable that the report on the CSFP does not mention NATO at all .
It is distant from reality , particularly since I-For and the CJTF are such important parts of the European security structure and since France has returned or is returning to the administrative structures of NATO .
Secondly , the report does not make sufficiently clear the importance of neutrality as a part of Europe 's developing security system .
Neutrality is not necessarily an ancient dogma carved on stone tablets , but in the current situation it is a positive element in the stability of Europe , particularly northern Europe .
From this point of view the report also contradicts Mrs Maij-Weggen 's report on which we voted when we discussed the Intergovernmental Conference .
Madam President , we Austrian Social Democrats are very pleased finally to have been able to vote for this report because , after the adoption of amendments , a security policy perspective which in our opinion is dangerous , risky and , more especially , unacceptable to our country no longer represents the opinion of this House .
We are not in favour of the continuation of the Cold War by other means ; we favour a new start in security policy free of preconceptions .
This new start must not lead us into military blocs bristling with weapons , but only to a new kind of common security system for Europe .
This text now explicitly recognizes that we can learn from different forms of security policy experience , especially that of the neutral states , and that has enabled us to vote for this report .
Madam President , the Austrian Social Democrats are convinced that the solution of the security problems Europe undoubtedly has can only be reliably sought in the doubtless difficult creation of a pan-European security system .
Such a system , in particular , must not regard Russia as an adversary but as a partner , and it must be applicable to Europe in the geographic sense .
Such a system will be capable of achieving what , in the view of all the experts , simply extending the existing military blocs and tying them in with the common foreign and security policy will certainly not bring about , namely the creation of greater security for Europe .
A European military bloc extending to the Russian border , on the other hand , will mean less , not more security for this continent .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fundamental question we must ask ourselves is : what kind of Europe have we in mind for the future ?
Is it a Europe vying for the possession of nuclear weapons , which regards the countries surrounding it as dangerous foes and deals with them accordingly ?
Is it a Europe that behaves as though the Cold War had never ended and now rejoices in the fact that the line of defence against the ' enemy ' has receded a little ?
Or is it a Union functioning as the strong core of a comprehensive European security system and pursuing an effective common foreign policy which regards neighbouring states , not as hostile powers , but as security policy partners ?
This is the only security policy concept that we Austrian Social Democrats can consider - not least on the basis of the experience we have had with our nationality policy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Austria has a good and successful tradition of neutrality .
We Social Democrats have never regarded neutrality as a strategy of remaining aloof from developments , but as a political duty to act even in difficult conflict situations on the basis of a commitment to peace without loss of independence .
We also do not view our neutrality as constituting any barrier to active participation and initiative-taking in a common security policy of the Union and to honouring those obligations of solidarity that are incumbent on every Member of this Union .
We know only too well that the outline conditions of world politics within which our neutrality functions are different to what they were a decade ago .
But , to us , neutrality does not mean inflexibility , and I think we have demonstrated in our approach to the European conflicts of recent years that neutrality in the new circumstances is also capable of redefinition .
Madam President , the Austrian Social Democrats are convinced that the security policy experience gained by our country and its people from our neutrality stance has been positive , not only in historical terms .
This experience still has its value in present-day terms and , by dint of that updated value , is still able to determine our security policy .
We Austrian Social Democrats concede that other countries , like us , have gained security policy experience of their own , which they also consider positive and on which they intend to draw for future needs .
But it is just not the case that one security policy concept , namely NATO membership , has since 1989 more or less won the contest and the other , namely neutrality , has lost .
Europe must learn from both concepts , and I believe it will gain from that .
Madam President , it is already worrying enough that the Budget Office of the US Congress , in the event that NATO is enlarged to extend as far as the borders of Russia , estimates the additional costs arising up to the year 2010 at $ 18.9 billion for the USA , $ 54 billion for the existing NATO members in Europe and $ 51.8 billion for the new members in Eastern Europe .
It is even more worrying , however , when the Budget Office then notes that , even with this enormous cost burden of over $ 124 billion , effective military protection cannot be provided at all for the Baltic States , Romania and the Ukraine and only limited protection for the other Eastern Europe states .
Such an admission of the non-viability of a security policy concept of this kind must surely encourage us to seek alternative concepts .
We Austrian Social Democrats in the European Parliament regard this search for a new security policy concept for Europe as one of the main tasks of European politics .
Madam President , we Austrian Social Democrats want to see the European Parliament make an effective contribution to the search for a comprehensive , forward-looking security policy concept .
Today 's vote was a step in that direction .
By adopting the amendments of the Social Democratic Group , this House has turned aside from continuing the outworn concept of the Cold War .
We are happy that reference to a common nuclear deterrent could be removed from the report , that the report reflected not only the historical experience of NATO but also the positive historical experience of neutrality and that no one-sided emphasis was placed on military security .
We Austrian Social Democrats advocate a modern comprehensive security concept .
We will participate actively and in a spirit of solidarity to the further development of an effective common foreign and security policy in Europe , but on the basis of a comprehensive security policy .
We are pleased that our standpoint on the amendment of paragraph 21 was listened to .
This was crucial if we were to vote for the report as a whole .
On the other hand , it was a shame that our Amendment No 7 was not sympathetically received .
The proposal of course explained that security policy , including international relations , economic relations , trade , aid and cooperation with neighbouring countries , comprises much more and is much more important than defence policy .
A common security policy should be aimed at resolving conflicts rather than fighting them out militarily .
We should like once again to state that it is a common peace policy with a common system for the prevention of conflicts that we need in Europe .
Although the European Union may be an economic giant , it is regrettably a political dwarf on the world stage .
The reason for this contrast is quite simple .
We have a defective procedure for developing a cohesive and coherent common foreign and security policy .
This current procedure requires unanimity .
This means that one Member State can effectively ensure that no common policy is agreed .
The emphasis is therefore on the brake rather than the engine room .
The consequence has been that at times of international crisis the EU has been totally impotent .
Either we had a weak , ineffectual policy or no policy at all .
And to make matters worse Member States often spoke with different voices .
I hope that the IGC resolves this matter by agreeing on the introduction of qualified majority voting in the CFSP area to ensure that in fact we do have a policy and are able to implement it .
Eriksson and Sjstedt ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm , Lindholm and Schrling ( V ) , in writing .
( SV ) We have nothing against constructive civil intergovernmental cooperation between EU Member States where this is better able than other forms of foreign policy cooperation to foster peace , democracy and human rights in the rest of the world .
However , we cannot support the manifestly all-embracing objective of the Fernndez-Albor report which is evidently to establish the EU as an interventionist military superpower ( and a nuclear one at that ) which , using a modern variation on the gunboat diplomacy of the past , is intended to participate in a kind of competition for world domination .
We also oppose the ambition which is evident from this and from other reports to charge EU institutions with international responsibilities which are already vested in existing international organisations of which all the EU Member States are members , such as the UN , OSCE and the Council of Europe .
The Member States of the EU should instead work constructively within these bodies to make them better able to carry out their responsibilities .
We consider it obvious that the international peace system should be a comprehensive one , which is true in respect of the UN and OSCE ( within its field ) but can never be true of the EU .
An effective peace system for the over 50 states in Europe cannot be based on an EU with 15 Member States or for that matter on an EU enlarged , in accordance with current plans , to at most 27 Members .
We believe that it is a strength that the Member States of the EU can unanimously adopt common positions and decide on common measures .
Clear and unanimous action by the EU in favour of peace , reconciliation , conflict management , cooperation and support for sustainable development is a positive thing for Europe and the rest of the world .
We do not share the view of the majority that 1995 saw far too little progress on the common foreign and security policy .
That the EU 's 15 Member States agreed on 106 declarations , 13 common positions and 10 joint actions should be seen as a positive result of intergovernmental cooperation founded on the unanimous decision-making procedure .
The European Parliament 's decision in connection with the Fernndez-Albor report demonstrates a lack of respect for the non-aligned Member States .
The European Parliament should rather set great store by and respect the Member States ' different security policy choices .
We vehemently oppose turning the EU into a military alliance .
We believe that in the report the European Parliament is seriously over-interpreting the EU 's objective as regards the common foreign and security policy as laid down in Article J.4.
We consider that the plans to create a military alliance with mutual defence obligations within the framework of EU cooperation are completely the wrong way to go .
This is all the more evident as a result of France 's decision once again to participate fully in NATO cooperation .
The responsibility for issuing binding military security guarantees in respect of its member countries should rest with NATO in the future too .
We do not believe that a successful common foreign and security policy requires a common defence policy , let alone a common defence , in order to be successful .
On the contrary , the common foreign and security policy is strengthened by the different choices made by the Member States as regards security policy .
Lasting common security can only be established through cooperation between democratic states which is based on trust .
Common security in Europe can only be established in collaboration with a democratic Russia and with the USA .
The fora for cooperation where the USA , Russia and the other countries of Europe meet , such as the OSCE and the Partnership for Peace should therefore form the basis for the establishment of common security in our part of the world .
As the Fernndez-Albor report on progress on the common foreign and security policy approaches the subject from a perspective completely different to that we have described we voted against the report as a whole .
Abduction of children
The increasing number of abductions of the underaged is yet another of the many problems faced by children both in the European Union and in other countries .
Children are the citizens of our present and future society . No geographical boundaries can be placed on their prosperity .
Society has a long-term responsibility to extend , support and protect the rights of children . The development of activities related to the rights of children and to satisfying their needs must be a political priority .
The increase of sex tourism , the sale of organs for transplants , the development of pornography via electronic computers , the exchange of pornographic material with underage protagonists and in many cases the trade in children themselves for the purpose of sexual exploitation and brutalization by members of international networks , are issues of daily concern to twentieth century society .
The freedom of movement and establishment of working people between the Member States of the EU and the continually increasing flow of immigrants from third countries , have led to the birth of more and more children from parents of different nationalities .
In the event of divorce , existing national family laws are unable to solve issues relating to custody and the protection of children , and to the rights of children to maintain contact with the parent that has not undertaken custody , with the result that we often hear about the abduction of children by their own parents .
The UNO Convention on the rights of children , in common with the recent Conventions of the Hague and the Convention of the Council of Europe in Luxembourg on the abduction of children , have proved ineffectual .
Children are the first victims of armed conflict , economic recession and cuts in the economy .
Activities should concentrate on the prevention of difficult situations instead of trying to deal with the exceptional circumstances and problems that arise every time .
We must adopt all necessary measures to protect children particularly in former Yugoslavia , to avoid a repetition of the appalling trade in children that happened in Greece during and after the end of the Civil War when an entire network was organised for the abduction of children who were to be sold in America .
It should be our concern to cover the basic needs of children , to adopt all necessary initiatives at national , Community and international level for the promotion of harmonised policies to safeguard the rights of children , and to make available resources sufficient for the promotion and support of those policies , so that the rights of children will become a reality both in Europe and in the rest of the world .
The Danish social democrats support the idea of extending the Brussels Convention to include the area of family law .
We are not in favour of harmonizing the rules of family law , but we should agree on some fundamental matters , for example that cases should be dealt with where the child is living , so that the child is able to be heard .
Our starting-point should be that the interests of the child are taken into account as far as possible .
We should also ensure that cooperation agreements are established with third countries in this area .
I wish to explain my vote for this joint resolution because I think it is absolutely necessary to harmonize legislative procedures Community-wide on such a delicate subject as that of the abduction of children , as a result of the violation of custody in Member States .
Especially since this is the sector of the population whose rights are most vulnerable and who very often are totally dependent on court decisions which cannot always take account of all the circumstances surrounding a particular case , I insist on the need to give greater scope to this resolution , calling for the revision and extension of the legal instruments at our disposal and making them explicit in this resolution , such that they include extremes such as leaving the conjugal home or even the country of residence because of ill-treatment , harassment or discrimination , directed either against the child or children or the parent , and that special attention is paid to the causes behind each case of abduction so as to guarantee legal aid based on the respect of human rights , women 's rights and children 's rights .
The harmonization of these laws and rights must be the basis of all legal provisions for this purpose .
McCartin report
Madam President , I should first like to congratulate Mr McCartin , who has produced an excellent report on a subject which should be close to our hearts , not simply because it concerns 600 , 000 producers whose income is still falling , but because there has been great injustice to shepherds who are part of our identity - and I am not thinking simply about Giono , Alphonse Daudet , about transhumance , sheep tracks and causses - and who play a fundamental role in the balance of disadvantaged regions , whether it be in Larzac , la Mancha in Spain or Deux-Svres with goat rearing .
It is very unjust because we are short of sheep .
The French herd has fallen from 30 million head of sheep to 8 million head .
In France , we are only 50 % self-sufficient , and in the European Community only 80 % .
We import 250 , 000 tonnes against exports of 5000 tonnes , and we have created an anti-sheep mechanism !
When there are more than 63 million head of sheep , there is a stabilizing mechanism , there are penalties , and quotas .
Mr Debatisse even proposed fixing an electronic chip in the ear of every sheep to monitor them by satellite !
The European Community Court of Justice refused to consider that the wool from sheep was an agricultural product , which would at least have produced some additional income .
So I ask that we do justice to the shepherds , who had managed to make a move towards what was going to be a fundamental part of our identity , and I also ask the European Court of Auditors in its turn to stop thinking that ECU 1 per kilo is too dear .
For sheep are firebreaks and contribute actively to both organic farming and a balanced environment in the most disadvantaged regions .
We do not agree with the basic criticism by the Court of Auditors of the alleged explosion in spending .
On the other hand , we do agree with the criticism that the Member States have failed to meet their obligations , making it almost impossible for the EU to administer the market organization .
Against this background , we regard a general tightening-up of the market organization as essential to enable intervention measures to be implemented within it .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0890 / 96 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty ( CTBT ) ; -B4-0900 / 96 by Mr Macartney and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty ; -B4-0908 / 96 by Mr Piquet and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on negotiations on the nuclear test ban treaty ; -B4-0935 / 96 by Mrs McKenna and others , on behalf of the Green Group , on the nuclear test ban treaty ; -B4-0945 / 96 by Mr Wiersma and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty ; -B4-0950 / 96 by Mr Oostlander and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the European People 's Party , on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.Ladies and gentlemen , I have just made one of my biggest mistakes ever while in the chair .
As I gave the floor to Mr Bertens you all saw that he was leaving the Chamber .
I hope that Mr Macartney will not leave and will use his one and a half minutes to address you .
Thank you , Mr Macartney .
You have the floor .
Mr President , I am delighted to step into the breach .
I thought that in your generosity you would give me the Liberal Democrats ' allocation of time as well , seeing as I had helped to save their bacon .
However , seriously , I think this is one of the issues on which a very wide spectrum of this House , if not the entire House , can unite .
Even those of us who are very critical of the nuclear powers within the European Union , the French and the British , can , I think , make common cause on this issue .
I have many times asked people who support the nuclear deterrent held by the United Kingdom , who they were going to use it against , and the answer is usually ' nobody ' , in which case I ask them why they don 't just abolish it .
The same argument applies to the French nuclear deterrent .
However , the justification is always given that with the nuclear deterrent , with the nuclear weapon , you have a seat at the top table , you can influence events in the wider world , and so I think in the European Union we want in particular to ask the UK and France to use that influence and , with all of us behind them , to say , in particular to the Chinese that they must stop testing nuclear weapons .
This testing of nuclear weapons is an abomination , it threatens the environment , it threatens the vulnerable communities on the periphery of their own country , and just as we condemned Jacques Chirac when he came to this Chamber in unequivocal terms for what was happening in the French Polynesian testing , we do the same to China .
Let us have a united front on this and I would be very happy indeed to either propose or second the joint resolution .
Mr President , I also wish to sign up to this joint resolution since from the beginning it was a serious mistake to make nuclear weapons and they are a danger not only when they are used but also because they affect many generations after .
It is inconceivable that , after the end of the cold war , we should continue to test nuclear bombs when it is clear that they are a hazard for the whole of mankind .
It is inconceivable that France should have continued its nuclear tests and that the United Kingdom should continue to take part in US nuclear programmes or that China should still explode atomic bombs .
That is why it is urgent that , within the timetable set by the General Assembly of the United Nations , there should be ratification of the full test ban on nuclear weapons .
In a climate as negative as the present one , we must shed a ray of hope for mankind .
The European Parliament would be making a primordial contribution to that step if , by adopting this resolution , it made it known to the General Assembly of the United Nations so that a new step for mankind can be taken .
Mr President , these dreadful weapons of destruction have hung over all our heads for a very long time now this century .
Many of us have been involved in trying to find some way out of the planetary catastrophe that could ensue .
Therefore , it is really important that we pursue in good faith to bring the negotiations for a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty to fruition .
It is really important that we send out a signal from this House to ensure that they move speedily , because we are concerned at the failure of the Conference on Disarmament to meet the deadline for the conclusion of negotiations .
This House must send out a clear signal here today that we in the European Parliament , representing the citizens , want them to work in good faith .
I particularly would like to ask the UK , France and the United States - although we only have the opportunity in this Parliament to directly address the UK and France - to constrain and curb nuclear weapons development .
We do not need to develop them : we already have these weapons of destruction .
Why were we testing nuclear weapons in the Pacific last year ?
We already had all the knowledge necessary .
It was an outrage , and continues to be an outrage , that we develop these weapons .
We need to constrain them , not develop them .
I would ask this House , therefore , to send a clear signal by adopting the resolution and to urge all the Member States to speedily conclude the negotiations , because it is even an outrage that it should be suggested in the negotiations that there could be ' peaceful ' nuclear explosions .
There cannot , and we must stop this exploding of these toxic materials in the atmosphere for the good of the citizens of the world and for the sake of the planet .
On a point of procedure first , Mr President .
When we suspended the debate here in order to vote your predecessor in the chair said that we would be continuing the debate on Mr Cars ' report , but clearly the weather and time of year do nothing for the way in which Parliament organizes itself .
And I am looking at your officials .
I think it is disgraceful to change things without prior agreement .
Now to the main points of my speech , if you have no objection .
The first deadline for the test ban treaty has passed and the second one is very close .
The world is waiting for a treaty of this kind .
The nuclear states committed themselves to this when the non-proliferation agreement was completed and Chairman Ramaker , a Dutch diplomat , is doing his utmost to push it through .
At present a new text awaits the negotiators ' verdict .
This will be delivered between 29 July and 12 August .
The talks are not easy .
India is only ready to sign if the timetable for total nuclear disarmament is accepted .
I appreciate that ambition , but I think it would mean the kiss of death to the treaty as things stand at the moment .
It is , of course , desirable though that stockpiles of nuclear weapons should be reduced .
And then the continuation of Chinese nuclear testing is of course unacceptable and especially damaging in the current climate .
What credibility can there be for the CTBT if China is still carrying out nuclear tests during the final phase of negotiations ?
As we said last month : it is more important to have the treaty come into force than to have everyone on board .
Political pressure will have to ensure that all other countries sign up to it .
The Union must set an example and the Council must use all the instruments at its disposal to complete the negotiations , get the treaty signed , ratified and brought into force .
Mr Bertens , I have taken note of the remarks you made at the beginning but please bear in mind that to err is human and that the agenda is not amended unless a vote in plenary has authorized any changes .
I fully understand , Mr President .
To err is indeed human - very human .
Mr President , a full year ago agreement was reached in New York to extend the NonProliferation Treaty sine die .
Following several rounds of talks in which the European Union presented a united front agreement was finally reached on an unconditional extension sine die .
Many reluctant states were persuaded by the promise that a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing would soon be forthcoming .
Talks on that ban are currently in progress in Geneva .
But the earlier deadline of 28 June as the date for an agreement has regrettably not been met .
The talks are to resume at the end of the month .
The new deadline has been set for 12 August so that the treaty can be submitted to the 51st General Assembly of the UN .
The impasse caused by India 's refusal to sign unless the preamble contains provision for a reduction of the nuclear weapons arsenal of the nuclear states is a cause for concern .
If India does not sign , Pakistan most probably will not either .
That will mean that a chance has been lost of getting the ' threshold ' countries signed up to an international treaty which opposes the development of nuclear weapons .
Because these countries are not bound by the Non-Proliferation Treaty since they did not sign it .
The British reaction , that unless India signs the treaty is pointless , is regrettable .
It has heightened the tensions and offers no solution .
We urge all the parties concerned to sign the treaty and halt the negative spiral which has begun .
We urge the Union too to take action .
Nuclear states which claim that the nuclear test ban treaty is concerned not with nuclear weapons but with nuclear tests are of course right in theory .
Notwithstanding this there is a direct link between the NonProliferation Treaty and the ban on testing .
As we have said , nuclear testing is the best way of halting the further spread of nuclear weapons .
The question is whether one cannot find a formula , for example a reference to the Non-Proliferation Treaty , to Article 6 , which everybody could accept , so that the problem of India could be resolved .
The five official nuclear states which have pushed for signature of the Non-Proliferation Treaty have undertaken to make their intentions on further nuclear disarmament clear and to continue making them clear vis  vis the threshold countries .
Even if no agreement can is reached on the passage which India wants - and again , I think it should be possible to find a solution - I think the treaty should in any event be signed by the nuclear states and by Great Britain too , so that we do at least have something in the bag , a treaty signed by as many countries as possible and hopefully by some of the threshold nuclear states too .
In conclusion , this treaty must be signed , ratified and brought into effect as soon as possible .
The debate on it has gone on for too long .
Mr President , in a few weeks ' time , the international community will have the opportunity to take a major step towards nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament with the signature of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty .
This Treaty will succeed the decision of May 1995 in favour of the indefinite extension of the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons for which the European Union has been very actively working .
The Commission regrets India 's decision not to sign the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty .
At a time when the Commission is encouraging the European Union to strengthen its partnership with India , the signing of this Treaty by India would have been seen by the Commission and by the Member States as an extremely positive sign .
The Commission wishes to pay tribute to the efforts of the ambassador , Mr Ramaker , who proposed a text on 28 June allowing Member States for the first time to consider the conditions for an agreement .
Like the European Parliament , the Commission hopes that the members of the Conference on Disarmament will reach an agreement before 12 August 1996 allowing the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty to be signed before the end of the year , and so help to strengthen the conditions for international security and hence the security of the European Union .
Thank you very much , Mr de Silguy .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0872 / 96 by Mr Cars and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the need to arrest indicted war criminals in former Yugoslavia ; -B4-0887 / 96 by Mr Stewart-Clark and others , on behalf of the European People 's Party , on the need to arrest war criminals Karadzic and Mladic .
Mr President , I have here before me a small cutting from a Swedish newspaper .
It refers to what the French Minister of Defence , Charles Millon , said in Sarajevo on Sunday .
On behalf of France he calls upon the UN Security Council to give IFOR , the NATO-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia , a clear mandate to arrest people accused of war crimes .
He stresses that France is concerned that people such as Karadzic and Mladic are still at large , despite the fact that both of them stand accused of genocide , among other things , and that the UN 's war crimes tribunal in The Hague has issued orders for their arrest .
It is precisely this , Mr President , that lies behind the resolution we have tabled .
I am convinced that if we really want peace in the former Yugoslavia and want to get people to understand that they must be reconciled with one another we must also find those who should be held to answer for the crimes committed .
I believe that it is very , very regrettable that IFOR at present lacks the clear mandate that I hope , after today 's debate , Parliament will demand , just as the French Minister of Defence has .
It is my hope , Mr President , that after this debate Parliament will adopt a clear standpoint to the effect that war criminals , be they in the former Yugoslavia or elsewhere , should not be allowed to remain at liberty .
Mr President , the International War Crimes Tribunal was set up to bring war criminals to justice .
From the outset Judge Richard Goldstone made clear that his mission would only be meaningful if the top culprits in Bosnia and elsewhere were brought to justice .
Accordingly , Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic were indicted on 24 July last for crimes committed between April 1992 and July 1995 , including , and I quote : ' The shelling of civilian gatherings in order to kill , terrorize and demoralize the Bosnian Muslim and Bosnian Croat civil population ; the creation of numerous detention camps , where thousands were held in inhumane conditions ; the systematic destruction of Muslim and Catholic places of worship ; the appropriation , plunder and destruction of property . '
What have we done to bring these men to justice ?
Nothing !
Take Karadzic : Carl Bildt threatens to reimpose sanctions unless Karadzic gives up the presidency of the Republic of Srpska and retires from public life .
And then what happens ?
He steps down and becomes Secretary-General !
I recall that Stalin held that title .
Mladic continues to hold military power .
When he was colonel , he was the person who flattened and raped Vukovar before Milosevic promoted him to general for his valour .
The man who took 25 , 000 inhabitants of Srebrenica , over 50 % of the entire population , and had almost all of the males massacred , whilst the United Nations looked the other way , desecrating the name of safe haven .
Karadzic and Mladic will only surrender if they are forcefully arrested .
If this does not happen now , elections in Bosnia in September will be a farce !
Democracy and the rule of law will become meaningless .
Hardliners and moderates alike will judge that looting , aggression , bestiality , ethnic cleansing : all pay .
We will eventually pay the price .
Vukovar , Dubrovnik , Srebrenica and the War Crimes Tribunal will be our tombstones .
IFOR must be enabled to act before it is too late !
Mr President , the important thing now in Bosnia-Herzegovina is to establish democracy and the rule of law , because only in that way can the fragile peace be secured .
The implementation of the terms of the Dayton Agreement and , in particular , the unhindered staging of the free elections planned for 14 September , must make way for an auspicious new beginning for this tortured country and its people .
An essential element in this new beginning is that the disastrous fragmentation of the population on nationalist lines should be halted .
It is therefore crucial that the traditional parties , some of which are heavily implicated in the atrocities of the war , should not be the only ones within the national groups to put up candidates .
Those which represent other forces in the political spectrum that is also present in Bosnia-Herzegovina must be free to put up candidates without hindrance , especially those which stand for a perspective cutting across individual ethnic groups .
A particularly important point is that by no means the whole of the Serbian population group supports the disastrous and bloody policy of the leadership dominated by Karadzic and Mladic .
As long as these two are performing key functions and are able to exert pressure on their fellow citizens , the possibility of free and democratic elections will be in doubt .
This and growing evidence of the involvement of Karadzic and Mladic in the terrible atrocities of the war make it urgently necessary that the international arrest warrants against both be executed as soon as possible , at all events before 14 September .
Mr President , the former Yugoslavia and Bosnia-Herzegovina are really an open wound in the EU 's conscience .
When I visited Banja Luka in Bosnia last week , and also Croatia , I observed that the elections to be held on 14 September cannot be implemented unless those indicted of terrible war crimes are brought before the Court of Justice in the Hague .
The debate has centred on Karadzic and Mladic but I am not so nave as not to see that there are some 30 people on all sides in this war , as Carl Bildt mentioned , who should be brought before the Hague Court .
I-For 's mandate , and the respect in which it is held , now depend - and this is the EPP Group 's opinion - on whether those indicted of war crimes are actually brought before the Court in the Hague .
In my opinion , it is not possible for a person to act as president of a party if he refuses to come before a court to be tried or to demonstrate his innocence .
For the rest , I-For 's operations are in my opinion a good example of the fact that , although we have not yet got common defence policy guidelines , because some of us are neutral countries - not non-aligned , but neutral - we have all worked together in the I-For troops , our neutral Finland as well as the NATO countries .
Now we really expect that all those indicted of committing or ordering atrocities during the war , should be brought before the court .
Thank you , Mr President , I know you understand Finnish .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I should first like to recall that three years ago , when the International Tribunal was set up , there were many Members of this Parliament who criticized this initiative or expressed scepticism about the first serious initiative by the international community regarding Yugoslavia .
Today , thanks to three years of unremitting work , but also thanks to the tenacity of the President of the Tribunal , the public prosecutor , the judges and the investigators , Parliament is in a position to support the request for the arrest of the two main people responsible for organizing the ethnic cleansing policy and , in particular , for the tragedies of Srebrenica and Zepa .
There is now every possibility that Parliament will be supporting a similar request very soon , this time concerning the ' planner in chief ' of the ethnic cleansing policy and the tragedies I have just mentioned who , as we all know , lives in Belgrade .
So many very good reasons , therefore , to vote with conviction in favour of this resolution .
Mr President , the Commission is pleased that the European Parliament has included the case of Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic on the agenda for this urgent debate .
In so doing , Parliament is once again calling attention to the unacceptability of continuing to allow these two persons , still living in the Republika Srpska , to remain free .
According to the Dayton Accords , they should long ago have been brought before the Tribunal in The Hague .
The Federal Yugoslav Republic and the Republika Srpska have not fulfilled their obligations in this matter and have thus violated the peace accords .
The Commission considers that the influence that Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic continue to exercise in the Republika Srpska is a constant threat to the peace process .
It is unacceptably complicating the return of refugees , the reconstruction of the country and the holding of free and democratic elections .
The formal transfer of the powers exercised by Mr Karadzic as President of the Republika Srpska will hardly change the situation .
The recent uncovering of mass graves in and around the town of Srebrenica once more reminds us of the cruelty of the indescribable acts of violence committed at the instigation of Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic .
Covering more than fifty pages , the indictment of the International War Crimes Tribunal describes , sometimes in horrible detail , how far the deliberate policy of genocide and ethnic cleansing was taken and the part played in it by Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic .
The international community has a political and moral duty to bring these two accused without delay before the International War Crimes Tribunal .
Any further delay , which is in any case unjustifiable and intolerable , can only thwart the peace process .
All the efforts , both military and civilian , made up till now would then have been in vain .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on 20 motions for a resolution on human rights .
As you know , the Bureau has decided that this debate should be held as follows : each subject will be debated separately but the Commission will answer at the end of the whole debate on all subjects .
Burma
B4-0873 / 96 by Mr Haarder and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democratic and Reform party , on the situation in Burma ; -B4-0883 / 96 by Mr Kristoffersen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the European People 's Party , on the circumstances of the death of James Leander Nicols , Consul of Denmark , Finland , Norway and Switzerland , following his detention in a prison in Rangoon ; -B4-0895 / 96 by Mr Pasty and Mr Caligaris , on behalf of the Union for Europe group , on the death in prison of the Danish Consul in Burma ; -B4-0899 / 96 by Mr Vandemeulebroucke and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in Burma ; -B4-0919 / 96 by Mr Vinci and Sornosa Martnez , on behalf of the Confederal group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the political situation in Burma and human rights violations by the SLORC ; -B4-0924 / 96 by Mr Telkmper and others , on behalf of the Green Group , on the situation in Burma ; -B4-0944 / 96 by Mrs Kinnock and others , on behalf of the Party of European Socialists , on the political situation and continued human rights abuses in Burma.Cyprus
B4-0949 / 96 by Mrs Green and Mrs Rothe , on behalf of the Party of European Socialists , on the political assassination of Kutlu Adali in the occupied area of Cyprus ; -B4-0959 / 96 by Mr Hatzidakis and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the European People 's Party , on the assassination of Mr Adali in the occupied area of Cyprus . ' Boat people '
B4-0874 / 96 by Mrs Gredler , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on Vietnamese boat people ; -B4-0927 / 96 by Mr Telkmper and Mr Kreissl-Drfler , on behalf of the Green Group , on Vietnamese boat people ; -B4-0940 / 96 by Mr Howitt , on behalf of the Party of European Socialists , on events in Hong Kong.Ethiopia
B4-0892 / 96 by Mr Fassa and Mrs Andr-Lonard , on behalf of the group of the European Liberal Democrat and reform Party , on the human rights situation in Ethiopia ; -B4-0917 / 96 by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the arbitrary arrest of Mr Taye , an Ethiopian citizen ; -B4-0930 / 96 by Mr Telkmper and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the Green Group , on the human rights situation in Ethiopia.Philippines
B4-0885 / 96 , by Mrs Banotti and others , on behalf of the European People 's Party , on respect for human rights in the Philippines and the mistreatment of Father Shay Cullen.Algeria
B4-0906 / 96 , by Mrs Elmalan and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on violations of press freedom in Algeria ; -B4-0937 / 96 , by Mr Cohn-Bendit and others , on behalf of the Green Group , on violations of press freedom in Algeria.Salman Rushdie
B4-0876 / 96 , by Mr Cars and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the fatwa on Salman Rushdie.Arrest of Father Tomislav Matanovic
B4-0955 / 96 , by Mr von Habsburg and others , on behalf of the European Parliament People 's Party , on the arbitrary arrest of Tomislav Matanovic , a priest in Prijedor , and his parents by agents of the self-styled Republic of Srpska .
Mr President , the circumstances surrounding the death of consul Nicols in Rangoon are typical of the totally unacceptable way in which the SLORC oppresses and rules Burma .
The international community must take action to tackle the continuing human rights abuses in that country and the total suppression of any democratic forces .
250 parliamentarians belonging to the National League for Democracy who are held in detention must be freed .
A new law making political dissent punishable by a 20-year sentence must be withdrawn and the election result which plainly showed that the now banned NLD was the most popular party must be honoured .
The Union must send out a very tough and unequivocal signal and must take action .
Following the worthy decision by Heineken and Carlsberg - commendable decisions prompted by the work of a number of action groups - following the decisions of these two companies a commercial and economic boycott must be imposed on Burma .
It must be made plain to the countries of ASEAN , which as we know are keen to admit Burma to their number , that they must not fill the gaps vacated by European firms in Burma .
The Regional Forum of ASEAN is an excellent stage on which to deliver this message .
It must be made clear that the proposal to admit Burma to ASEAN is altogether unacceptable and inopportune at the moment .
It is most important that the world community should present a united front here .
It is through economic sanctions that we can hurt the SLORC given that the SLORC , the regime , itself has major interests in the economy .
I wish also , on behalf of my Group and on my own account too , to express my support for the persistence and courage of Aung San Suu Kyi .
Despite countless threats against her , her supporters and her party she continues with these weekend meetings which have become famous and which have become an important signal .
We should respond to that signal !
Mr President , the situation in Burma continues to attract the maximum attention on a worldwide scale .
It is crucial and of major importance that we work hard to secure democracy and human rights in this country which is ruled by a dictatorship .
In Scandinavia , we are deeply shocked by the death of our consul , James Nicols , in a Burmese prison .
All the diplomatic efforts to clarify the circumstances of his death have been dismissed by the regime in Rangoon .
The Burmese ambassador in London has been summoned to Denmark , where he is also accredited , but he has simply not come .
The body of the Danish consul has not been released to his family .
A post-mortem examination has been refused , and there has been no explanation as to why he was convicted and imprisoned .
It is simply claimed that he had too many fax machines in his office in Rangoon .
What an explanation !
In my view and that of the PPE Group , the time has come for the EU to take steps to apply sanctions against the regime in Rangoon .
Dialogue and requests are leading nowhere .
Firm action is the only thing that will command respect , so with the PPE Group , I am asking for Denmark 's calls for specific measures to be followed , such as the suspension of Burma 's trade preferences with the EU .
Like Mr Bertens , I also wish to appeal to the ASEAN countries to block full membership for Burma .
I would endorse Commissioner Marn 's view that the ASEAN countries should be helping to move Burma in the direction of democracy .
Otherwise , this could have a direct bearing on the EU 's relations with ASEAN .
I also welcome the fact that all the groups in Parliament have worked closely together to increase the pressure on Burma .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the death on 22 June of James Nicols , Consul of Norway , Denmark and Switzerland , after being held in prison for six weeks , is shattering news of the greatest concern to us .
The Consul 's arbitrary arrest by the Burmese authorities for operating telephones and fax machines at his home without permission , the authorities ' refusal to allow him to be attended by a doctor , his delicate state of health and , above all , the serious violations of human rights that are going on in Burma , all call for urgent special investigation by the entire international community .
The European Union must make every possible effort and officially request the details needed to establish the responsibility of the Burmese authorities , who are continuing to pursue a policy of repression and violation of human rights in the face of all opposition .
Furthermore , the inhumanity of the SLORC ( State Law and Order Restoration Council ) in refusing to release the body of James Nicols to his family or allow them to attend his burial , and the arrest of more than 250 members of the National League for Democracy , led by Nobel and Sakharov Prize Winner Aung San Suu Kyi , are evidence of how serious the situation in Burma is as regards respect for human rights and democracy .
The European Union must implement strong and urgent economic and political sanctions against Burma , including suspension of the Generalized System of Preferences and concessional finance .
All economic links based on trade , tourism and investment by European organizations operating in Burma must be broken off .
Finally , we must make Burma understand clearly that its request for full membership of the ASEAN Regional Forum will be affected by the trade relations that ASEAN is developing with the European Union and the West .
And , lastly , let us express our full solidarity with James Nicols ' family and our hope that they have not suffered in vain .
Mr President , the military dictatorship in power in Burma is once again becoming notorious for its cruelty , its inhumanity , its despotism .
The specious grounds for the arrest of Consul Nicols , the conditions of his detention , the treatment inflicted on him which certainly led to his death , the inhumanity of this National Council , which has refused his family the right to attend his burial , must demand from us a vigorous reaction , going beyond simple condemnation .
This case is added to the long list of oppressive acts that we have unceasingly denounced .
For democracy has not advanced in Burma , and even though the situation of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , a Nobel Prizewinner , has improved , she herself is continuing to alert world opinion to the increase in violations of human rights in her country .
Political expression is a criminal offence , forced labour is current practice .
All these machinations merit sanctions .
In the first place , questions should be raised about the observer status granted to Burma in the ASEAN Regional Forum .
It would be desirable for the Commission and the Council to denounce this decision at the next meeting of this Assembly .
Next , economic sanctions must be applied to Burma .
Let us decide to break off all relations with that country , whether it is over investment , trade or tourism .
Let us follow the example of the Carlsberg and Heineken Companies and make the Burmese government face its responsibilities .
This is the stance my group wishes the Council and the Commission to take .
Mr President , I should like to address the Commissioner , because what we are calling for in this debate are measures that European Parliament has been calling for unanimously for several months .
But the Council and Commission have done nothing , absolutely nothing .
The Council has even refused to make a statement on the sanctions proposed by Denmark after the murder - and that is what it was - of James Nicols .
We want to see an end to diplomatic shilly-shallying and we are asking for the economic and political isolation of the Rangoon government , as every group in this House has requested today ; we also call on the Commission to remove Burma immediately from the list of countries benefiting from the Generalized System of Preferences .
This would be a political signal of Europe 's resolve in respect of Burma .
If the Commission refuses to move in this direction , it must at least explain its reasons , Mr Commissioner .
We call upon the Council to take immediate action to urge the ASEAN countries not to accept Burma as a full member , because of the very serious human rights situation .
Failure to do even that would be a sign of complicity .
Mr President , I do not see that as a threat .
Some months ago we discussed Burma , last month we discussed Burma , and now we are doing so again .
We are disturbed by the death of James Nicols , the Consul for Denmark , Switzerland and Sweden .
His death is evidence of torture in that country .
He was prevented from sleeping , he was not given medical care .
We can no longer tolerate this inhuman behaviour , this inhuman treatment by the SLORC .
According to information from the IMF , 3.1 % of the gross domestic product of Burma in 1994 was generated by forced labour .
That is a measure of this tragedy , which we cannot simply stand aside from .
Perhaps it was our protest , perhaps it was also the commitment of the NGOs that has so far prevented Heineken and Carlsberg from investing there .
There are other potential investors , such as BMW , who we hope will adopt the same stance .
We , particularly the Commission and the Council , are also being called upon to react .
I do not think the Commission should grant any more preferences .
We must make it clear diplomatically that relations will be suspended if the situation does not change .
The Council must also make that clear , particularly in the context of relations with the ASEAN states .
In conclusion , let me say that we must continue to support Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , and I hope that diplomacy will bear fruit in this matter .
Mr President , you recognize of course , just as the Commission does , that what we are dealing with here is one of the most barbaric regimes in the world ; a regime which relies upon child labour , forced labour and slave labour for its very existence .
In fact Amnesty International very recently published a report which clearly said that people are being held in leg-irons , in chains and beaten into unconsciousness as they work on the railways and roads of that country .
The SLORC and military junta is clearly a regime that we cannot deal with or indeed make deals with .
Aung San Suu Kyi has today , in a video in this Parliament , spoken unequivocally about the need for economic sanctions , for a stop to all investments , an end to tourism , and for every possible measure to be taken to isolate that regime .
The fact that she , as the democratic leader of the opposition in that country , is asking the European Union to do that should surely be a signal to us to take action immediately .
Nelson Mandela has been visiting Europe recently and it was that kind of economic pressure that brought the apartheid regime in South Africa to its knees .
These are the kind of practical measures , economic measures , which will bring the political change that Aung San Suu Kyi wishes to see .
We recognize in the European Union , as the Commission well knows , that in our dealings with third countries we should work for the promotion of democracy and human rights .
So if that is the case , and if that is our guiding principle , then that has to be an essential element in our dealings with Burma .
We are , of course , as others have said , very encouraged by the fact that Heineken , Carlsberg , Levi Strauss and to a certain extent Pepsi Cola , have , as a result of citizen 's pressure , pulled out of that country .
That kind of investment needs to be discouraged and from this Parliament we urge European Union citizens also to put pressure on Total , a French company , to take similar measures .
I would like to ask the Commission what they intend to say in the ASEAN Conference next week in Jakarta , where they will be present .
I would like to ask the Commission to state very strongly that they abhor that regime .
I would also ask the Commissioner to tell us when we are going to see that report on forced labour , which we are waiting to see , because it is only on the basis of that report on forced labour that we will see the leverage that we need to withdraw the GSP privileges from Burma .
Those are two categorical questions where I would like answers from the Commission .
The legitimate leaders of Burma are asking Europe to introduce economic sanctions against the military junta which has unlawfully taken power in the country .
We should take heed of this request .
As in the case of South Africa , sanctions should be implemented if they are supported by the opposition and accepted by the population .
Today , many national leaders are queuing up to take the credit for the sanctions policy against South Africa , but they were by no means so full of confidence when the sanctions had to be applied .
Burma gives those leaders a chance to do the right thing once again .
We received Aung San Suu Kyi 's son and husband here in the European Parliament on her behalf , and we admire her for her courage , vision , love of her people and historical awareness .
We must listen to this woman .
She is asking us to introduce economic sanctions .
I cannot see how we could say no to this .
Let me explain the vile nature of the present regime in Burma .
It is waging a war against its own people .
It has introduced forced labour , so there is slavery .
It has ignored the landslide victory of the democracy movement in 1990 .
It has imprisoned the leaders or placed them under house arrest .
And it is imprisoning diplomats .
How can the western world be content to respond to the despicable actions of the Burmese junta with diplomatic censure , when the regime is imprisoning those who represent us ?
How can we be diplomatic with people who are throwing diplomats in prison ?
James Nicols was the representative of Denmark and other European countries .
He was imprisoned because he had too many fax machines ; he was subjected to hardships , including long periods of interrogation , and was deprived of sleep .
He did not receive his medicine , and his burial was kept secret .
A Burmese newspaper has written of Mr Nicols that he was a petty scoundrel who received his well-deserved fate , because he was a glutton for food and an idler with a taste for luxury .
Any newspaper which is allowed to publish in Burma is approved by the junta , which is thus turning the knife in the wound it has tried to inflict on us through Mr Nicols ' death .
I am grateful to Carlsberg and Heineken , because they have pulled out , but how can anyone bring themselves to embark on a joint venture in a country where their partner will be the Defence Ministry in a military junta ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to Mrs Kinnock we were able this morning to see a video of a question and answer session with Aung San Suu Kyi .
I was profoundly impressed by it , to see how someone who has to endure such difficult personal circumstances , such miserable conditions , has the courage , the energy and the strength to fight for democracy .
I regard myself today simply as a mouthpiece .
We have a chance here to voice her demands for her .
In the first instance , and this is a question which I put on her behalf to the Commission , what exactly does the Commission understand by a ' critical dialogue ' on trade , foreign investment and tourism , in the light of worldwide calls for Burma to be isolated ?
I received a fax this morning in which 46 NGOs support this remarkable woman 's request , 46 NGOs from Europe and America .
Let us isolate Burma .
Let us stop investing there .
As paragraph 9 of the resolution states , we are of course extremely glad that Heineken and Carlsberg have pulled out .
But yesterday 's papers said that Heineken had not in fact pulled out .
Spokesmen in Burma dispute it .
I would like the Commission - and this is my second request - to investigate the truth or otherwise of this rumour .
Lastly , in line with paragraph 10 of our resolution , I would ask the Commission to ensure that others do not step in to fill the vacancies created .
It would be very cynical if some investors pulled out , only to have other European firms seize the opportunity and speedily move in there themselves .
That would be appalling .
Cyprus
Mr President , the Cyprus problem is an issue of human rights for both Greek and Turkish Cypriots .
The presence of 35 , 000 Turkish troops occupying over one-third of the island of Cyprus denies the human rights of Greek Cypriots but also of Turkish Cypriots .
The situation in the northern part of Cyprus has been made deliberately worse by the illegal settlement of many thousands of mainland Turks , in itself a clear contravention of the Geneva Conventions .
Progressive forces in the occupied area are recognizing , with the support of the European Commission and this Parliament , that membership of the European Union for Cyprus and the imminent accession talks provide not just the right future for Cyprus but also a window of opportunity to solve the Cyprus problem .
Increasingly , over the last two years there has been an escalation of terrorist activity often focused on those very progressive forces promoting and discussing the future of a united Cyprus as a member of the European Union .
Kutlu Adali , a distinguished Turkish Cypriot intellectual , author and respected journalist has paid with his life for openly expressing and defending these views .
He was murdered on 6 July in occupied Nicosia .
Nobody has yet been brought to justice for this terrorist act nor the many bombings of offices , houses , cars and political offices in the occupied part of Cyprus .
We are told that one in five people in occupied Cyprus is a member of the Turkish security forces .
Yet it seems they cannot catch anybody responsible for these acts .
The illegal regime and the Turkish security forces must act to find the perpetrators of these acts and the person or persons who murdered Kutlu Adali .
We all need to remember that the voice of the illegal regime is not the only voice of Turkish Cypriots .
There are other distinguished and courageous Turkish Cypriots whose voices need to be heard .
Kutlu Adali was one such .
Mr President , what is needed in Cyprus today , is peaceful coexistence of the two communities , the Greek and Turkish communities .
Though the Turkish Cypriot side is unyielding , I must say that there are indeed democratic progressive forces which favour a closer approach between the Greek and Turkish elements .
Kutlu Adali , who was murdered under mysterious circumstances a few days ago , was one of the moderate Turkish Cypriots and his murder was clearly a political act , bearing in mind his activities and the nature of the Denktash regime .
Kutlu Adali , a distinguished author and journalist , had in the past repeatedly written articles severely criticising the Denktash regime , and condemning in particular : first , the mass introduction to the occupied part of Cyprus of colonists who constitute a foreign element of Turkish Cypriot society , and secondly , the systematic terrorisation of Denktash 's political opponents .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the occupied part of Cyprus a regime of military and police rule has been established which is particularly harsh towards dissidents and the Turkish Cypriots .
It is characteristic that numbers are declining in Turkish Cypriot society , which from 120 , 000 people in 1974 , numbers barely 85 , 000 today with more and more Turkish Cypriots leaving all the time .
It is indicative of the violence of the regime that prevails in the occupied areas that among a population of 160 , 000 , approximately 35 , 000 are soldiers or security forces , in other words one in five of the citizens , as the President , Mrs Green told us , is under arms .
Today , Cyprus is the most highly militarized place in the world , in relation to its size .
With today 's resolution , we of course are saying that this situation must be brought to an end and a process should begin of bringing the two societies closer together , which was also what Kutlu Adali wanted .
Mr President , more than ever Europe should make amends for what it has done since the fall of the Ottoman Empire in 1922 .
Indeed , it is important that Cyprus should become a part of Europe as soon as possible to avoid a continuation of the situation of violence which has lasted for 20 years .
The murder of an intellectual like Kutlu Adali , a writer who was known for his tolerance and seems to have had the confidence of the people on that island and ended up being punished with his death , while the Turkish authorities in Cyprus stood aside , is a form of violence which we witness every day whether it is in Cyprus , Bosnia or anywhere else ; it all results from the fall of that other empire , the Soviet empire .
This is a historic moment when Europe could help to change the situation but fails to do so because it prefers to grant economic benefits to countries which depend on it for economic reasons and continues to turn a blind eye to violence which , in my opinion , is unacceptable .
We have arms but not only arms in the real sense . We have other arms in our arsenal to prevent war from continuing in this localised and regional form and which respects the Geneva Convention .
Mr President , in the occupied part of Cyprus political crimes are rampant and on the increase .
Statistics bear that out .
There appears to be a pattern .
Turkish Cypriots who speak out for the preservation of Turkish Cypriot culture are systematically trampled on , both literally and figuratively , by the tens of thousands of Turks imported by Denktash but also , as Mrs Green has said , by Turkish troops and secret servicemen .
Those who criticize are silenced .
All efforts undertaken by the international community must be aimed at halting this .
The entire island of Cyprus deserves stability and peace .
I urge the international community to put pressure on the so-called Turkish Cypriot Government not to endanger the safety of its critics .
The tragic killing of Mr Adali is bad enough .
Let us not forget : this is a country which will soon be represented here by a number of spokesmen .
So I think it is a good thing we are having this debate on Cyprus in the House and I hope it will not be the last time we do so .
Madam President , since appeals to respect human dignity have failed , and since strong condemnation of the use of violence against asylum-seekers are being added to the list of similar actions , already , alas , too long , the time has come to change to action .
Apart from the various types of pressure available to us to remind all those directly or indirectly involved of the misery of the boat people , we must show a solidarity that goes well beyond simple declarations of intent .
Our condemnations are addressed of course to China , to Hong Kong and to the Vietnamese authorities , who are not doing all they could to provide a decent welcome for these former refugees , but we must also be ready if necessary to share the burden created by the almost insoluble problem of the boat people and to accept into our countries any refugees coming to us as part of a fair distribution of the load .
I believe that , if we do not wish our declarations on respect for human rights and on the right of refugees to humane treatment to remain hollow words , we owe it to ourselves to move on to a very clear policy of solidarity .
Madam President , on 10 May there was a mass break-out of Vietnamese refugees from the Whitehead Detention Camp in Hong Kong .
This highlights a worrying situation .
There are still 25 000 Vietnamese ' boat people ' in Asian camps , 15 000 of them in Hong Kong .
Nevertheless , 50 000 boat people have returned voluntarily under a UN programme .
In Hong Kong , however , about 2 000 people were also forcibly deported .
I criticize that , because we also have Vietnamese people in the Federal Republic of Germany who are due to be deported .
I do not think that people can be simply expelled in this way .
The right thing to do is to set up programmes and help them with their repatriation .
For that reason , we oppose the deportation of these people from Hong Kong .
On the other hand , we call on the Commission to use its efforts in international fora in order to ensure that funds are made available for new repatriation programmes under which people from Hong Kong and other Asian states or from Europe can settle in Vietnam , if that is what they want .
No asylum-seekers must be expelled from Hong Kong or from the Federal Republic of Germany , and I think that the Commission should promote a programme for Vietnam , making use of the 17 million budgeted .
Madam President , the refugees in the detention centres in Hong Kong are being treated like criminals : their custody has been transferred from the Hong Kong housing services to the correctional services ; they are being dealt with by staff who are trained to look after prisoners , not families in need of help ; they are left in their cells , individually isolated from the world for 23 hours a day .
In the May riots 2 , 000 cans of teargas were fired and , following that , 200 people were moved directly into prisons , including , disgracefully , one five-year-old girl who was kept in isolation for 12 days whilst the prison authorities lied to the parents about her being held .
What crime are these people guilty of ?
The crime of fear : fear of returning to Vietnam where each and every one of them would face three to four days of intensive interrogation about any political contacts they may have had within the camps ; where they would face harassment ; where they would face surveillance and where there are clear reports of arrests and of disappearances .
Today this Parliament must stand out against these forced repatriations - 600 in the last 4 weeks alone - as there has been a completely arbitrary denial of refugee status since 1988 in Hong Kong : these people are being denied their rights under the Geneva Convention .
In its answer today the Commission must stop condoning this breach of international human rights and ensure that our European aid goes to supporting the human rights of these people , not trying to sweep them under the carpet .
Ethiopia
Madam President , a few months ago during a hearing on freedom of the media organized by the Committee on Foreign Affairs I met members of the Ethiopian journalists ' association who told me to my amazement that there were more journalists imprisoned there than in any other country and that they were maltreated almost weekly .
Clearly there is much still to be done in this country which was freed just a few years ago from Mengistu 's dictatorship .
It looks as if too many of his mini-despots are still in charge there .
The secession of Eritrea proceeded remarkably peacefully , but the democratization process has been very much a stop and start affair .
Mr Woldesmayat , the president of the Teachers ' Association who is under arrest , must be freed immediately , if only as a symbol of hope for the other hundreds of political detainees who still languish in the country 's jails .
I hope the Council and the Commission too will press for this .
Madam President , my Group has been following with interest the political developments in Ethiopia , where the Addis Abbaba government has , over the past few years , taken some significant steps forward as regards democracy and human rights .
We believe that this process should be supported by the European Union .
It is , however , precisely for this reason that the news reaching us is so worrying , and especially the news of the arrest of Mr Taye , Chairman of the Ethiopian Teachers ' Association .
He was arrested without charge , which raises the probably well-founded suspicion that he was arrested for political reasons .
We therefore request , as does the resolution , that he be released and that his case be dealt with with all due guarantees , because a political arrest is completely unacceptable .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am also concerned over the situation of Taye Woldesmayat , Chairman of the Ethiopian Teachers ' Association , about whom we have been hearing here .
He was arrested at Addis Ababa Airport without charges .
I tried to do something for him and received a letter from the Embassy stating that he had been arrested on legitimate grounds .
Detailed charges were not given but , basically , he is being accused of clandestine activity .
As he cannot engage a lawyer and has no contact with his family , legitimate conditions for detention under the rule of law do not apply .
We must make it clear to the Embassy or the Government that we do not approve of that .
The Ethiopian Teachers ' Association is constantly harassed and persecuted .
We witnessed a similar case back in December 1993 , when Mr Abera Yemane Ab was arrested in similar circumstances and legal action was taken against him without any indication of charges .
We cannot accept this situation .
We seek to defend human rights .
For this reason , the Ethiopian Government should explain what these people are charged with , or it should release them .
Philippines
Madam President , many Irish priests have gone to work in the Philippines and have distinguished themselves in their fight for human rights and for bettering the lot of the people there .
Father Shay Cullen is in a very rich tradition .
He has been campaigning and gaining worldwide attention for his campaign against the paedophile sex tourism in the Philippines .
In the past few years he has rescued many children and has set up the orphanage in Olongapo City in the Philippines .
While protesting peacefully against the erection of a high-tension electricity pylon right beside the orphanage , he was most viciously attacked by the police , arrested , denied medical attention and subsequently had great difficulty in obtaining medical treatment , as no doctor in the city was prepared to help him .
Clearly Father Shay Cullen 's campaign against this vicious tourism , which Parliament has condemned many times , is causing considerable worry to the powerful and corrupt circle in the city in which he is campaigning .
I believe his own personal safety is at risk and I hope that when Parliament votes on this resolution that the Philippine Government will be made aware of the serious concern we have for Father Cullen 's personal safety and for his campaign to protect these very much at-risk children .
Madam President , I have little to add really to the points my colleague Mrs Banotti has outlined so well .
Perhaps just this : this is one of the forms of exploitation , child prostitution and child pornography , which are found wherever the difference between rich and poor is extreme .
We know that despite all our efforts this difference between rich and poor has increased in recent years and as a result so have these abhorrent forms of exploitation .
Those like Father Shay Cullen who take it upon themselves to do something about it deserve our support .
I venture to hope that Mrs Banotti 's resolution , which will undoubtedly be adopted this afternoon , will ensure that such people are helped rather than penalized for the useful and essential work they do .
Madam President , I would like to join with my Irish colleague , Mrs Banotti , in expressing our concern for Father Shay Cullen .
He has been a tireless campaigner against the evils of child prostitution and child pornography in the Philippines .
In the face of intimidation and threats he has fiercely defended the most basic rights of the most vulnerable in any society , the children .
Given the value of this work , it is inexplicable that he should have been treated so aggressively by the Philippine authorities .
Father Cullen was engaged in a peaceful protest when he was violently arrested , kicked and handcuffed by the police .
Neither Father Cullen nor his colleague were given adequate medical treatment in police custody and both had to be taken for medical treatment at a later stage .
Most ominously , the lives of Father Cullen , his assistant and legal adviser have been threatened .
This is utterly unacceptable .
Instead of harassing Father Cullen , the Filipino authorities should welcome the work that he has been doing in their country .
The work of Father Shay Cullen is typical of the work carried out by Irish missionaries not only in the Philippines but throughout the world .
For many years now he has been a powerful advocate of children 's rights and an implacable enemy of child abusers .
He has acted as whistle-blower against those who engage in the vile practice of child abuse and he has been central in bringing such individuals to justice .
He has railed against the sex tourism so predominant in the Philippines .
This House should learn a great deal from the work and commitment of Father Shay Cullen .
There is a pressing need , in my view , for the introduction of international legislation to bring the perpetrators of child sex abuse to justice .
It is clear that such individuals visit countries like the Philippines to carry out their vile practice .
Each EU country , with the wholehearted support of this Parliament , should have legislation to ensure that , when child abusers return from their travels , they can have the full rigour of the law applied to them in their country of origin .
My own party in Ireland has pioneered such legislation .
I hope that the House lends its full support to this important resolution .
Algeria
Madam President , the Algerian government does not accept critical journalists .
In the name of the just and necessary fight against terrorism , muzzling the press is unfortunately the order of the day and freedom of speech is being threatened .
On 4 July , many European journalists could not obtain a visa to take part in a meeting to express solidarity with Algerian journalists .
On the same day , the cartoonist Chawki Amari was imprisoned , his newspaper ' La Tribune ' was banned and his management was placed under legal restrictions .
Algerian journalists are in an unenviable situation .
On the one hand , they are under permanent threat of terrorist attacks - 53 of them , may I remind you , have been murdered since 1993 - and on the other hand they are subjected to pressure from the authorities .
Our group supports their fight for press freedom .
In our opinion , censorship and control of information can only weaken the battle for democracy and against fundamentalism .
That is why we are asking the Algerian authorities to release Chawki Amari , to allow republication of ' La Tribune ' and to respect freedom of speech and information .
At the same time , we are pleased at the continuation of the dialogue with democratic forces that is currently in progress , and we hope that this will lead to the settlement of a crisis which has lasted only too long .
We are also pleased about the opening of negotiations between the European Union and Algeria but , going by previous association agreements that we have voted on in Parliament and that have considerable consequences for the economy and employment in Mediterranean countries , we ask that democratic forces and trade union and professional organizations should be regularly consulted during these negotiations .
Madam President , I belong to the generation who came to understand what was going on in the colonised parts of the world through the Algerian war and I actively supported the Algerian freedom fighters .
Many of us had very great hopes that Algeria would lead the way in respect of democracy , freedom and human rights in the Arab world .
It was not long before we realised that it would not be so easy .
As late as the 1970s and 1980s I visited Algeria a number of times .
There was then certainly no democracy but there was nevertheless a certain sense of hope .
When elections were then called there a few years ago we hoped that they would lead to democratic development .
As everyone knows , events took a very different turn .
The arrest of Chawki Amari on 4 July is simply one of the most recent pieces of evidence that the Algerian regime is unable to deal with the problems in a democratic manner .
As the previous speaker also emphasised , a great many journalists have been killed or arrested or have met with problems for having wished to carry out their democratic , journalistic obligations and report on what is really happening in the country .
A dialogue is now being conducted which still does not include all the parties in Algeria .
Of course we are in no way supporters of the Islamic Salvation Front but I find it extremely difficult to understand how the dialogue which President Zrroual resumed yesterday with delegations from four parties can lead to anything if one does not in some way attempt also to include the other forces , even if they are in themselves not approved of .
We believe that the European Union has a considerable responsibility to support democratic development in Algeria .
Madam President , at these times the European Parliament 's message must be one of solidarity with Algerian journalists and a call for the release of the cartoonist Chawki Amari .
We should also recognise that in Algeria - especially in Algeria - as in all countries in the world , the national flag arouses feelings of deep respect and pride .
Our message of solidarity from the European Parliament , firmly in favour of press freedom and calling for this journalist 's release , must not in any way be seen as alien but as a point of departure for an attitude of dialogue and joint action as Euro-Mediterranean partners , since we share the same aims of peace and democracy .
Algeria is going through very difficult times but there are the multilateral talks which are hopeful and the start of negotiations on an association agreement .
It is precisely the old , obsolete and outmoded code that President Zrroual has proposed to change .
We must lend political support for the country to go down the road to pluralism and peace .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , freedom of expression and freedom of information should always be respected where respect for the rule of law and democracy is demanded .
We cannot accept direct and indirect censorship measures and information controls affecting the press , which should be able to operate properly , free of controls .
It is important that such freedom be established in Algeria and in some other States , where freedom of the press is being seriously violated .
The European Union should support measures and projects to help the Algerian media , which are currently in need of sufficient economic support to enable them to continue supplying the country with the information it needs .
In any case a political dialogue must be established as soon as possible with all the Algerian authorities and democratic powers , to find a solution to the current crisis and , hence , restore as quickly as possible the civil peace needed for the forthcoming legislative elections .
Everyone in the country must join forces to launch the peace process that unfortunately has yet to begin .
Finally , I should like to express my full solidarity with all those who are being deprived of their freedom because of violations of human rights and democracy , but especially because there is no freedom of expression and opinion .
Madam President , the arrest and imprisonment of the cartoonist Chawki Amari and banning of the publication of his newspaper are only another indication of the predicament the Algerian political authorities find themselves in .
The attack on the freedom of the press can only , and even then with difficulty , mask the powerlessness of the authorities to overcome attempts at destabilizing their country .
Moreover , attempts to control information are stupid because they are anachronistic . Anachronistic because nothing can any longer prevent ideas from circulating .
There are , fortunately , many examples to prove that attempts to deprive public opinion of information , embarrassing or not for the ruling regime , are doomed to fail .
This at least is one of the positive aspects that can be credited to the worldwide information society .
The Algerian authorities would thus be well advised to use other means to re-establish the rule of law in Algeria and not to attack the powers of the press , one of the pillars of the new society they are preparing to build .
Salman Rushdie
Madam President , the Council of Ministers is currently holding discussions with Iran on a number of issues , including Salman Rushdie .
We have no objection to this in itself but some of what has leaked out concerning these discussions gives cause for concern .
The aim of the Liberal Group 's resolution is to make it quite clear to the Council where Parliament stands and we hope that Parliament will support this resolution . This must occur before the discussions between the Council and Iran result in any form of agreement , of whatever kind it may be .
We in the Liberal Group hope that Parliament , like us , will oppose anything which Iran can interpret as any kind of recognition - silent , implicit or indirect - of Khomeini 's fatwa against Salman Rushdie .
No religious leader or movement should be permitted the freedom to urge supporters in some kind of fatwa to commit murder .
That , Madam President , is outrageous behaviour which must be exposed and combatted to the end by every true democrat .
Arrest of Father Tomislav Matanovic
Madam President , as you know yourself , our group was in Banja Luka exactly a week ago today .
We saw there what is really going on in this so-called Serbian Republic .
I can only say that , on the basis of our conversations with the local representatives and spokespeople of Mr Karadzic , I felt as though time had rolled back fifty years .
Indeed , the way people talked and the arguments they used reminded me strongly of the most terrible Gauleiter of the Hitler period , quite apart from the Stalinists who were also represented there .
We really are talking about a gang of brigands , and the chief brigand , Karadzic , really has fomented infamy here .
One of the worst cases was reported to us by the Bishop of Banja Luka , that of a priest who had been held in detention for nearly a year , since 24 August last year , together with his parents .
The Serbian authorities maintain that they would have intervened on his behalf but that the local police chief will not authorize his release , although he has not been charged with anything - he has simply been thrown into jail .
When the Bishop asked for our authorities and representatives to intervene , promises were made to him , but nothing has happened .
Hence it is high time that we , the European Parliament , took clear action on this situation , which is in direct breach of the Dayton Agreement , and demand that our representative , Mr Bildt , who after all is obligated to us , finally do something to ensure that Father Matanovic and his parents are released , which is their right .
If we cannot achieve that , it would again be apparent how incapable we are of taking effective action .
That would be a grave danger to peace .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will take the topics in the order in which Parliament has dealt with them , and I begin with Burma .
The Commission shares Parliament 's concern about the deterioration in the political situation in Burma .
It deplores the death of Mr Nichols in prison .
The defamatory remarks recently published in the official Burmese press have particularly offended the Commission , which supports any initiative that might bring the Burmese government to adopt a line of conduct more in keeping with international practice .
At the same time , it calls the attention of Parliament to the very limited effect any possible economic sanctions could have , given the small volume of trade between the Union and Burma .
In 1995 , this amounted to less than ECU 200 million , 66 for imports , 113 for exports .
As for the suspension of the Generalized System of Preferences , no decision can be taken on this until the investigation currently being carried out by Mr Marin 's services is complete .
I can assure you that the Commission is conducting this with due speed , due rigour and due vigilance .
It will be finished in September .
The Commission supports the proposal from some Member States to use the next meetings with ASEAN , particularly in the Asian Regional Forum , to insist on the need to renew the dialogue between all democratic and ethnic forces in Burma .
Secondly , Cyprus .
The Commission is deeply concerned at the escalation of violence observed during the last few months in the Turkish Cypriot community .
It was shocked by the murder of Mr Adali , an eminent Turkish intellectual and journalist .
The death of this highly respected person , well known and appreciated for his outspokenness and his defence of the identity of Turkish and Greek Cypriot values , and highly regarded for his attachment to human rights , can only be strongly deplored .
The Commission will continue its efforts at conciliation in Cyprus by making contact with the Turkish Cypriot community about the prospective accession of Cyprus to the European Union .
I would remind you that European Union policy on Cyprus was reaffirmed at the last EU-Cyprus Association Council .
It was reiterated that negotiations on the accession of Cyprus will get under way with a Commission proposal six months after the end of the Intergovernmental Conference , taking into account the results of that conference .
On that occasion , the Union also declared itself in favour of a global settlement of the Cyprus question along the lines of United Nations Security Council resolutions and based on the formation of a two zone and two community Cypriot federation .
Thirdly , the Vietnamese Boat People .
While of course sharing the concern of the European Parliament , the Commission wishes to direct your attention to the following items of information : in March 1996 , the Steering Committee responsible for the global plan of action of the International Conference on Refugees from IndoChina removed the principal remaining obstacles to a humanly acceptable solution to the tragedy of the Vietnamese Boat People ( this agreement should now end this tragedy ) ; Malaysia and Singapore closed their camps at the end of May and June 1996 and the same thing will happen in Indonesia , Thailand and the Philippines ; in the case of Hong Kong , the majority of the repatriation operations have been progressing normally ; Vietnam has accepted the return of some 70 , 000 of its citizens and their situation is being closely monitored by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees , which has not observed any cases of discrimination .

Lastly , the European Commission shares Parliament 's concern over the destination of Community aid .
Such aid should be given directly to the Vietnamese returning to the country .
It may be mainly in the form of support for starting up production enterprises , of grants for specialist training and of help towards micro-projects aimed at improving living standards in the communities into which the former refugees are being reintegrated .
May I end by adding that , for the majority of non-refugees known as Vietnamese economic migrants , the only viable solution is a return to their country .
The repatriation operations are progressing smoothly .
Fourthly , Ethiopia .
The Commission and the Member States are increasingly concerned by developments in the human rights situation in Ethiopia .
The Commission Delegation and the Heads of Missions of Member States , in close contact with the International Committee of the Red Cross , are monitoring very closely the situation of certain prisoners , such as Mr Abera Yemane Ab .
I should stress that the Commission and the Member States are fully aware that for them to act effectively , the human rights situation must be painstakingly assessed and evaluated on the basis of individual cases .
It has also been decided , in the context of coordination between Member States and the Commission in Addis Ababa , to undertake common action to collect , compare and verify data relating to violations of human rights and , of course , to speak to the government about this .
Fifthly , the Philippines .
The Commission is engaged in open dialogue with the government of the Philippines and other governments in the region about human rights .
As regards the particular case of Father Shay Cullen , the Commission is in a position to state that he was actually arrested on 13 June last but was quickly released .
The Commission , which has had the opportunity to take part in some of the activities of Father Shay Cullen 's Preda Foundation against child prostitution , nevertheless immediately asked that an enquiry be quickly carried out on the spot .
The Commission will of course keep Parliament fully informed of the results of this enquiry and the conclusions to be drawn from it .
Sixth point , Algeria .
Sadly , Algeria is in the throes of a crisis which is putting the political normalization of the country to the test .
Several sectors of Algerian society are suffering from this , particularly the press .
Since the signature of the Barcelona Declaration in November 1995 , the Algerian government has already committed itself multilaterally , and I quote : ' to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to guarantee the effective and legitimate exercise of these rights and freedoms , including freedom of speech ' .
The Algerian government has also shown that it is keen to negotiate an association agreement with the European Union , in which respect for human rights and democratic principles will form an essential element .
Internally , the Algerian government has published a memorandum announcing a national conference , a referendum on revision of the constitution and parliamentary and local elections .
The Commission is actively encouraging the Algerian government to implement its multilateral commitments and national measures that could lead to the political normalization of the country .
In addition , the Commission will soon be in a position to announce the first projects for financial aid to the press , adopted as part of the media-democracy programme created on the initiative of the European Parliament in 1996 .
Point 7 : the fatwa against Salman Rushdie .
The Commission shares the profound concern of the European Parliament over the adoption and continuation of the fatwa against Salman Rushdie .
The pronouncement of a death sentence on a citizen of a Member State of the European Union for having written a book is totally unacceptable and contrary to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
The Commission therefore welcomes the declaration of the G7 Summit at its meeting in Lyons last June , calling on the Iranian government to abandon the path of terrorism and to stop supporting the death threats hanging over the head of Salman Rushdie .
I should also remind you that the General Affairs Council of 22 April 1996 decided to make the dialogue with Iran more critical .
For the Commission , the continuation of a critical dialogue with Iran is an effective instrument for producing a change in Iran 's behaviour sooner or later .
The eighth and last point is the arbitrary arrest of Tomislav Matanovic .
The Commission is as concerned as the European Parliament by the arbitrary detention since 24 August 1995 of Father Tomislav Matanovic and his parents at Prijedor in the ' Republika Srpska ' .
The Commission has enquired about this case .
It has raised the matter several times with the NGOs in Sarajevo and will be discussing the case with the competent Bosnian authorities , particularly with the mediators installed under the Dayton Accord . I can assure you that the Commission will also urge Mr Carl Bildt to intervene with the official institutions in the ' Republika Srpska ' with a view to obtaining the immediate release of Tomislav Matanovic and his parents .
Madam President , may I be allowed to ask one or two supplementaries ?
In doing so I must express keen disappointment with the Commission statement about Burma , which I find less than satisfactory .
First of all I understood Mr Marin to say last month that he was opposed to the generalized system of preferences .
There was no ' if ' or ' but ' about it and so I am surprised that the matter has been referred to a special committee .
Secondly , it may be that the trade is small but investment is not and I do not think the Commissioner said anything about Carlsberg or Heineken or forthcoming investment which I think is very important .
Thirdly , it was my understanding that there was to be a report shortly about forced labour .
When is that report going to be made available , if it is indeed being prepared ?
As regards the generalized system of preferences , I would remind you that there are Community procedures that the Commission must comply with , that these procedures begin with investigations , that these investigations are taking place , that they are confidential and that they then lead , depending on the situation , to proposals and decisions of the Commission about maintaining the generalized system of preferences .
I repeat that the Commission is currently carrying out these investigations .
As they are confidential , I cannot of course reveal their contents .
What I can say is that these investigations are being carried out speedily since they have to be completed by September and that the Commission will draw from them all the necessary conclusions .
I can assure you that the Commission will take into account the essential elements concerning human rights and democracy , in accordance with the powers vested in it for the application of these regulations .
Madam President , I put questions which have not been answered .
I think I am entitled to an answer to the two other questions concerning investment and the report on forced labour .
If the Commissioner is not able to reply at this moment would he be good enough at least to give me a reply in writing ?
Mr Moorhouse , I take good note of your request .
I cannot answer you today , but we shall reply to you very shortly and directly .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0877 / 96 by Mr Haarder and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democratic and Reformist Party , on Taiwan 's role in international organizations ; -B4-0881 / 96 by Mrs Laurila and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on Taiwan 's role in international organizations ; -B4-0904 / 96 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance in the European Parliament , on Taiwan 's role in international organizations ; -B4-0926 / 96 by Mr Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on Taiwan 's role in international organizations .
Madam President , the Liberal Group is a cosignatory of the joint resolution on Taiwan and this is not the first time that Parliament has been called on to stress the positive role played by Taiwan in the development of the Far East and its contribution to aid for developing countries .
This is not the first time , either , that we have to highlight the progress of democracy enabling the Chinese population to have a democratic Chinese state , which is a very happy state of affairs .
The aim of this proposal is to go further .
Chancelleries are petrified by any relationship with Taiwan .
The European Union has the advantage of more flexible formulae .
Complaints are sometimes heard that Information Offices are not true ambassadors .
Let us turn a handicap to advantage : the opening of a Commission Information Office in Taiwan would make it possible to develop and strengthen fruitful relationships and to do so without too much trouble .
Madam President , at last we have got round to discussing freely those recommendations which the Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted unanimously , with the exception of two members , as long ago as April .
Now we are discussing the matter as an urgent topic because , if Parliament adopts these recommendations , they will have to be brought to the attention of the UN General Assembly when it reconvenes in the autumn .
I do not intend to take you all through the long history , which has led to there being a People 's Republic of China and a Republic of China , referred to hereinafter as Continental China and Taiwan so that there will at least be no confusion in interpreting , as sometimes happens .
We all remember that since 1971 Continental China has been the only official Chinese Member State in the UN .
However , a lot has happened since 1971 .
First of all , in the 1980s there was the remarkable economic development which led to democratization , and also in the 1980s there was a rapprochement between Continental China and Taiwan and an improvement in relations between them .
Then the Taiwanese began to go on quite frequent visits to Continental China , Taiwanese investments in Continental China became possible , etc .
The situation suddenly changed in the 1990s , when relations cooled noticeably , partly because Taiwan 's democratic development had speeded up considerably and Taiwan was beginning to be regarded as a fully democratic society along the West European model .
The fact that Taiwan had repealed the laws from the period of martial law as early as the 1980s , did not help this cooling off in the 1990s .
The lowest point in relations was reached this year in March , when Taiwan approached its fully democratic , free and direct presidential elections reflecting the people 's choice .
Before this Taiwan had already held democratic elections to a representative institution in 1991 and again in 1995 .
President Li was re-elected Taiwan 's President in the general elections in March this year .
In his discussions since the election he has stressed his desire to hold a dialogue with Continental China on cooperation and the relaxing of relationships .
Taiwan 's international importance both in Asia and here in Europe is so great , and Taiwan 's contribution is so important now in terms of development cooperation , environmental activities and other areas , that Taiwan can in my opinion no longer be left outside the international organizations under the auspices of the UN .
I have myself drawn up a report on the subject in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , which was adopted here , as I mentioned , in April this year with only two members opposing it , but which owing to the opposition of the Socialist Group and for technical reasons it has not been possible to debate in this house .
Now , to my surprise , I see that the Socialist Group is again opposing the adoption of these urgent motions for resolutions irrespective of the fact that all the Socialist Group members in the Foreign Affairs Committee supported the provisions of my report , which are just the same as the ones which we are adopting today in our vote .
For example , I have not started from the assumption that Taiwan should be proposed as a full member of the UN , because I see that this is not realistic , but my recommendations assume that Taiwan should be able to take part in the activities of the organizations under the auspices of the UN , as well as in the organizations loosely associated with the UN .
All the European Union Member States have their own information offices in Taipei , and I have therefore proposed that the European Union could also open an information office there .
These are the main recommendations which are being put forward in this proposal .
A population of 21 million can no longer be sidelined , as if they had never existed .
In my opinion we in Europe should feel a sense of responsibility because we have demanded democracy from Taiwan , and Taiwan has gone a long way down that road .
This democracy should be rewarded .
Finally , Madam President , I would refer to the fact that there are two particularly bad translation errors in the Finnish translation : paragraph 1 ( b ) and ( d ) have become quite comical .
The Finnish translation should say ' in the activities of bodies answerable to the UN General Assembly ' and in point ( d ) ' the Council urges the Commission to adopt measures ' .
The Finnish language translation is quite inappropriate , even though the original language of these recommendations was Finnish , and I do not know how this entirely inappropriate Finnish wording ended up here .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , by voting for this resolution today Parliament will show that it is appalled by realpolitik .
By voting for this resolution , Parliament will affirm , admittedly with moderation but with a great sense of responsibility , that the exclusion of Taiwan from the international community is unacceptable .
Yes , such exclusion is an example of the hypocrisy of the whole Western world and we must put an end to it as quickly as possible !
Today Taiwan is an unquestionable democratic reality , whereas we are very far from being able to say the same about a neighbouring country , which day by day steps up its policy of repression but still has a privileged relationship with a Europe incapable of reconciling its essential commercial aspirations with the will to affirm respect for human rights and the promotion of democracy all over the world .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance will vote with conviction for a text which has had , as our colleague Mrs Laurila has reminded us , to surmount many obstacles before being put to the vote in this Parliament .
Madam President , the Green Group in the European Parliament has joined in tabling this joint motion for a resolution , since we support the legitimate desire of Taiwan to be admitted to the international community of nations .
Taiwan has made significant progress over the past year towards democratization .
We want to give active encouragement to this process so that further advances will be possible , particularly in respect of human rights , employee rights , equality of opportunity for women and environmental protection .
We think that democratic advances will be boosted by Taiwan 's participation in international fora .
No country in the region is threatened by Taiwan .
The Taiwanese Government has for some time taken a serious interest in achieving dtente in its relations with the People 's Republic of China .
This gave us all the more reason for concern over China 's sabre-rattling at the time of the elections in Taiwan .
Next year the currently British colony of Hong Kong will be given back to China .
The handover may prove to be a test-case to determine whether the People 's Republic is willing to respect established social and political structures or whether China can only impose its authority by coercion and repression .
The EU should exert its influence on the People 's Republic of China in order to promote the process of dtente in the region .
This state has long since ceased to meet the criteria for the label ' Red ' China as , in economic policy terms , the Peking Government has for years been pursuing a muscular form of industrialization reminiscent of the early days of capitalism .
The European Commission has over the past two years been systematically promoting economic relations with China .
It should now develop its cooperative links with Taiwan .
A first concrete step would be to open a European Union information office in Taipei .
This step , which would be a very important gesture in signalling the European Union 's interest in the development of Taiwan , should be taken as soon as possible .
I hope soon to get an answer from the Commission which will give the lie to the slogan which has become current : MEPs ask questions , Commission gives no answers .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ever since the nationalists were forced to flee the Chinese mainland and seek refuge in former Formosa , now Taiwan , an enormous amount has been achieved on that island through hard work and intelligence and with the support of overseas Chinese elsewhere in the world .
Taiwan , with only 21 million inhabitants , is an economic power to be reckoned with in the world economy .
Despite the widening political differences between China and Taiwan , Taiwan is one of the leading investors on the mainland .
The Chinese Government 's recent aggressive sabre-rattling just before the elections did not inhibit progress towards democracy in Taiwan .
Anything but !
This aggressive action did , however , lead to a build-up of arms in the region , according to reliable sources .
Immediately after the elections Taiwan made a gesture of peace to resume the interrupted negotiations with Beijing , but never received an answer .
So today 's resolution is on the one hand a tribute to democratic Taiwan , clearing the way for its membership of international organizations .
It is also a call to encourage Taiwan to cooperate with the mainland .
I fully endorse this resolution .
And I voted for it in the Foreign Affairs Committee , as Mrs Laurila said .
But a sizeable proportion of my Group is not in favour of points B and D concerning an EU information office in Taipei and the consideration of possible membership of UN agencies .
My Group will request a split vote on these points .
Madam President , I heartily concur with what the previous speakers have said , particularly the remarks of Mrs Laurila , for whose report I also voted in the Foreign Affairs Committee .
I would like to add something , however .
It is somewhat rare today that such matters have to be dealt with in a topical and urgent debate .
It had been the long-standing custom of the European Parliament to draw up reports on the political situation in particular regions through its committees , especially the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
In those committees , we were able to examine and discuss situations in all their aspects .
Suddenly , that is becoming increasingly difficult and , in this case , quite impossible .
So we have to use any opportunity we can get to put out an opinion of the European Parliament .
What is the actual reason for this opposition of the Social Democratic Group ?
They are otherwise always so keen on autonomy , self-determination , democracy and human rights .
Why are they giving way to pressure from a country , which has incidentally put severe pressure on the rapporteur because of this report on Taiwan ?
Are they so eager to show deference to China ?
I really do not know .
Why should the European Union not support a country which has great economic significance in the region , which is on the road to democracy , which in other words is also a factor of democracy , in a way which after all does not alter the political situation ?
Why do we seek to prevent a nation from realizing the capabilities and possibilities it possesses in the great network of international organizations ?
It is really incomprehensible , for we have had links with that country going back many years .
We should above all remember who is exerting pressure here .
Again and again , we find that human rights and concepts of democracy are at stake , and we should really not set a bad example here .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what is the problem with Taiwan as regards international law ?
It is that of the recognition of a government .
After a terrible war , both parties claimed to represent the whole of China .
The authorities in Taipei did not lack arguments on this point : they were set up by the last legal government ; the Communists had seized power by force ; the Taiwan parliament resulted from the last free Chinese elections , imperfect as they were .
Today , forty-eight years after seizure of power by the Communists , the terms of the problem are different .
It must be accepted that we can no longer be content to choose between the two Chinese authorities .
Even States which maintain diplomatic relations solely with Beijing have to take account of this large island with a population of 20 million ruled by a genuine , effective , stable and peaceful power .
Establishing international relations with Taiwan is in the interests of the international community and it is also in the interests of the whole of China , until continental China and the billion human beings living there are finally liberated from the bloody , totalitarian Marxist-Leninist dictatorship , which not long ago had , we should remember , so many ardent defenders even in this Chamber - and not only on the benches of the left , alas !
Is it necessary to remind you , Mr Nordmann , that Mr Giscard d 'Estaing once really believed that Mao Tse Tung could be described as ' a beacon of world thought ' ?
So , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what satisfaction it is today to see the joint resolution catch up , after several decades , with the solutions proposed by the European Right to the problem of Taiwan !
Madam President , I am glad to be able to restate a number of arguments .
In my view Taiwan is a sovereign state .
Taiwan is a democracy .
Taiwan upholds human rights .
Taiwan is an important partner in the world economy and a significant trading partner of the European Union and most of the Member States .
But Taiwan plays no official part on the world stage .
21 million people are deprived of a voice in the United Nations .
21 million people are unable to benefit from the information , expertise and experience of the World Health Organization .
The people of Taiwan cannot benefit from UNESCO .
Taiwan 's children cannot benefit form the services of UNICEF .
Taiwan respects the terms agreed for international trade .
Taiwan is not a member of the World Trade Organization .
Her membership of the World Trade Organization is in our interest too .
So Taiwan should be made a member forthwith , and so should China .
Membership of UNESCO , UNICEF and the World Trade Organization must not be withheld from the people of Taiwan .
Nor must membership of the United Nations .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has taken careful note of Parliament 's call to open an information office in Taiwan .
Today , and for the time being , the Commission has no intention of opening such an office .
However , the question could be re-examined in the event of Taiwan acceding to the World Trade Organization , since that would bring a new element into the trade relations between that country and the European Union .
The question of opening an office once Taiwan becomes a member of the World Trade Organization could be re-examined , provided of course that there are sufficient budgetary resources .
Any possible office of this type would not be a delegation with diplomatic status , but an office responsible for defending the interests of the Union .
I would remind you in any case that the European Union 's interests in Taiwan are mainly of a commercial nature , so that the work of the office in question would inevitably be centred on commercial matters , but could of course also be extended to areas such as information and culture as many European universities have links with Taiwan universities .
Eventually , the office would be very similar to those that some Member States and a few third countries have already opened in Taiwan .
The decision to open such an office would therefore be in accordance with the policy long pursued by the Union in that part of the world .
Consequently - and I emphasize this point - it would contribute nothing to a possible recognition of Taiwan as a sovereign state .
First , I should like to say to Mr Gollnisch that if we had both to take part in a debate on our relationships with Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , it should not be limited to the latter 's judgement of Mao Tse Tung .
But I have asked to speak in order to put a supplementary question to the Commissioner , who linked the opening of a Commission Information Office in Taiwan to that country 's accession to the World Trade Organization .
Is this a necessary or a sufficient condition ?
I have not so much a question for the Commissioner , Madam President , more a comment in reply to Mrs Lenz .
We had absolutely no wish for urgency on the subject of Taiwan .
Nor did our Group put down a motion for a resolution .
Really we wanted things to proceed in the usual manner via the Committee on Foreign Affairs and your colleague 's report .
I now have the impression that we are being reproached for our coolness on this resolution which does not really concern a matter of urgency .
But to make things perfectly clear : we voted against urgency for Taiwan on Wednesday evening and we would far rather see the subject dealt with in the normal manner via a normal report by the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Just to clarify matters , Madam President .
Very briefly , Madam President .
On this point at least , we are in agreement with Mr Nordmann .
I do not understand the Commissioner 's reply very well .
Why wait for the green light from the World Trade Organization ?
Does that mean , to put it bluntly , that we await the permission of the Americans ?
While on its side the World Trade Organization is itself perhaps waiting for the European Union to take the initiative ?
If that is so , it could be a very long wait and since the Commissioner has told us very clearly that there is no question of diplomatic recognition , I do not really see why we are so afraid of the prospect of opening up trade representation .
Madam President , may I ask the Commissioner if the European Commission will be closing its delegations in all countries which are not members of the World Trade Organization ?
Madam President , I should like to state very briefly that we should not be hypocritical and two-faced in this house but should discuss matters openly .
We may disagree , but we must speak openly .
We all know that the Socialist Group prevented the Foreign Affairs Committee from approving the report coming for debate .
And that is what we are talking about today - not about the fact that the Socialist Group wished at all costs to prevent the subject of Taiwan being discussed as an urgent question .
In any case , I refer to the procedure which has been in force in the Bureau .
In my opinion we all benefit from the fact that we speak openly and call things by their real names .
If we oppose something we must oppose it openly instead of saying that we have never opposed anything but its being debated as an urgency .
We would have liked this to have become a normal report adopted by the Foreign Affairs Committee in the normal way .
The Socialist Group has prevented this .
Madam President , necessary or sufficient condition ? I repeat what I said very clearly : an essential condition for the re-examination of the question .
Do not worry , Mr Gollnisch , we are not waiting for the green light from the WTO , but the European Union has very precise powers as far as trade is concerned and hence it seems obvious that the day when Taiwan joins the World Trade Organization will have an effect on trade relations between the European Union and Taiwan .
That is why , given the powers of the European Union , the WTO is taken into account ; it is , of course , certainly not because we have to ask for authorization from the World Trade Organization , an authorization that in any case it would have great difficulty in giving us .
To answer another question that was raised , it is not a matter today of closing delegations .
We are now engaged in a process relating to the World Trade Organization which dates back to the Marrakesh agreements two years ago .
Under the terms of these agreements , we are now negotiating the entry into the World Trade Organization of a number of countries , which requires several conditions to be met , and we see in the enlargement of the World Trade Organization a strengthening of the ' multilateralization ' of trade which is a good thing for the European Union which has every interest in preserving an open and multilateral trading system .
I therefore think that the question on the agenda today is more that of the enlargement and opening up of the WTO to non-Member States rather than that of its closure .
Madam President , I have to say again that to argue in terms of the WTO , Commissioner , is not actually an answer .
I could understand the social principles of the ILO being quoted .
But the WTO is not exactly the personification of democracy .
So this answer did not convince me at all .
The European Union should pursue an independent policy ; bringing the WTO into the discussion is really ridiculous .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0981 / 96 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democratic and Reformist Party , on the escalation of the fighting in Chechnya ; -B4-0901 / 96 by Mrs Lalumire , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the resumption of the fighting in Chechnya ; -B4-0920 / 96 by Mr Puerta , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Chechnya ; -B4-0925 / 96 by Mrs Schroedter and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the attacks of the Russian military on Chechnya ; -B4-0948 / 96 by Mrs Hoff and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Chechnya ; -B4-0951 / 96 by Mr von Habsburg and Mrs Oomen-Ruiten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on developments in Chechnya .
Madam President , the tragic events in Chechnya mean quite simply that Yeltsin is rather less trustworthy than he purported to be at the time of the elections .
Many Chechen citizens have already been killed .
Many , many more have fled , and this is not only a slap in the face for the Chechen negotiators and the people of Russia but also a flagrant breach of the agreement which currently exists between the Union and Russia .
A clear signal from our Union is thus called for , and I would remind the House that it is this same Russia which has just been admitted to the Council of Europe amid great fanfares and trumpeting .
The intention in admitting Russia to the Council of Europe was to exert rather more influence on the situation on the ground .
So we must make quite sure we convey our grave displeasure to Yeltsin , the duly elected President .
It should also be a signal to General Lebed , whom we cannot exactly be sure of either .
His main election pledge was to end the war in Chechnya but now , after the bombing , he has pledged full support for Yeltsin 's policy .
Does that inspire confidence ?
I think not .
Madam President , what has happened in Chechnya is precisely what was very easy to foresee .
Without even waiting for the official announcement of the result of the presidential elections , Mr Yeltsin went back on his statement that he wanted a peaceful solution to the Chechen problem and immediately ordered a new military offensive that has already caused hundreds of deaths over the past few days .
In just a few short hours , all President Yeltsin 's electoral promises went out of the window .
We even begin to wonder how much real power President Yeltsin has in ruling Russia .
Mr Bertens ' reference to General Lebed seems pertinent .
My Group feels that the unilateral resumption , by the Russian army , of the military offensive in Chechnya is incompatible with the spirit and letter of the agreement currently in force between the European Union and the Russian Federation .
We cannot sit back and watch the elimination of an entire population and the destabilization of an entire area , the Caucasus , which , because of the Chechen conflict , is again at risk of exploding with all its problems .
We therefore call on the Commission to use its legislative powers to propose suspension of the agreement between the European Union and Russia .
I think this is the only way of exerting pressure , especially as the United States and the entire international community have already roundly condemned the resumption of hostilities in Chechnya .
My Group also demands that all possible steps be taken to ensure that President Yeltsin withdraws Russian troops from Chechnya , in accordance with his own decree of 25 June 1996 and with the two cease-fire agreements signed by him before the elections , just a few weeks ago .
Madam President , my colleague is quite right .
For a year and a half - with very few interruptions - Russian troops have been bombarding Chechen settlements .
Thousands of civilians have fled , without recognition and without rights .
Human rights violations in the filtration camps are hardly even mentioned .
And western governments look on , pat Yeltsin on the back and praise his democratic reform process !
I cannot help thinking of the Council statement after the elections .
What a democracy !
And what mendacity !
Instead of the expected peace talks , Yeltsin again deploys heavy artillery against the civilian population one day after the elections .
In so doing , he destroys the confidence of all the voters in his country .
There is not much hope left for a democratic development .
Yet the agreement we have concluded with Russia sets democratic development and respect for human rights as preconditions .
I remind the Commission that that was the basis for the interim agreement ; you said that we could exert greater influence through the interim agreement .
But , as I see things , absolutely nothing is happening .
At this point , I would like to ask the Commission : will it propose to the Council that the interim agreement be suspended ?
Will it ensure that a conciliation committee , as provided for under the interim agreement , is brought into operation ?
Has the Commission formulated a basis for concrete steps to be taken against the Russian Government ?
Or does the Commission accept these attacks on the civilian population in the northern Caucasus ?
Will it continue to look on ?
I would like a very concrete answer to these questions for , in this Parliament , it is our job to support democratic forces Russia , and they are growing ever weaker .
We hope that we can support the soldiers ' mothers , the peace groups , because they are the hope for that country .
Madam President , it is unfortunately not the first time the European Parliament has had to consider the war in Chechnya in a topical and urgent debate .
After the start of negotiations and President Yeltsin 's promises during the election campaign , we had every hope that this bloody and tragic conflict would be ended by a political solution and that actual peace negotiations would begin .
That is what both the Russian and the Chechen people want .
Sadly , however , that hope was short-lived .
One increasingly gets the impression that the lofty promises were merely part of a coldly calculated election strategy .
That kind of thing is cynical and shows contempt for humanity .
The European Parliament cannot and will not remain silent in the face of such conduct .
Of course , we know here that there are plenty of groups on the Chechen side whose readiness for violence is not slow to manifest itself .
But that does not excuse the behaviour of Russian soldiers who turn their guns on Chechen villages and destroy them and whose main victims are , once again , the civilian population .
The European Union supported President Yeltsin politically and materially during the election campaign .
That was a pledge of confidence in advance , which must now be justified politically .
Our message to the Russian President and to Russian politicians is quite clear : Russia cannot be admitted to the Council of Europe and demand the expansion and deepening of relations and cooperation with the European Union and , at the same time , fail to end the bloody war in Chechnya and the continuing violations of human rights , despite all protests , appeals and warnings .
This is also a call to the new Russian Government .
The great majority of Members of the European Parliament are interested in good and intensive cooperation with Russia .
We are doing good preparatory work on this in the Delegation for Relations with Russia , but we cannot continue to do so regardless of the circumstances .
Cooperation is a two-way street , and shutting our eyes or looking away from the bloody events in Chechnya cannot be allowed to become a principle of our policy .
There will be no military solution to this conflict . I therefore call on everyone concerned , on behalf of the Socialist Group , finally to work seriously for a political solution that justifies the term peace negotiations .
Madam President , the Chechen drama furnishes yet another clear demonstration of what the words and promises of Russia , particularly the present Russian regime , are worth .
We should not forget what Yeltsin proclaimed in his June decree , namely that he would withdraw the troops .
General Lebed said up to election day that he was in favour of ending the Chechen war and after the election - bearing out what I said earlier - that he favoured a military solution .
In a word : we have again been completely misled in the matter of this Chechen war , at least those who took the declarations seriously .
I was not one of them , because I know a little history and hence am well aware that you cannot base anything on such words , and that advance benefits of any kind only bring about one result : they merely encourage certain personalities to continue their gangsterism .
Finally , Madam President , there is something else we must realize : Russia today , in the age of decolonization worldwide , is the last great colonial empire on earth .
The French were in West Africa when the first Russian crossed the Urals in order to conquer Asian territory .
And what is happening in Chechnya is only the start of decolonization in Russia .
Hence , in order to save our credibility , we must really stand up for the selfdetermination of nations - that applies to the Chechens too - and we must put serious pressure on Russia to keep the promises it has made .
If they break their word again , we must not reward those responsible by maintaining financial aid , which will only encourage them to carry on as before .
Chechnya is a historic challenge for us .
Whether we are up to it , only our future will tell .
Commissioner , I am afraid that we are repeating ourselves , but well , in this case I think it is not excessive .
Those of us with little faith in Mr Yeltsin 's democratic spirit felt , back in May , that the signing of agreements was no more than an unsubtle political manoeuvre .
Unfortunately we were right because no sooner were the election results known than the bombings started and , as others have said , hundreds of civilians were killed and hundreds and thousands of civilians were forced to take flight .
It seems to us that , once and for all - and not only in the case of Chechnya but also Turkey and many other countries - the European Union must use the means of pressure at its disposal in its agreements , thanks to the democratic and human rights protection clauses , to avoid such massacres .
The European Union , including the European Parliament , must be told that this pressure is absolutely necessary if we want to bring an end to killings in Chechnya and if we want to end the violations of human rights in so many countries .
We in the European Parliament are aware of what is happening all the time to human rights in many other countries .
All we can ask , Commissioner , is that pressure be exerted to stop killings .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened to your debate with much interest and I have taken careful note of what speakers said .
For the most part , I share your anxiety and I can assure you that the Commission is seriously concerned by recent developments in the situation in Chechnya .
The Commission regrets that the two parties have not fulfilled the undertakings they gave in the cease-fire agreements of 21 May 1996 and 10 June 1996 .
The Commission is particularly worried about the difficulties experienced by the OSCE assistance group in Grozny , commissioned to mediate between the two sides .
The Commission is also concerned about the working conditions of the humanitarian aid organizations .
The European Union is by far the largest provider of humanitarian aid to Chechnya .
The aid teams do not have free and completely secure access to all Chechen regions .
The Commission is monitoring the situation in close collaboration with Member States and strongly reiterates its disquiet over the new outburst of violence in Chechnya .
The Commission calls on Russia to honour the commitments it has made , particularly at the time of its accession to the Council of Europe .
It is convinced that the only way to settle the issues in dispute between the parties is through negotiation and , in this respect , no efforts should be spared to achieve this objective .
Madam President , I have just one request , namely that the Commissioner answer my questions .
I am not going to repeat the words of the statement I made on behalf of the Commission , but I have taken careful note of Mrs Schroedter 's statement which I will pass on to the responsible Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We will now take the vote .
Reconstruction aid to former Yugoslavia ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0247 / 96 ) by Mr Cars , on the proposal for a Council Regulation relating to aid for Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Mr President , Mr Cars ' report is most important in that it opens up new and improved perspectives for the whole of former Yugoslavia and Bosnia-Herzegovina in particular .
The report properly details what needs to be done and on what conditions measures need to be tackled .
I am especially pleased that a number of additions were made during the deliberations in committee which certainly deserve the support of my Group , the Christian Democrats .
A notable omission for us is the position of Vojvodina which is not actually mentioned in the report .
We discussed this in committee too and the Christian Democrats ' amendment is worded in such a way that I think it will meet with the House 's approval .
The fact is that the cultural and political rights of the national minority in Vojvodina must be respected , and this must be one of the criteria for granting aid in the territory of the Republic of Serbia proper , for example , or the rump Yugoslavia .
So reconstruction in Bosnia-Herzegovina is tied to all manner of political considerations and conditions .
That is not just a political ide fixe , or an excuse for steering people in a certain direction .
Travelling round , in the Banja Luka area , for example , where there is no devastation , you see that the only things which need rebuilding are mosques and catholic churches .
It only makes sense to rebuild these if the refugees who fled are coming back .
There is thus a total overlap , between political considerations and the practical necessities .
So it is most important that we make sure to help where help is needed and not where there is little actual damage .
And the same goes for the East and West sectors of Mostar .
There is no point putting money into West Mostar where hardly anything has been destroyed ; East Mostar , however , has been flattened , so it makes sense to concentrate on rebuilding East Mostar .
And to focus on activities which impel people to work together across ethnic lines .
In the Neretva valley there are also many villages which have simply been devastated ; here too , reconstruction must be directly conditional on the return of refugees .
The Cars report raises an important question concerning the overseeing of policy .
It is particularly regrettable that the Council has favoured Article 12 as a means of clipping the Commission 's wings completely .
This is something against which every parliamentarian should really protest vigorously .
I think it is most important to get Article 12 changed , as Parliament wants .
We are not going to have our supervisory powers taken away by a bunch of cowering despots whose only concern is to interpose extra red tape between the Commission and the job to be done .
I think this is a most important point and I hope the Commission and by extension the Council will act on our requests to change this article so that Parliament 's powers of scrutiny remain undiminished .
Mr President , following the many political pronouncements on the form which aid to former Yugoslavia should take it is now time to discuss the regulation on the basis of which that aid may be given .
It is high time the decisions were implemented .
The six months ' delay caused by the Council and Commission is most regrettable .
Rapporteur Cars rightly castigates the Council for unnecessarily complicating the procedures by introducing a regulatory committee , and Mr Oostlander is also right in the points he makes .

I compliment Mr Cars , who should have been sitting next to me but is , as we know , already busy elsewhere , on his alertness and his fresh ideas .
I think it is important that this regulation too should include the conditionality to which we have already given so much attention in this House .
No chance must be missed of ensuring that the parties punctiliously carry out the Dayton Agreement .
I warmly endorse the rapporteur 's idea of allowing PHARE countries to submit bids within the limits of available funds .
Given that some of the money for Yugoslavia comes from PHARE it is a good idea to allow the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to tender for contracts in former Yugoslavia .
It will be good for all of us .
Finally I urge the Union institutions to get this regulation brought into effect as soon as possible .
The building and sowing season is starting in Bosnia and it is most important , moreover , that the people of former Yugoslavia should see visible signs of progress in advance of September 's elections .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , reconstruction aid for former Yugoslavia has to satisfy two criteria : it must be possible to deploy it quickly and efficiently .
Unhappily the sad reality is that this is not the case .
As a number of honourable Members have said , the money has been available since January but so far nothing can be paid out .
That is an utter disgrace .
To our mind the regulation as it currently stands focuses too much on a centrally managed aid programme , when the central structures in former Yugoslavia are still not functioning at all .
Like Parliament 's Committee on Budgets , we are very much in favour of having this aid deployed regionally and locally , naturally with the necessary guarantees of conditionality .
The Green Group in Parliament has thus retabled the amendments of the Committee on Budgets in the hope that they will be supported by the plenary .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , of course the Commission proposal is rather late in coming .
Something is not right with the bureaucracy in Brussels .
I fear that this delay will continue in the field .
With these aid measures , the reconstruction in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia could be ready for take-off if the conditions demanded by Parliament were really enforced .
One of the preconditions is of course that the refugees can return .
Another is that freedom of movement in Bosnia-Herzegovina should be restored - something that should have happened by the end of March , but did not .
When the former Foreign Minister of Bosnia and current UN Ambassador can only travel to Banja Luka after three years under the protection of European parliamentarians , how can an ordinary mortal move around freely in that country ?
How do our EU authorities in the field act in the event of violations ?
I wonder whether indeed they do support projects the benefits of which only go , if at all , to part of the population or end up completely in the pockets of war profiteers .
And , if we take our principles and conditions seriously , we must be able , wherever there are ruined houses , to force the local authorities into allowing the owners to return and then to help these people financially in the rebuilding work .
In order to secure such an accommodating attitude on the part of the local authorities , supplementary economic or training projects could be financed on a local basis .
In this way , our taxes could be very well spent and achieve optimum benefit .
Such aid in the field would enhance the possibilities of repatriation for refugees currently living in our countries , which would in turn ease the financial burden on our communities .
The approach which seems to be adopted only too often by the High Representative , namely to give even-handedly to everyone and rather to turn a blind eye to gross violations of the Dayton Agreement , is the wrong one in my opinion and does not hold out much hope of really achieving our current aims .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Regulation under consideration today and submitted for the opinion of Parliament , is an important contribution to the efforts towards reconstruction undertaken as part of the peace process .
To consolidate the peace , the effects of war have to be obliterated .
Reconstruction , which also has reconciliation as its aim , is therefore essential .
Last January , the reconstruction effort was started with the programme of essential aid , financed from PHARE appropriations .
In 1996 , about ECU 125 million will be allocated to this effort .
Community programmes involve all the priority sectors : housing , employment , transport , energy , water supplies , telecommunications and health care .
High priority is being given to the return of refugees .
The adoption of the Regulation now before you should provide the Union with the additional resources necessary for these activities .
On the initiative of Parliament , three budget headings have been created , allocating a total of ECU 92 million .
In view of the urgent nature of the reconstruction effort , a first instalment of ECU 27 million can already be committed .
In the meantime , plans have been worked out for the remaining amount .
The budget heading ' aid to refugees ' provided with ECU 30 million will be allocated as soon as possible , in consultation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Member States .
As for the proposed amendments , I should like to make the following brief comments .
First , the Commission shares the wish of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy to bring the consultation process to a conclusion as quickly as possible so as to ensure speedy distribution of aid for reconstruction .
In this connection , the Commission is wholly in favour of Amendment No 17 which allows invitations to tender and markets to be extended to countries benefiting from the PHARE programme , as is already the case for the TACIS programme .
The Commission is also in favour of the amendments on : the duration of application of the Regulation , Amendment No 6 ; the transparency of its implementation , Amendment No 7 ; the conditions for the granting of aid , Amendment No 10 , which also corresponds to the initial Commission proposal . It is also in favour of the principle of decentralization expressed in the first part of Amendment No 14 ; of the regular briefing of Parliament , of course , Amendment No 21 ; and of the comitology procedure , Amendment No 19 .
The Commission is also in a position to accept the principle of inserting a special suspension clause for cases where the conditions for the granting of aid are infringed , Amendment No 11 .
However , it is of the opinion that the proposed procedure is cumbersome and probably has little applicability .
Wishing to reserve the full role of Parliament in this area , the Commission intends to make a statement to the Council about the rapid briefing of your Assembly using a procedure identical to that agreed for financial cooperation with Turkey .
On the other hand , the Commission cannot accept a new budgetary formula - that is Amendment No 9 - it prefers to retain the traditional standard formula of the trialogue ; neither can it accept a general relief from taxes and customs duties : Amendment No 16 , which would pose other problems .
The additional comment relating to elements of control and evaluation - Amendment No 20 - seems to us no longer necessary .
Lastly , and I shall end with this , the Commission notes the points made concerning the political process in the former Yugoslavia .
This is the subject of Amendments Nos 1 to 5 , 8 , 12 and 13 .
The Commission is of the opinion however that these points are already sufficiently taken into account in the Regulation proper and in the many statements by the Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow , at 9 a.m.
Petitions in 1995 / 1996
The next item is the report ( A4-0191 / 96 ) by Mr Gutirrez Daz , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions in the parliamentary year 1995-1996 .
Mr President , I am presenting to this Assembly the report on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament for the period 14 March 1995 to 11 March 1996 .
This report sets out the work carried out not by the committee as a whole - that would not be accurate - but an active core , with the task of monitoring with rigour and out of a sense of service , I would say , presided over with authority and with rigour by Mr Newman .
Mr President , the Committee on Petitions is one of the European Union 's bodies that brings us closest to European citizens .
At this moment in time , as we are examining the Union Treaties at the IGC , where one of the main concerns is the notion of European citizenship , the practice of the right to petition is one of the clearest expressions of the condition of European citizenship .
This we were able to ascertain through our work , given the number of citizens who approach the European Parliament to voice their complaints , concerns and denouncements .
Although this number is modest , I wish to point out that we have examined 1169 petitions over the last year , of which just over 600 were declared admissible ; however , if you bear in mind that many of these petitions are signed by large numbers of citizens - in the case of collective petitions - we see that more than 700 , 000 citizens expressed their confidence in the European Parliament to voice their complaints and to ask it to act as go-between .
Therefore , this is an important question which the European Parliament is obliged to act upon with justice and speed .
Here is the first question : at least the Committee on Petitions - through its chair , Mr Newman - should turn to other committees or delegations in the European Parliament and inform them of the content of these petitions and seek their support , information and opinion .
From this point of view , I must emphasise the need for all committees and delegations to realise the importance of the concerns raised by the Committee on Petitions because this is really a way of responding to the confidence that our citizens have shown in us .
These petitions are a way of gauging what concerns European citizens in respect of European legislation .
But not only that .
It also enables us to see where there are vacuums in European legislation , by looking at those petitions that cannot be answered because we lack the legal base ; we should perhaps then think of the need to create European legislation to respond to those petitions .
Mr President , the problem is more important when we cooperate with the Commission .
Indeed , we greatly depend on the Commission so that our committee can respond to this cooperation .
This is carried out more slowly and with more difficulties because the Member States ' governments fail to cooperate and the Commission , Commissioner , is too soft on them .
It usually refuses to take proceedings for failure to respect European Directives .
Mr President , I think it is important for the Commission to be aware of the importance of the work carried out in the Committee on Petitions , which is now being backed up thanks to the cooperation of the European Ombudsman .
Finally , Mr President , there have been five amendments to the report .
These amendments have been tabled by highly qualified members of the Committee on Petitions .
I must say that I regret that they were not tabled within the Committee itself , which would have enabled us to discuss them and improve the text .
In any case , Mr President , I wish to conclude by saying that I agree with No 1 , with an amendment to the wording , by an oral amendment which I shall table when the vote takes place .

But I agree with all the others , especially No 4 , tabled by Mr Santini , which is important if we are to get information across to the citizens .
But I cannot accept the last , No 5 , also tabled by Mr Santini , because I think its interpretation would restrict the principle of the right ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Petitions is the body in Parliament that maintains direct contact with the citizens of the Union .
But , for many petitioners , it is incomprehensible that it should take so long for their submissions to be considered or for a solution to be found .
This results from three basic problems , which we raise year after year and to which no satisfactory solution has been found to date .
Firstly , the number of petitions , which has been rising for years , is making it increasingly difficult for the committee secretariat to cope with the work .
Secondly , once a petition has been declared admissible , the Commission is asked for information .
It increasingly often makes direct contact with the petitioner , thus shortening the circuitous route via the national representations .
However , when it turns out that Member States are clearly in breach of Community law , the Commission hesitates for far too long before initiating proceedings for the violation of Treaty provisions .
Thirdly , the Council rarely observes the terms of the interinstitutional agreement , which require prompt information to be supplied .
Stalling tactics are used to withhold and delay information .
When the Committee attempts to speed things up through an own-initiative procedure , i.e. by inspection of documents , the correspondence with the Council is declared to be confidential and document inspection is refused .
To that extent , the wording of paragraph 7 of the resolution is much too mild ; we parliamentarians have direct experience of the exasperation felt at bureaucratic case-handling and delays .
I hope that in the future we shall find a way of ensuring the more efficient handling of petitions by the Commission and the Council .
Even so , anyone who has read the report will have noted that , in many cases , it was possible to help petitioners in securing their rights .
These petitions which reach a favourable outcome give us members of the Committee on Petitions the courage to persevere in applying all our energies to defending the interests of our fellow citizens .
Mr President , during the 1995-1996 parliamentary year the European Parliament received 1169 petitions .
At the end of that parliamentary year the Committee on Petitions has 823 petitions still outstanding .
The outcome of those petitions is detailed in the remarkable report by Mr Gutirrez Daz , who has produced a very readable account .
It seems our citizens have quite a few problems with the functioning of the single market .
It seems that our fellow-citizens complain about the poor functioning of freedom of movement for individuals , for example in the exercise of the right of residence , for example in the equivalence of qualifications .
It seems that our citizens submit a lot of petitions on environmental protection , more specifically non-compliance with the directive on environmental impact assessment .
Some petitions bear many signatures .
One petition from my own region of Limburg obtained 37 000 signatures in connection with the difficulties of discrimination between frontier workers from Belgian Limburg working in Dutch Limburg .
The Maastricht Treaty introduced the notion of European citizenship .
One of the most concrete rights for European citizens is the right to petition the European Parliament , and / or the European ombudsman .
I should like to make three points in relation to this , Mr President .
Firstly , what is the use of conferring a right if the person enjoying that right does not know he has it ?
In other words , what use is the right to petition the European Parliament if Parliament does not publicize that right ?
For this reason Europe 's citizens need to be informed more thoroughly and more extensively about Article 138d of the Treaty .
But information and communication are not enough of course if they merely state the existence of the right to petition as such .
It must also be made clear in what cases petitions may be submitted and on what conditions .
I think there is a pressing need for Parliament 's offices in the Member States to be involved in the provision of this information .
Secondly , there is no point announcing and publicizing a right if the exercise of that right is hampered by a lack of resources , both material and immaterial .
In other words , petitions must be dealt with within a reasonable period of time , and it is here that we encounter problems .
It is not just a question of infrastructure and logistics , though these too need to be improved ; we should like to see the facilities for the secretariat expanded in terms of both staff and other necessary infrastructure .
And we want the citizen submitting a petition to have that petition dealt with in the best way possible .
So let us take a good look at the present situation .
We still have 500 petitions under consideration which are more than a year old .
So we have a whole year 's worth of backlog to make up and that means we need to increase not only our staff but also the rhythm of our meetings .
So I think we have to agree on a more efficient pattern of meetings , so that we do not overlap with Parliament 's other committees , and we could do that on Thursday afternoons and Friday mornings , because there are no other committee meetings then . In other words we have to take the citizen seriously , we have to take his petitions seriously and we as Parliament must undertake to clear as much of the existing backlog as possible quickly and take the measures needed to make this possible .
One again my thanks to the rapporteur for his excellent report and I commend our amendments to the House .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that I personally and the Green Group approve Mr Gutirrez Daz ' report .
The work of the Committee on Petitions , which has until now provided one of the most important links between citizens and the European Parliament , constitutes , together with the appointment of the European Ombudsman , a major element in the right of Union citizenship established by the Treaties .
The petitions reaching the Committee give us an insight into citizens ' problems ; for example , they have in the past often brought us face to face with important problems , concerning in particular the environment and freedom of movement .
I fully support the proposals in the report and would stress especially the following points : closer interaction between the Committee on Petitions and the other committees , with a follow-up including legislation , on major issues raised in petitions ; the need for a good collaborative relationship between the Committee on Petitions and the European Ombudsman ; greater commitment by the Commission and Council to follow-up problems raised by the Committee on Petitions and the content of petitions submitted to it ; criticism of delays and inadequate collaboration with the Member States named in petitions ; finally , the need to deal with petitions speedily and effectively .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the parliamentary year 1995-1996 was marked by the long procedure involved in electing the European Ombudsman .
A few weeks ago , Mr Sderman also presented his first activity report and it has been possible to see a real willingness to cooperate between the European Ombudsman , a new body set up under the Maastricht Treaty , and our Committee on Petitions , which can pride itself on its long experience .
Such experience enables us to evaluate and appreciate the task of the European Ombudsman , and it is in the light of this that the rapporteur mentions the longer times taken to deal with petitions .
Even if such delays can be attributed partly to the length of the procedure for electing the Ombudsman , we should nevertheless be very vigilant to prevent the right of citizens to petition from being undermined by procedural obstacles .
May I therefore make a suggestion about the organization of our work .
As the European Ombudsman works from Strasbourg , the official seat of this body , we could well envisage holding meetings of our Committee in Strasbourg in order , firstly , to shorten the delays gradually and , secondly , to mark symbolically the close cooperation between the European Parliament and the Ombudsman in Strasbourg , their common seat .
The rapporteur rightly emphasizes - and I am still talking about organization - the effectiveness of the collaboration with the European Commission , which unfailingly expedites the complaints transmitted to it .
It is regrettable that , in the case of Member States , this cooperation is somewhat grudging , particularly when the complainant alleges infringement of Community law by the Member State in question .
However , I do not support the rapporteur 's wish that the Commission should proceed further against recalcitrant Member States before the Court of Justice by invoking Article 169 of the Treaty .
This is because it is important for our citizens to avoid long and complex stages of litigation , when very often a favourable outcome can be achieved by negotiation .
The Ombudsman should play a major role here .
Turning to the basis of the petitions recorded and dealt with , we see that a large number of complaints citing serious breaches of Community environmental legislation have been filed this year .
You know that my group is very concerned about the full preservation of national sovereignties and a very strict respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
Nevertheless , in environmental matters , it is important for the European Union to exercise wider powers in a field which , by definition , is not confined within national boundaries .
Recent events , like mad cow disease or the disastrous situation of the nuclear submarine bases at Murmansk , clearly illustrate the need for strong restraining action at European level .
As the Member for Alsace , I am also very alive to the problems facing those who have to cross frontiers to work .
Many of these workers suffer discrimination , particularly those working in Switzerland .
I shall continue to keep a close watch on such difficulties and I hope that eventually this type of obstacle will be overcome through bilateral agreements .
In conclusion , I hope that the appointment of the Ombudsman will provide even more effective protection for citizen 's rights .
It is in this way that public opinion in our countries will appreciate the real nature of European construction which , I have to say , too often appears ponderous and remote .
Mr President , as chair of the Committee on Petitions I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Gutirrez Daz , on our latest annual report .
Mr Gutirrez Daz is a very active and senior Member of Parliament in a range of areas , including the Committee on Petitions .
He has put forward this report backed by a great deal of experience and knowledge of our work , of the issues raised by petitioners and of how we try to assist them .
The quality of the report reflects his experience and involvement .
It is widely recognized that the European Union is too remote from ordinary citizens and that is why our Committee on Petitions tries to break down the barriers by giving all citizens and residents the right to put their views on any matter or their complaints on any grievance which falls within the competence of the European Union .
I do not want to repeat things which have already been said by the rapporteur and other speakers in the debate .
Quite clearly the kind of issues we deal with concern agriculture , social affairs of various kinds and customs issues .
There are a large number of environmental petitions usually alleging contravention of European Community environmental legislation .
There are petitions concerning taxation matters , freedom of movement and recognition of diplomas , access to education , access to work , conditions of work , residence permits , transfer of social rights , border controls for all the people who are trying or have tried to exercise their rights of free movement , their rights within the European Union .
So we try to assist the petitioners .
But we have some problems which we should try to resolve .
I have tried to give a lead in helping to resolve them with the support of committee members over the past period .
The committee is much more open than it used to be .
It is the exception rather than the rule that we deal with petitions in private now .
Most of our work is open to the public .
It is very important that Parliament 's external services , in particular Parliament 's external offices take seriously the provision of information , informing citizens and residents of the Member States of their right to petition .
Not enough is done there and it is important .
In the recent past a number of Members of Parliament who are not on the committee have realized the role and importance of the Committee on Petitions : when their constituents have put forward petitions they have come along to support them and have appreciated the opportunity to do that .
My last point is that our main problem is with the Member States .
The Ombudsman deals with allegations of maladministration in European Community institutions and bodies .
Our petitions usually deal with the fact that Member States do not implement European Community rules , regulations and laws properly to the detriment of citizens and residents .
We do not get cooperation from the Member States .
We do not get representatives of the Council or from the Permanent Representatives attending committee meetings .
We have problems with the Commission but our principal problems getting assistance to citizens derive from the Member States and that is one of the reasons for the delays .
One of the reasons why petitions sometimes stay open for two or three years is because we are batting them back and forwards to the Member States either via the Commission or directly , trying to get a response , trying to get assistance and support for the petitioner .
The best way citizens can get support and we can get help in our work in assisting citizens is if the Member States take the right to petition the European Parliament - which they have agreed to in an Interinstitutional agreement and in the Maastricht Treaty - more seriously .
Mr President , after all , it was a trick to check whether this whole idea of petitions works .
I had been excluded from the debate , I made a petition and now , here I am , speaking to the House .
It is a good sign for this report , which opens the door to a new phase of activity .
Firstly , I , too , would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Gutirrez Daz , an ever-present and enthusiastic member of this Committee , which some people , perhaps wrongly , consider to be , perhaps not in the ' second division ' , but at least rather less interesting than some of the other committees .
Personally , I have had occasion to get genuinely excited about some cases .
You feel you are doing something useful : sometimes , you deal with a petition , discuss the issue and reach a concrete solution .
I believe that if any European citizen , or indeed any Member of this House , could see this Committee at work , they would adopt a new philosophy and feel truly a part of European democratic life .
After all , the right to petition is a reassuring guarantee for citizens , almost a form of insurance against the abuses that can undermine democracy .
In a context of freedom , security , peace and progress , I would say that the European Union has found the right formula for making its citizens feel included , alongside and within European Institutions .
It is a formula that , amongst other things , makes it possible to iron out any defects in Community justice .
And yet , having said this , I wonder how many citizens are aware of this wonderful opportunity .
Article 138 of the Treaty states that : ' Any citizen of the Union , and any natural or legal person residing or having his registered office in a Member State , shall have the right to address , individually or in association with other citizens or persons , a petition to the European Parliament on a matter which comes within the Community 's fields of activity ... ' , etc , etc .
Now , I wonder : how many people have access to the Treaties and how many people are familiar with them ?
Which suggests there is here a need to make citizens more aware , in a more practical and concrete way , of these instruments and , particularly , of the ways and means of gaining access to them .
But citizens also need to be clear about the role of this Committee .
Very well , it is a pettifogging Committee , but we must not give citizens excessive expectations or illusions .
We must also clearly indicate the limits within which this Committee can and must work .
This means it is important for there to be a link with the European Ombudsman , a symbiosis , that helps to create this guaranteed area of safety for citizens .
This would imply less dispersal of resources and would also reduce the number of petitions that are so often met with a phrase that must be displeasing to a European citizen : rejected .
That one word alone can give rise to a moment 's disaffection .
So , my compliments to the rapporteur and Mr Newman and everyone who believes in this institution , which I believe is about to go up in our citizen 's estimation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's annual appraisal of petitions addressed to it by European citizens provides an appropriate moment to reflect on the relationship existing between these citizens and the European Union .
When addressing a petition to the European Parliament , a citizen of the Union complains of the faulty application of Community legislation but by so doing , he also expresses his confidence that the European Parliament , together with the other institutions , will redress the injustice he believes he has suffered .
Dealing with petitions thoroughly and doing everything possible to satisfy citizens ' complaints without delay : this is what is essential if we do not want the confidence of our citizens to be disappointed and if we wish the exercise of citizens ' rights in Europe to have meaning in their eyes .
At a time when a debate is taking place in the context of the Intergovernmental Conference on ways of bringing the citizens of the European institutions closer to each other , such a direct relationship between the citizen and Parliament must be preserved and encouraged .
The excellent report by Mr Gutirrez Daz shows once again that citizens address a very large number of petitions to Parliament and I associate myself here with the many congratulations offered to the rapporteur and to his work .
These petitions are concerned with such sensitive areas for our citizens as social security , the environment , taxation , freedom of movement for persons , recognition of diplomas and degrees , to quote only a few of the principal ones , but a few that undoubtedly concern the citizen most deeply .
To guarantee full respect for Community legislation in these areas and to strengthen this legislation for the benefit of the citizen : these are tasks that the Commission considers to be essential .
The Commission is pleased that Mr Gutirrez Daz 's report instances progress in cooperation between the Committee on Petitions and the European Commission .
The inclusion of the right to petition in the Treaty was , for the European Commission , an additional encouragement to reply as quickly and pertinently as possible to requests from the European Parliament relating to petitions .
Mr President , a few words now , if I may , on monitoring the application of Community law and on the information given by the European Commission to the Committee on Petitions .
I will start with the infringement procedures since this question was raised several times during the preceding debate and since the question is , of course , also raised in Mr Gutirrez Daz 's report .
In expressing its opinion on the annual reports of the Commission relating to the application of Community law , Parliament has recognized the progress made in this area as well , but it has expressed wishes , of which the Commission has taken careful note , particularly as regards speeding up the infringement procedures : I can tell you that the Commission will be very willing to agree to make additional efforts to shorten the time taken for the transmission of these communications to the Committee on Petitions .
Among the criticisms habitually directed at the Commission are the length of the infringement procedures and , I would say , what is considered to be the over-cautious approach of the European Commission in this area .
I should point out , however , that in this area the European Commission has a discretionary power as regards infringements and that it does its best to act consistently in the exercise of its discretionary powers .
The Commission is also endeavouring to improve its procedures in order to make its actions consistent and effective .
As for the length of these procedures , mentioned several times by Members of Parliament , I can only repeat on behalf of the Commission that , as guardian of the Treaties , it does everything it can to ensure respect for the application of Community law , solely in accordance with the criteria of objectivity and of law .
The time taken by infringement procedures reflects both the complexity of the matters dealt with , the thoroughness of the examination the Commission is required to carry out of the arguments put forward by the Member States and the constant care to achieve , if possible , the correct application of Community legislation without necessarily going before the Court of Justice .
Parliament receives detailed information on the actions of the Commission in this area through the Commission 's annual report on the application of Community law . It also draws up a very interesting and very instructive report every year on the subject of Community law .
As regards briefing of the Committee on Petitions , I should like to emphasize that the Commission has always given it complete and detailed information .
In particular , it reports contacts made with national authorities .
However , that does not mean that the Commission has the right to transmit confidential documents emanating from Member States , particularly in the context of preliminary legal procedures relating to the application of Community law .
I can assure you that the Committee on Petitions will continue to receive from the European Commission all the information necessary for the effective treatment of citizens ' petitions .
Mr President , there is something missing from the conduct of this sitting and it is for that reason that I asked to speak .
We have looked at an excellent report , and you have heard an excellent account from the rapporteur and from the chairman of the Committee on Petitions too .
You have also heard an excellent account from the Commissioner .
But the person we have not heard from is the one responsible for the great hold-ups in the work of the Committee on Petitions , namely the President of the Bureau of Parliament who is also responsible for the Secretariat-General .
All the questions asked so far about improvements to the situation have either not been answered or have not been answered properly .
I would have appreciated it if the Bureau of Parliament had replied at this sitting to all the substantive arguments put forward here concerning the organization of Parliament itself , organization of the secretariat , the registering of petitions .
There is not much that is right about this House and there is no point meeting again next year , debating another excellent report and then concluding that once again nothing has changed .
That is what I wanted to say , Mr President , and I hope you will pass it on to the Bureau .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow , at 9 a.m.
Scientific and technical cooperation with Israel
The next item is the report ( A4-0250 / 96 ) by Mr Stockmann , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision concluding the Agreement for scientific and technical cooperation between the European Community and the State of Israel ( COM ( 96 ) 0205 - C4-0311 / 96-96 / 0134 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this House has been asked for its opinion on the proposal for a Council Decision concluding an Agreement for scientific and technical cooperation between the European Community and the State of Israel .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy on Tuesday approved the Agreement by a large majority , and I expect - or at least I recommend - that Parliament will approve it tomorrow in plenary sitting .
The Agreement raises the long-standing and successful cooperation between Israeli scientists and research establishments and those of the European Community to a new level .
Israel can participate in programmes of the Fourth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development , except in the fields of nuclear safety and nuclear fusion .
Scientists and research establishments in the European Union are free to participate in Israeli research activities .
Israel 's financial contribution corresponds to the contributions of the Member States of the European Union in proportion to their respective gross domestic products .
Hence , for the first time , a non-European country is participating extensively in the Community 's framework programme for research in a relationship based on balance and reciprocality .
The Agreement is in the interests of European research policy ; I would like to stress that here .
In the Community and worldwide , we are witnessing the increasing internationalization , indeed globalization , of the research process .
This development is within the logic of the differentiation and increasing specialization of research itself and its growing financing needs .
At the same time , however , we are unfortunately witnessing a decline in national efforts to promote scientific activity .
For that reason , we must , today more than ever , seek synergy effects through improved international research cooperation .
Israel has outstanding competence in a number of research areas .
I expect new developments to be generated by increased cooperation in the fields such as information technology , for example data compression and image processing , and in medical research , for example immunology , epidemiology and cardiovascular diseases , to mention only a few .
I also expect new impetus in the field of biotechnology , for example in neurobiology and biological water treatment , and in the development of technology for systems to harness renewable energies .
The research cooperation Agreement follows the Mediterranean Agreement recently concluded with Israel , which regulated economic and cultural cooperation and placed regular political dialogue on an institutional footing .
Through both Agreements , the European Union seeks to contribute to the development of the Mediterranean region and to stabilize the peace process in the Middle East .
Our political message is : we seek to deepen relations and to promote continuity in political action by means of binding agreements and treaties .
And that is also what we expect from our partners , indeed in every area .
I should like to add a few comments addressed to the Commission .
Firstly , in future negotiations , the Commission should adhere to the existing arrangements under the Luns-Westerterp procedure and keep us continuously informed on the status of the negotiations - that did not happen in this case .
Secondly , Israel should be involved in the assessment of the Fourth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development and in the discussion on the direction of the Fifth Framework Programme .
Thirdly , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy wishes to have regular contacts with the members of the Knesset 's Economic Affairs Committee , whose remit covers research policy .
Fourthly , in order to promote peace and reconciliation in Israel , Israeli and Palestinian research establishments should be especially encouraged to respond jointly to invitations to tender .
Fifthly , I hope to see a broad information campaign on the new possibilities for cooperation in our countries .
The negotiation of measures to be covered by the Agreement took a long time ; we now hope that it will be made operational in practice as quickly as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the excellent report by our colleague Mr Stockman on scientific and technical cooperation between the European Union and Israel explains clearly what this agreement is and why it is therefore necessary to vote for it without reservations and without uncertainties .
This is a good agreement which has been reached through lengthy negotiations between the Union and Israel and which will be advantageous both for Israelis and for Europeans , since everybody will benefit from their separate and joint efforts .
It is an important partnership agreement , cofinanced by Europe and Israel as part of the fourth research framework programme .
This is also the first time that a non-European country will be able to take part in Community research .
In return , Europe will have access to Israel 's research and research programme .
As chairman of the Delegation for relations with Israel , I am happy with this and I approve of it .
As a French socialist , I shall unhesitatingly vote for it .
As a representative of the Party of European Socialists , I bring the support of my group .
Should we , for all that , ignore the questions of some of our colleagues about the peace process after the recent Israeli elections ?
Certainly not !
Their concern , and ours , is justified when we read the programme of the new Prime Minister , when we look at the composition of his government and when we hear some of the statements being made .
Having said that , it is clearly not for Europe to judge the results of a democratic election in a democratic country .
Nor does anything today entitle anybody to prejudge the results of discussions which are only beginning between the new government and its neighbours .
Lastly , and most importantly , is not the best way of helping the peace process to increase the European presence in the Middle East , its partnership with the Israelis , with the Palestinians and with their Arab neighbours ?
Our scientific cooperation agreement fits perfectly into this process .
We must therefore implement it quickly , give it full scope , and form a partnership between the European Parliament and the Knesset through Parliament 's Delegation for relations with Israel in order to monitor it .
We must look for ways of encouraging the Palestinians to participate in these efforts and their results .
Peace has undoubtedly been declared but , above all , peace is alive !
And for the survival of peace , all possible partnerships must be developed between us .
Is not the agreement on the search for better living conditions today particularly symbolic ?
I think it is , and above all I think we must do everything we can to support it : I repeat my congratulations to Mr Stockman and I urge all my colleagues to approve the agreement of 25 March tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by quoting Professor Markel , the newly elected President of the Max Planck Society , who wrote about the shifting borders of Europe in the following terms : how important it is that , precisely as representatives of science and research , we avoid as far as possible speaking of Europe in terms of clearly defined geographic areas ; we need no further argument for this than to single out the example of Israel today which - whatever else it may be - is also European .
In this context , I heartily welcome , on behalf of my group , the Agreement now to be concluded with Israel .
Through it , we shall receive new impetus for our research and benefit from the outstanding competence of Israeli researchers .
The Weizman Institute , an excellent academic institution which has maintained an office in Brussels for years , bears witness to the European direction of research in Israel .
Israel is the first country that will not pick and choose its topics .
With the exception of programmes on fusion and nuclear safety , it works in all the fields covered by the Fourth Framework Programme .
Israel will be able to participate straight away in invitations to tender for specific programmes .
There is one Israeli demand which the EU cannot accommodate - and my group supports this view .
As a nonmember country , it cannot claim voting rights in the programme committees .
Israel will be able to put forward experts for project assessment and selection and to present its concerns and preferred areas of research in a joint committee , the EC-Israel Research Committee .
As we are now embarking on the preparatory work for the Fifth Framework Programme , Israel will be able from the outset , on a consultative basis , to exert its influence on the direction of programmes and to assist in shaping cooperation agreements for the future .
In parallel with the cooperation process , the parliamentary level , especially the two committees concerned in the Knesset and in the European Parliament , should establish regular working contacts .
Arrangements for the protection of intellectual property have been included in the Agreement .
Whether they will always be satisfactory to both parties , experience in practice will show .
As we are constantly refining our own legislation in this field - witness the hotly debated Directive on the patenting of genetically modified organisms - this point , i.e. protection of intellectual property , may need to be renegotiated for the next agreement .
The Water Task Force which has been set up will certainly be of great interest to Israel .
Proper water management in the Mediterranean region , especially in the Middle East , contributes to peace among the nations of the area .
Israel 's experience in this field , amongst other things with desalination plants , will help us effectively to solve one of the greatest problems of the next century , i.e. the efficient supply of water to the population , and hence contribute to the wellbeing and peace of peoples throughout the region .
I should like to conclude these remarks on the Agreement with a word of thanks to the rapporteur for his good and agreeable cooperation and by quoting Professor Markel for a second time : there really is such a thing as a world scientific community , and it can span a cohesive network of intellectual and inter-personal relations which holds fast even where national differences , ideological divergence , hostilities between nations and competitive clashes over economic interests mercilessly separate most human beings .
I hope this research Agreement will bring not only economic benefits , but also advances for the peace and wellbeing of peoples .
Mr President , Commissioner , under the agreement we are examining , a non-European country - Israel - will for the first time be extensively associated with the Community framework programme for research and technological development .
The agreement grants Israel privileged status , because it will be the only non-European country to have direct access to a highly strategic Union programme , without even being part of the European Economic Area .
This agreement will therefore allow Israeli laboratories to participate on an equal footing with European laboratories in competitive bidding for European Union research funding .
The excellence and competence of Israeli laboratories are known , as is the quality of technicians and researchers in Israel , a country that has already attracted investment and the establishment of high-technology installations by private multinational companies .
In granting Israel such a , shall we say , exceptional position , the European Union has taken account of the advanced state of research in Israel but also , and particularly , of the political importance of this association in the context of the Middle East peace process .
The peace process is obviously a cornerstone of all the Union 's effort to collaborate in the development of countries bordering on the southern Mediterranean , an effort to which the Union , and this Parliament in particular , have given their full support .
It seems to me that this agreement should therefore be seen by Israel and by its recently elected government as another important dividend of the peace process and as further encouragement from the European Union to pursue the path it has bravely taken towards developing good relations with neighbouring countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , cooperation in science and technology is the key to greater innovation .
Israel has highly sophisticated scientific research and is technologically very advanced so can be profitable to the European Union .
Of course a reciprocal interest is needed if cooperation is to be successful .
Clearly there is such an interest between Israel and the Union .
Technology cooperation with Israel may provide a stimulus to industry and the small business sector and may open up new markets in the emerging information society and multimedia .
This may create more jobs .
So the Liberal Group welcomes this cooperation .
But I have a number of questions to the Commissioner .
Firstly concerning the financial memorandum .
The largest single cost item is business travel by officials and European experts .
This makes quite a hole in the budget for the specific programmes which make up the fourth , and shortly the fifth , framework programme .
Parliament regularly points to the high costs of administering the programmes .
I would like to ask the Commissioner why it is that these officials and experts have to fly business class , when even Dutch government officials and scientists regularly fly economy class .
I myself flew economy class to the United States two weeks ago and I can tell you that it is just as quick and just as safe as business class .
My second question : has account been taken in the budget of the cost of translating all the forms , brochures and project presentations into Hebrew ?
This is not a European language and will be expensive .
And lastly I should like to challenge the procedure followed .
The cooperation agreement was concluded by the Commission and representatives of Israel .
During those negotiations Parliament was neither consulted nor informed even though this cooperation significantly affects the fourth framework programme .
Decisions concerning the fourth framework programme are taken jointly with Parliament using the co-decision procedure .
Why was Parliament not involved and not even informed , despite the existence of agreements in accordance with the procedure devised by my distinguished compatriots Mr Luns and Mr Westerterp ?
Mr President , the issue of an agreement between the EU and Israel on research is not an entirely simple one .
Nevertheless , the important parts which are very positive have been singled out .
It is also good that EU research should not be geared solely to EU Member States and that the EU should open its eyes to the fact that a world exists outside the Union - this is tremendously important .
It is also good that the conclusions mention how important it is that this should be seen as support for the peace process .
On the other hand , I am concerned about some of the content of the agreement .
Even though the programme on fusion and nuclear safety is excluded from the agreement one must be aware that Israel undoubtedly has nuclear arms , despite its denials .
It is therefore important to ensure that no resources go to nuclear research ' on the quiet ' .
In this connection I would also like to mention that it will soon be ten years since the researcher Mordechai Vanunu was imprisoned after having spoken out about Israel 's nuclear research programme .
It would now be appropriate for Israel to release Vanunu as soon as possible .
We have our doubts about a number of the research sections of the fourth framework programme .
These include biotechnology and research into space travel .
This research appears harmless but may quite well be developed and used in areas which are far from being in our interests .
We no more want such research to be carried out as a result of agreements with countries outside the EU than we want it to be carried out within the EU .
We do not intend to vote against the agreement but to abstain .
Mr President , I am very much in favour of EU research cooperation .
I believe that those who favour a fortress Europe policy , limiting cooperation to within the Union , are making a mistake .
We need to use the best researchers wherever they are in the world , let alone in Israel .
Therefore I am very much in favour of the well-prepared report by my colleague , Mr Stockmann , where the Israeli Government is putting ECU 100 million , a third of its total research budget , into the programme .
It is actually paying to join in this programme .
However , in respect of this report I have two concerns .
One , which Mr Stockmann has raised , is the failure of the Commission to adequately consult and follow the Luns Westerterp procedure .
I raised this issue in committee yesterday and was told that I would get a reply from the Commission in writing .
I presume the Commission has not been struck dumb and that I might actually manage to get one this afternoon .
Secondly , flowing from this lack of clarity in terms of consultation , there are problems in a couple of areas .
Firstly , in view of the secretive nature of the Israeli nuclear weapons programme as revealed 10 years ago by Mordechai Vanunu , I have reservations on Israeli participation in the nuclear sectors of research .
The report says that nuclear safety and fusion power are excluded .
But that does not cover all the areas of nuclear research , as I understand it , that are done in the European Commission .
I am very much in favour of the peace process .
It is going through a rocky period at the moment .
I am happy , of course , that we have research in other than non-nuclear areas in Israel proper , but it would , in my opinion , be inappropriate for EU money to be allocated to research centres in the occupied West Bank or as part of an Israeli research programme without agreement from the Palestinians .
It would be as inappropriate as for EU money to be given to Turkey , which would be spent in Turkish Northern Cyprus .
These points that I have raised give me pause for thought .
I hope I can be reassured on these issues by the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this agreement represents a great opportunity both for Israel and for the European Union .
I would single out two areas in particular : Israel has a world lead in the field of computer security and anti-virus technology .
Israel also points the way in the production of educational software .
Several multinational software houses maintain research and development establishments in Israel .
As a member of both the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , I have a strong interest in the link between research and education , training and continuing education .
The particularly favourable position of Israel as regards educational software , which I have referred to , represents an ideal field of cooperation for the European Union .
This sector , which is so important to training and continuing education in the future , more than any other offers a suitable field for combining the aspects of research and education in a very concrete way .
The Task Force on Multimedia and Educational Software , set up by the European Commission , has already taken on a supporting role in relation to possible projects in this field .
Representatives of both the Government and companies in Israel are already taking part in meetings of the Telematics Committee of the European Commission .
Israel is also participating in the preparations for joint projects .
The Task Force is further planning to initiate joint workshops during the current year .
The second field is biotechnology .
In this field too , which is of outstanding importance to Europe , Israel has made great advances .
Europe can only benefit from cooperating in this area with Israel , which is particularly active in fields such as seed production and environmental biology .
I particularly welcome the intention of the rapporteur to bring about regular contacts between the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy of the European Parliament and the Economic Affairs Committee of the Knesset , whose area of concern covers research .
This would provide the means for efficient monitoring of the cooperation and for the evaluation of results with the aid of the European Parliament 's Science and Technology Option Assessment ( STOA ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I first thank you , and particularly Mr Stockman , for Parliament 's hard work on the subject and for backing the Commission proposal .
For the European Union the conclusion of such a scientific and technical cooperation agreement is an important step on the road to increased cooperation with Israel .
In this connection , I should first like to emphasize three particularly important points .
Firstly , this agreement is of benefit to both parties .
As your rapporteur has explained , it will enable European researchers and engineers to strengthen their capabilities and to develop synergies with first-class teams in many areas .
Alongside the opening of the fourth outline research and development programme , it offers the Israelis access to a volume , a potential and results of extremely important research .
Secondly , this agreement represents , as Mr Stockman very rightly also stressed , the first association of a nonEuropean country with research activities in the Union .
As such , it marks all the importance the Union attaches to strengthening its reciprocal ties with Israel , particularly in the field of science and technology .
And to reassure some speakers , I shall add that this agreement relates to non-nuclear research , Mr Holm , and to non-nuclear research only .
The agreement will have considerable industrial and economic spin-offs .
Thirdly , this agreement falls within the framework of the European Union 's new policy towards Mediterranean countries .
Allow me to reply to a number of very intelligent questions raised quite rightly by several speakers .
Firstly , as regards the information to be provided about the progress of the negotiations , I am told that the services of the Commission had already been able to brief the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy about the progress of the negotiations with Israel .
Nevertheless , I can make the commitment to you that the Commission will not fail in future to keep Parliament as well informed as possible about the conclusions of future negotiations .
Secondly , concerning the encouragement of Israeli and Palestinian researchers to cooperate in order to participate in invitations to tender , I can say that the Palestinians and the Israelis can already participate jointly in the international programme for scientific and technological cooperation .
This is activity 2 in the fourth Community outline programme and four large areas are therefore open to such cooperation : renewable natural resources , agriculture and the agri-industry , medicine and health , and advanced technologies such as information technology , biotechnology , materials and energy .
The third question concerned the participation of Israel in an evaluation of the fourth outline programme , which will be carried out by independent experts .
As provided for in the agreement , the Commission will be able to call on Israeli experts as on experts from Member States of the European Union .
The scientific and technological cooperation agreement with Israel will have been in force for only a short time when the preparation for the fifth outline programme begins .
It is therefore likely that , at that time , we shall still only have a few results from the cooperation .
Nevertheless , the available results will certainly be taken into consideration , together with those from other cooperation frameworks , for example , activity 2 of the fourth outline research programme .
The fourth question was about relations between the European Parliament , the Commission and the Knesset .
It is not within the province of the Commission 's representative to express an opinion on this point .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , I can assure you with regard to travelling and management expenses , that the rules to be applied are those normally applicable to Commission officials in all their activities and that there will be no departures from this nor any special treatment .
I can also reassure you by saying that the costs of translation into Hebrew will be an Israeli responsibility .
Concerning the sixth question , the problem of the Occupied Territories : the Gaza Strip , the West Bank and the Golan Heights are not considered to be part of the territory of Israel .
This is the official position of the European Commission and the European Union .
It is also that of the Israeli government .
As a result , the scientific and technological cooperation agreement does not apply to these territories .
I think I have replied to all the question raised .
May I say , in conclusion , that , beyond science and technology , the strengthening of cooperation between the Union , Israel and the other non-member Mediterranean countries helps to improve good neighbourly relations between those states .
Such an agreement therefore represents a further step on the path to peace in that part of the world .
Like your rapporteur , I also want to see scientific and technical relationships being developed between the Mediterranean countries themselves .
Only cooperation like this will enable peace efforts to be given lasting and concrete expression .
Mr President , I asked a series of questions of the Commissioner . He went some way towards reassuring me .
I was not entirely happy with all of his answers , but can I congratulate him at least for doing something that is unusual for some Commissioners - actually trying to deal with the questions rather than read out a prepared speech .
Thank you very much , Mr Ford .
That was not really a point of order but I think that at this time of day - and as we are virtually en famille - we can interpret the Rules loosely .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.35 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , exactly the same thing has happened to me today as happened yesterday when it came to the minutes .
For the second time in succession I have not had a chance to speak .
I wanted to say something about yesterday 's minutes .
Yesterday , Mr Blak said that we should put an end to the circus .
Even yesterday I wanted to object to the word " circus ' .
The item " Approval of the Minutes ' was on the agenda , and we had come to that item in the plenary session .
This is a parliamentary right , not a circus !
I wanted to reject this formally , and I would therefore ask that this should be done in future , whenever the approval of the minutes is on the agenda .
Mr President , on a point of order , before we discuss nominations for the Temporary Committee of Inquiry .
At the Florence Summit an agreement was reached between the Commission and the United Kingdom Government on trying to break the impasse created by the United Kingdom Government and its decision of non-cooperation .
As part of that agreement the United Kingdom Government agreed to implement measures to deal with the BSE crisis in the United Kingdom on 1 August .
It now appears that this will not be the case and the earliest possible time it estimates it will be able to do so is October of this year .
If this is the case , does that therefore mean that the whole agreement reached at Florence has been breached and , therefore , no longer applies ?
If so , does that mean that the Commission will not provide the additional funding to deal with the problem throughout the European Union ?
And if that is the case , should your office not write to the Commission and the United Kingdom Government for clarification on the point to help the industry and the farmers who are likely to be affected by the persistent inability of the British Government to deal with this matter ?
Mr Thomas , you are not raising a point of order but have made a political statement .
Votes
Mr President , I do not want to talk about the content , but about BSE .
The current debate is about the fact that gelatine is not safe .
And we should like you to tell us ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , there must be a mistake in the information you have been given .
I am against the wording of this amendment and I have personally told Mr Santini .
I understand the value he gives to the amendment but , in the explanatory statement - at the bottom of page 9 - the limits are well explained and I think it would be excessive to introduce it into the text , by a procedure that we think is too farreaching , without its being discussed beforehand in the committee .
Mr President , after an exchange of views with the rapporteur , I should like to withdraw this amendment , which was perhaps badly worded and has become even less clear in translation .
Since , on the other hand , the report is extremely coherent and straightforward , I withdraw the amendment to avoid confusion .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I have given my agreement to Mr Cars ' excellent report , although I have serious problems with the Council regulation , because I am bound to say that reconstruction in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is absurd , since nothing has been destroyed there , and large groups of refugees have come only out of Kosovo .
Therefore I believe that there is absolutely no point in giving aid to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , unless it is made conditional upon the autonomy of Kosovo .
This must not merely be attached to the aid in the form of a vague hope : it must be a condition of that aid .
That concludes voting time . .
Support system for producers of certain arable crops
The next item is the report ( A4-0236 / 96 ) by Mr Gillis , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation derogating from Regulation ( EEC ) No 1765 / 92 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops as regards the set-aside requirement for the 1997 / 98 marketing year ( COM ( 96 ) 0285 - C4-0351 / 96-96 / 0162 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I propose that Parliament gives its approval to reduce the amount of land that must be set-aside in the cereals sector to 5 % from the current level of 10 % .
Members will be aware that production of cereals in Europe - indeed throughout the main cereal-producing areas of the world - has fallen in recent years , mainly due to adverse weather : severe drought in the southern hemisphere , for example .
In these circumstances maintaining a 10 % set-aside requirement would be wrong .
Prices for cereals are at historically high levels on the world market and this is causing some hardship in poorer countries dependent on imports .
It is worth looking at the possibility of eliminating the set-aside requirement altogether for future years .
But , at the moment , the most prudent course of action is to set the level of set-aside for the next marketing year at 5 % .
I wish to thank the Commission for coming forward with its proposal this year in good time .
In a similar report last year we had requested an early proposal from the Commission and I welcome the fact that Commissioner Fischler was able to respond to our wishes in this regard .
I turn briefly to a specific problem we have in Ireland with the administration of the set-aside regulation .
The application of Article 9 of the set-aside Regulation 1765 / 92 in our country has resulted in an unforeseen and damaging reduction in the cereal area .
From a very small national base area we have lost production on 50 , 000 hectares - 125 , 000 acres , to speak in Irish terms - in other words , a 19 % reduction .
The reason for this is quite simple : 50 % of cereals in Ireland are grown on rented land and many owners of rented land withdraw the land from the rental market and use it for other purposes .
For example , rotation to grassland , to forestry , to animal production and , indeed , for other forms of development , making it impossible for traditional cereal growers to find alternative eligible land .
Hence the amendment I have tabled in the report .
I want to point out at this stage that this amendment was defeated in the Agriculture Committee .
The reason I am discussing this now is that I feel it was as a result of a misunderstanding and I just wanted to be sure that that misunderstanding was cleared up before we vote on this report .
I want to make it quite clear - and it is important that the House should realize this - that I am not seeking to increase the cereal area above the agreed national and regional base areas already decided in Regulation 1765 / 92 , I merely want to ensure that those farmers growing cereals on rented land be allowed to continue in business within that agreed base area .
I am sure you will agree that , because of the very necessary employment involved and considering the dire shortage in the European Union and , indeed , in the world at large of stocks of grain , this proposed set-aside reduction to 5 % is very desirable .
This also is a very desirable amendment to that proposal .
I would ask the House to accept this proposal and , indeed , to accept that amendment as well .
Mr President , may I take the Gillis report on set-aside as an opportunity , to point something out to you , ladies and gentlemen , to the Commission , and above all to the Council . In 1993 , the Council and the Commission increased the base area in the new Lnder of the Federal Republic of Germany , in the long term by 180 , 000 hectares and temporarily by 150 , 000 hectares .
This had been preceded by a spectacular abortive development in the processing industry , and enormous areas of arable , fodder and potato land became grandes cultures .
In spite of this 1993 decision , by the time the 1994 harvest came round , even the increased base area had already been clearly exceeded again .
In 1996 it is likely to be exceeded again .
This process will worsen if , as planned , from 1997 onwards this temporary 150 , 000 ha of base area has to be given back in four stages .
Since today there are already about 160 , 000 ha missing in the territory of the new Lnder , this missing base area would be increased to over 300 , 000 ha , and that would be approximately equivalent to an 8 % risk of sanctions .

That is intolerable .
This kind of excess cannot be observed in any other Member State of the European Union , but then no other Member State was experiencing such a fundamental restructuring process at the time when the base areas were defined .
For that reason it was only possible to make forecasts about developments in agriculture in the new Lnder .
Now it has been shown that some of these forecasts do not correspond to what has actually happened .
In view of this situation , any dismantling of the base area temporarily allocated cannot be justified at the present time , especially when this would lead to considerable displeasure and lack of understanding among the farmers affected by it .
Therefore , against the background of the debate about a further lowering of the set-aside rate to 5 % from now on , I should once again like to draw attention to the amendment that I proposed at the time of the Gillis report , at the November 1995 part-session , in which I asked for the suspension of the dismantling of the base-area allocated to the new Lnder at a level of 150 , 000 ha , for a specific period of two years .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Gillis , who has done everything in his power to write this report in a few days .
That has enabled the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to respond favourably to the Council 's request for urgency .
However , Commissioner , we know that we always have a number of deadlines : for the budget , the price package , the set-aside rate , etc .
This is how it is , and the Commission services must take into account the time which Parliament 's work requires .
We needed at least two months to do this work with the required care , even at maximum speed .
We should therefore thank our colleague , Mr Gillis , who has managed to produce the report in the shortest possible time .
May I also thank you in advance , Commissioner , since I know that you will convey our request to your services .
As regards the actual subject , the Commission proposes fixing the compulsory set-aside rate at 5 % .
This is of course the minimum rate for farmers , who can always voluntarily set aside up to 30 % .
So , Commissioner , I urge you to reduce this rate to 0 % .
Farmers wishing to set aside 30 % can always do so voluntarily .
Why this proposal ?
Firstly , the situation as regards European grain stocks and the world market : the particularly adverse weather conditions for two years in southern regions have reduced European production ; the economic difficulties in Russia and the very substantial increase in Chinese consumption have put pressure on the world market and therefore on world prices ; in Europe , you have been forced to introduce export taxes from December 1995 ; the dramatic fall in beef consumption as a result of the BSE problem has increased demand for poultry meat and pigmeat , whose production consumes large quantities of cereals ; and , lastly , the compulsory set-aside rate of 0 % would also result in a small reduction in Community expenditure and would thus make possible a small increase in the compensation to beef producers .
Commissioner , the zero rate should not be rejected for administrative reasons when our budget has to be slanted towards stockbreeders without penalizing European producers of arable crops and consequently the whole of farm and food production .
To my colleagues who are concerned about biomass fuels , I would like to say that there will be enough voluntary set-aside to cover all our current requirements !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we do not agree with this report and with the direction proposed by the Commission .
Cereal stocks in the EU have been reduced .
That was the aim of the Commission 's policy , or at least that is what it said at the time .
Now we have reduced the cereal stocks .
Prices on the world market have recovered , because the EU , amongst others , is not acting so aggressively in the market , and also because there is greater demand .
Now the area of cereal-growing land in the EU is to be expanded .
Production will increase by 8.5 million tonnes .
That means that the surplus situation will once again worsen .
As the Commission says , 38 million tonnes are to be taken into storage and will be available for export , but not at the prices that can be obtained on the world market , but at prices more redolent of the old familiar dumping system .
It is also clear that this reduction from 10 % to 5 % - as calculated by the Committee on Budgets - will cost 17 million in the first year , 50 million in 1996 / 97 and a further 30 million in 1997 / 98 . In other words , tax-payers ' money will be used to bring cereals onto the world market , cereals which are not necessary and which do not need to be grown .
If , in spite of all this , we agree to the report anyway , it is because we have succeeded in inserting an amendment to the effect that pulses , i.e. fodder , can be grown on set-aside land , and that this fodder can also be used by farmers to feed their own livestock .
The bigger groups have made it clear that they will approve the report .
That makes it possible for us to approve this resolution and this report because , within the framework of the 30 % voluntary set-aside rate , fodder can still be grown .
We now hope that the Commission will take this on board , and that in future we shall be able to grow fodder on this land .
After all , fodder is in short supply in the EU , and it should be grown in a way that makes crop rotation more ecologically acceptable , by increasing the soil 's nitrogen content by growing pulses and clover / grass leys , thereby reducing the use of chemical fertilizers .
In this case , we shall approve the resolution with a somewhat guilty conscience , and afterwards we shall ask the Commission , before the vote , whether it is prepared to accept our resolution .
I hope that it will do so !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the set-aside principle established by Regulation in 1992 , was designed as a flexible instrument for regulating the markets .
Entirely logically , it recommends a possible revision of the set-aside rate in line with trends in market production and grain stocks .
The Commission proposal submitted to us today , with a set-aside rate of 5 % , comes into the picture because of very low stocks and world prices which are still holding up .
Although the proposal is along the right lines , it does not go far enough .
This system , even if it is effective in limiting over-production , is still absurd in the eyes of most consumers and farmers and we , the elected Members representing them , should take account of the legitimate concerns of our fellow citizens .
In concrete terms , set-aside is creating untilled land all over the European Union and the socio-psychological impact of this is becoming a total disaster for farmers , who wish neither to be paid for doing nothing nor to contemplate their land lying fallow .
From this point of view , the CAP is looked upon as wrong-headed and is criticised unfairly in the light of the advances it has made possible .
The fact that the volume of production has been so successfully controlled does not mean that it can no longer run into problems and therefore be modified .
Furthermore , this system acts as a brake on policies for protecting the rural environment and on policies for improving the quality of produce since , globally , with set-aside , environmental pollution increases proportionally to increases in the output from the fields still under cultivation .
In addition , the system is still adding to the difficulties of small farmers and is thus contributing to the drift from the land , particularly in southern Europe .
All this is not really directed towards reform of the CAP for , although it recommends an increase in the competitiveness of European agriculture at world level and the adjustment of the potential production to market demands , it does not really ensure protection of the environment and the development of underprivileged rural areas .
We must therefore resolutely direct our efforts towards plans for the lasting development of farms centred around the maintenance of the agricultural workforce , a vital element of the rural world and of regional development .
This means farmers ' families living on profitable farms in a well populated and active rural environment .
It means a very limited and more flexible set-aside of cultivated land in order to adapt to market conditions , to restore the balance between export capacity and farmers ' incomes , and not to interfere with the emergence of new agricultural products which are not being over-produced .
It means a policy of quotas based mainly on limiting yields per hectare to improve the quality of the produce and on limiting the total available aid per agricultural worker so that concentration of agricultural land and intensive production are no longer encouraged .
It means sensible environmental measures , encouraged by new and sufficiently incentivising Community aid which , in practice , have the effect of protecting the rural landscape , the soils and the farmed land .
It means , lastly , human thought for the relationship between the farmer , his work and his environment .
You will understand , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that it is in order to show our disapproval of the present set-aside system that , on behalf of my Group of the European Radical Alliance , I have tabled an amendment to 0 % , which would abolish the compulsory set-aside of 5 % of arable land and replace it by a flexible system for producing biomass for fuel and crops intended solely for animal feed , related more closely to environmental constraints .
This new system , replacing the unproductive system of set-aside , would give European agriculture the durable quality it still lacks , namely : the ability to produce at a lower cost so as to increase long-term productive capacity .
We can therefore no longer support such a conservative system , that is blocking all progress towards a really durable agriculture .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like at this point to thank Mr Gillis , our rapporteur , for the speed with which he has written his report so that we can accept the urgency required by the Council , and can do so after having adopted his report in committee .
Like many of my colleagues , Commissioner , I should like you to ask your services to take due account of the time required by Parliament to do its work under the best conditions .
I venture to indicate this to you , because the proposal for a regulation that we are now examining is an annual event since it aims to adapt the set-aside rate to the level of our grain stocks and to the trends in consumption .
Our group has tabled an amendment proposing a zero compulsory set-aside rate for land .
Before explaining the reasons for this amendment , may I say that this zero rate does not call into question the principle of a voluntary set-aside that may go up to 30 % .
The justification for our amendment is simple .
First , world stocks of cereals are very low with only 42 days of world consumption remaining and , in Europe , with Mediterranean countries having experienced two years of exceptional drought , production is very low .
You have even been forced , Commissioner , to introduce an export tax on European cereals as from the end of last year .
This reveals the limitations of the very principle of set-aside for , at the same time as we are forcing all farmers to set aside part of their productive land , we are destabilizing the basic principle of secure world supplies of food .
We can understand a principle of voluntary set-aside in order to compensate for agronomic differentials of arable land in Europe , but the principle of compulsory set-aside should be abandoned .
All economists , including American ones , anticipate a very significant increase in Chinese cereal imports while , looking more at the state of their economies , the difficulties of Russia and Ukraine mean that these countries are far from being able to achieve their potential levels of production .
My last point concerns consumption trends : with the fall in beef consumption as a result of the BSE problem consumption is being transferred to pigmeat and poultry meat .
These two types of produce , may I remind you , consume great quantities of cereals .
Finally , Mr President , may I finish by saying to you that the European Union should have a policy which respects the rural fabric , a balancing element indispensable to our European society , and which at the same times preserves the predominant position of European agriculture in the world .
Mr President , in politics , we have to learn to wait ... for years , we have been asking here for a zero rate and everybody thought we had eaten too much British-made animal feed !
The outcome has shown that we were right .
We are therefore happy to have nearly two million hectares extra and to have nearly eight million tonnes of additional production , hoping that it is not too late : will the market share lost to the Middle East or North Africa be recovered ?
What is important now is to learn lessons from this so that we do not make the same mistakes again .
First lesson : the stubbornness of the Commission .
It does not want to take into account the explosion in world prices , the speculation on the Chicago stock exchange , or the pension funds playing around with cereals .
It does not want to know about the collapse of stocks .
It does not want to take into account climatic factors . After all , everybody knows that there was an El Nio effect in the Pacific which caused both droughts and torrential rain and which , over North America and even over South America , brought about large variations in production .
Second lesson : the statistical error of the Commission .
It was mistaken about structural factors ( Mr des Places spoke about these ) : the Chinese population figures , the rise in the Chinese standard of living , the climatic factor that I have already mentioned , the political factor in the collapse of the USSR , all of which mean that cereal consumption can only increase in the long term .
And anybody who has made mistakes will make more !
Have you not made the same mistakes over wine production ?
This time there is no possibility of correcting them , because when vines are uprooted they are uprooted !
The third and last lesson is the philosophical one of your reactions : when confronting a problem , your reaction is still the restricted outlook , Malthusianism , quotas , reduction in working hours and with Mr Rocard , set-aside .
Basically , as the market expands at world level , you contract mentally .
Your anthropology has a little of LeviStrauss in it : for him , it was the raw and the cooked , for you it is the open and shut !
Mr President , first of all let me say that we very much welcome the fact that this report has come forward at this time of the year - in previous years we have been scrabbling around on Friday mornings in October or November to try and set a set-aside rate .
That is to be welcomed and it will enable our farmers to plan .
I would like to thank Mr Gillis for his report .
He always makes it seem amazingly simple .
We appreciate that very much and thank him for his work .
Set-aside is not a popular tool of agricultural policy .
One of the problems with it is that it is actually visible .
But where you have a system of quotas and where you have a system of subsidies , you need to be able to put a brake on production .
So we have a brake on production called set-aside .
Personally I would prefer to see a nought percent set-aside .
I will take the advice of the Commission on this occasion , but I hope that we get it right .
I certainly would be very concerned if , later next year , we had a very serious grain shortage .
I would like to speak on one point in Mr Gillis ' report : his amendment concerning the Irish situation .
We have discussed this quite thoroughly in the Socialist Group and our understanding is that the Irish Government and any other Member State government already has the power under existing legislation to make the changes that Mr Gillis wants .
Perhaps the Commission would be able to enlighten us at the end of this debate because it would help guide the way in which we would vote .
Can I make one point about the Greens ' amendment ?
We think this is a good amendment because it gets right to the point .
A friend of mine who is a psychiatrist made the remark that it must be very frustrating for farmers who are denied now , particularly if they are in the pig and poultry area , the opportunity to grow their own food , additional food which they desperately need now that they are unable to have access to bone-meal which has traditionally been part of poultry and pig diets for many years .
In my view , this amendment from the Greens goes some way to meeting that .
I would ask that we vote for this now .
I hope that we make progress and I look forward , like everybody else in this Parliament , to the day when set-aside will be a thing of the past .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament and the Council have decided on a uniform set-aside rate of 10 % for the 1995 / 96 crop year .
This rate also applies from now on to long-term fallow .
Now there is some discussion about cutting this rate to 5 % , because world cereal stocks have gone down and the prices of maize and wheat have risen , and I think that we need cereals .
At the same time , I welcome the fact that the proposal has been made earlier than on previous occasions , because farmers need this information in order to draw up their crop plans , which they have to do very soon .
For this reason , it is particularly important to have the information in July , so than they can plan in good time .
Set-aside has proved its worth as a means of doing away with market surpluses and restoring market equilibrium .
I too am not in favour of high set-aside rates , but I am in favour - and I am addressing our French colleagues here - of our using this land to grow renewable raw materials .
In Germany we now grow almost 5 % of renewable raw materials .
Nature offers us a wide range of substances that can be used for many different purposes : carbohydrates , oils , fats , proteins , fibres , dyestuffs , and certain ingredients needed by industry .
I also foresee good opportunities for biodegradable and recyclable materials for packaging and for internal parts of vehicles , and in agriculture for the combustion of solid biomass for heating and power generation .
But we should also not forget the use of set-aside land to grow clover / grass leys , with the proviso that the farmer would be obliged to use these to feed his own livestock .
Finally , the positive environmental aspects of renewable raw materials , such as carbon-dioxide neutrality and biodegradability , should be counted as advantages .
I am therefore not in favour of set-aside in itself , but I am in favour of farmers producing raw materials that industry will be able to use in future , because we shall very soon have enough cereals again , and I can tell you that with absolute certainty !

Mr President , like my colleague , Mr Hallam , I should to thank Mr Gillis for his report and welcome the fact that we are making this decision on the level of set-aside for certain crops well in advance .
One of the great complaints from our farmers has been that in the past they have not been given sufficient time to make sensible decisions .
I also welcome the amendment to allow increased production of crops for animal feed so that we can get away from the unnatural practice of feeding ruminant animals on animal remains .
I think it is right to reduce set-aside from 10 % to 5 % in certain areas , and hope this will be extended soon to other producers of crops which are subject to growing world shortages .
This should include financial encouragement to use both land already in use and the additional land in an environmentally friendly way with reduced inputs and encouragement for woodlands where appropriate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Gillis , for his report and the speed and efficiency with which he completed his work .
I would also like to thank the European Parliament for giving priority to this Commission proposal .
Since Parliament is expressing its opinion , the Council will be in a position to publish the regulations .
Thanks to this , farmers will be better able to plan their work , since they will be fully aware of their obligations , so far as temporary set-aside of land for the year 1997-1998 is concerned .
It is still too early to estimate the harvest of cereals for 1996 , either at Community or at world-wide level .
At any rate , the Commission considers that the state of the market , which is characterised by an unprecedented low level of stocks , enables it to submit from now its proposal for an appreciable reduction of the compulsory quota , in parallel avoiding the risk of accumulating stocks to the level they had reached before the reform .
The Commission considers that if the quota is set at 5 % for the 1997 harvest , this will achieve a balance between on the one hand the forecast level of production , and on the other hand the possibilities for disposing of cereals .
Besides , the Commission considers that in parallel this will make it possible to build up stocks again to an acceptable level .
If we went any further , or if we set the quota at zero , the risk of building up stocks too far would become excessive , and in this I refer to Amendments Nos 2 and 5 .
In addition , to set the proportion of temporary setaside provisionally at zero would have severe consequences for the long-term viability of the existing situation relating to agricultural products not intended as food products and related directly to compulsory temporary setaside .
That situation could not be put right by any system of special support , because it would conflict with our international obligations .
As for Amendment No 1 , which aims to suspend the implementation of exceptional temporary set-aside , the Commission can accept the idea of refraining temporarily from that kind of temporary set-aside as a means to control production .
As for the request to make the application of Article 9 of Regulation 1765 / 92 optional in relation to the selection of land , the Commission regrets that it cannot agree .
Indeed , if we were to accept Amendment No 3 , we would call into question one of the basic aspects of the 1992 reform .

As for Amendment No 4 , which envisages permitting the production of protein-containing products for selfconsumption in areas subject to temporary set-aside , the Commission again cannot agree . And this , because it would call into question the very purpose of temporary set-aside for arable land , an aim based mainly on the adaptation of supply and demand for arable crops .
Mr President , before the vote on the legislative resolution I should like to ask the Commission once again whether it is prepared to accept Amendment No 4 , after this House , by a large majority and with the agreement of almost every group , has accepted Amendment No 4 .
For me , the grounds that you have just read out - but perhaps I am asking too much of you , because it is not your field - are not valid , because fodder is being grown on this land anyway , particularly since we are talking about the cultivation of renewable raw materials where the subsequent products can be used as animal feed .
Therefore the Commission 's arguments do not hold water .
And therefore I should like to ask you once again , before we vote , whether you will now accept this amendment .
It seems to me , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , that the Commissioner has already expressed his opinion ; however , I invite him to speak again .
Mr President , what I can assure the honourable Member is that in future , the Commission will give careful consideration to the issue he mentioned and which Parliament has just adopted .
However , what we cannot do at this time is to adopt that amendment .
And this , because as I said earlier , it would call into doubt the very purpose of temporary set-aside for arable land , an aim based mainly on the adaptation of supply and demand for arable crops .
For that reason , the Commission cannot accept this amendment now .
However , we take note of Parliament 's wish and I can of course promise that my colleague Mr Fischler and the appropriate services of the Commission will examine the matter presently , with all the goodwill for which the Commission is noted in its cooperation with Parliament .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to express my pleasure in knowing that at least we have now approved Amendment No 4 in Parliament , to the effect that the ecologically acceptable cultivation of fodder , which is essentially what is intended , is now possible on set-aside land .
I should like to explain , however , why our group did not refer the amendment back to committee after the Commission did not accept it .
We are of the opinion that Parliament has always tried to give farmers information about the set-aside rate in good time for sowing .
This time it has succeeded .
Therefore we do not want to cause a delay now , although we are of the opinion that it is necessary for this amendment , introduced by us , to be adopted .
I now have confidence in the Commissioner 's word , that he will ask his colleagues to examine it .
When the next round of amendments is due , which will be soon , we shall propose our amendment again , and then , if you say that you will not accept it , it will be time for the gloves to come off .
We are confident that the Commission will accept this amendment .
Therefore we have let it go this time , quite apart from the fact that it is also doubtful whether we would have obtained a majority for our amendment .
Unit of account and conversion rates
The next item is the report ( A4-0192 / 96 ) by Mr Jacob , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 3813 / 92 on the unit of account and the conversion rates to be applied for the purposes of the common agricultural policy ( COM ( 96 ) 0040 - C4-0155 / 96-96 / 0037 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I shall be very brief since there are , I believe , only two amendments to this report .
I should simply like to recall , as a preamble , that since the GATT agreements , as all Members are aware , Community preference has been widely flouted and has fallen very much behind through the abolition of variable duties , converted into fixed duties .
The only two elements of Community preference that really remain are the policy of standardization , with its well-known imperfections ( particularly the UN standards which are increasingly in evidence rather than Community standards ) , and the monetary lever .
We are keen on this monetary lever and I am personally keen on keeping the agricultural conversion rate .
We have in fact two conversion rates , which involve administrative difficulties for the Commission . I understand this very well since it is true that for certain products one conversion rate will be used rather than another , depending on the way they are classified .
The agricultural conversion rate , being greater by 5 % , provides better protection for the market and the Commission 's proposal , which I largely support , is to use a single rate .
In simple terms , what I should like personally is for the agricultural conversion rate to be used rather than the other one , because it protects the market better .
I confess to being surprised that the Commission has chosen to use the normal customs rate as the single rate since it provides less protection for our market , when we know very well that currency fluctuations produce very great instability in the market .
Look at what is happening in the USA with the dollar .
Between one dollar to 5 francs and one dollar to 10 francs , we can clearly see how far the penetration of our market by our competitors can go .
Thus , the first of the two tabled amendments has the unanimous support of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the executive Commission since it aims to use a single rate .
The second amendment , for which there was no majority in the Committee on Agriculture , aims to use the agricultural conversion rate as the single conversion rate rather than the customs rate .
Mr President , what we are discussing here is one of the subjects I believe our citizens use as a yardstick to measure our ability to adapt and apply purely economic rules to the practicalities of everyday life .
I would , therefore , like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Jacob , on the skill with which he has managed the intricacies of this debate ; but , since he is not listening to me , I shall congratulate him personally , in private .
So far , we have been told that , in accordance with a temporary rule that was in force until 30 June of this year , two rates have applied : a monthly customs rate , on the basis of which annual rates have been applied , and the annual rates themselves , which certainly do not reflect the constant exchange-rate fluctuations .
Now , instead , we are going to apply agricultural rates to a whole range of imports that can , by and large , be linked to the instruments based on Article 43 of the Treaty , that is , to the common agricultural policy .
Since they do not work well together , these two conversion rates have given rise to much uncertainty as regards their application , which has led the Commission to draft a proposal to amend the basic agri-monetary regulation to eliminate the disadvantages of this dual conversion system , and so give taxpayers something they can understand , and to do away with both economic inconsistencies and complicated legislative procedures .
The proposed new system provides for application of the monthly customs rate to all imports of agricultural products .
The Commission itself thinks that the application of its proposals would mean a very small reduction in Community preferences .
Many Council delegations do not approve of a reduction in Community preferences and have called for consideration of the possibility of universal application of the green rate .
This could lead to both political and legal problems , because universal application of the agricultural rate to all imports of agricultural products could , in turn , involve the risk that the Union 's trading partners would demand new negotiations on account of border protection .
Which means the debate would start all over again .
Mr President , the report we are dealing with on the proposal for a regulation on the unit of account and conversion rates applicable in the framework of the Common Agricultural Policy simplifies a situation that had introduced serious complications .
Not that complicated situations are infrequent in the context of regulations concerning the CAP and , therefore , any simplification is to be welcomed , but I shall explain later on in what this simplification consists .
The current situation produces economic incoherences and generates administrative complexity that leads to errors and creates situations that are not always legally very clear .
From that point of view the Commission 's proposal presents certain advantages through the simplification that it introduces .
First of all , it would facilitate a situation that would be legally surer and the risks of dispute would be reduced .
Furthermore , monetary fluctuations would also be reduced and experience shows that those fluctuations , with the system of monthly customs rates , are only significant for those Member States which are not in the EMS .
Moreover , administrative complexity will be reduced and that will facilitate the management of small and medium-sized undertakings .
As a consequence the system will be more transparent .
A combination of legal uncertainty and complexity had led to many mistakes and , therefore , increased economic costs .
However , the Commission proposal presents a problem which comes from confusing farming conversion rates with the monthly customs rate and , since the latter tends to be lower than the farming conversion rate , the Commission proposal will bring about a reduction in frontier protection and , thereby , Community preference .
However , two questions have to be borne in mind : on one hand , that the system proposed has a general scope for all farm products .
However , there are farm imports which are insignificant for the European Union and therefore the most important ones are concentrated in a restricted group of crops , which poses problems for that group of products .
However , it would be naive to think that this proposal can worsen still further the already deteriorated European Community preference .
The real problem lies in the signing of preferential agreements with third countries by the European Union .
The reality is that most farm products , those where imports are considerable , enjoy a preferential share that puts heavy limits on this factor .
Community preference is being deteriorated and I should like to recall that this is a basic principle of the CAP .
Yet the problem does not lie only in conversion rates but also in the signing of preferential agreements .
The genuine problem , from this point of view , is that farming is bearing a considerable share of the cost of the European Union 's foreign policy , and this situation is all the more serious in the case of fruit and vegetables , products from the region of Murcia - from where I come ; these crops are most affected by the conclusion of preferential agreements and this has knock-on effects , which are worse in the case of Mediterranean farming areas .
In the Commission proposal there are some scandalous aspects .
It is scandalous that the Commission , in its proposal to reform the COM on fruit and vegetables , should have proposed a market management financed in part by the farmers themselves , when imports definitely are to blame for the hold-ups occurring in those markets .
That is why I think that this type of problem must be borne in mind .
The simplification of farming regulations is desirable when it is a genuine simplification and here , Mr President , this is a simplification .
That is not the case of the ideas communicated by the Commission for the simplification of the CAP , translated in practice into the dismantling , re-nationalization and experimentation with policies of dubious effectiveness and that have never yet been tried out .
Mr President , we should now be trying to defend Community preference or prevent the disappearance of the CAP .
In this particular case , I think that changing the conversion rates will simplify matters and offer transparency while the negative effects will be very small .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the subject we are dealing with today is particularly difficult because it is technical and that is why it was entrusted to a distinguished rapporteur in the person of Mr Jacob .
I have much sympathy for his arguments and more particularly for those relating to administrative simplification : the coexistence of two conversion rates , in this case the customs rate and the agricultural conversion rate , poses problems for importing companies in its application .
This is the sense of Amendment No 1 which our group has tabled and which I hope will be adopted by Parliament , since it has the advantage of completing the wording of the second recital in the Proposal for a Regulation .
But , Commissioner , why choose to abolish the ACR in favour of the customs rate ?
On this point , I do not understand you .
After all , the difference between the rates is 5 % : why , therefore , choose the rate most unfavourable to European Union agriculture ?
Once again , we are choosing the solution which reduces the advantage of Community preference .
The Commission is the only organization worldwide which systematically favours imports from non-member countries .
Amendment No 2 proposed by our group seeks to alter the choice of the rate .
We say ' yes ' to the agricultural conversion rate and ' no ' to the customs rate .
To put it plainly , we wish to favour the principle of preference .
Many of my colleagues here present are members of the Committee on Agriculture .
They very often talk about Community preference , but I believe that when it comes to voting they put the Commission before the interests of farmers .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , my group asks you to adopt our Amendment No 2 in order to show our farmers at least this once that the European Parliament wishes to protect them .
May I remind you that agriculture and the rural world as a whole are a vital balancing element in our European society .
Mr President , here , we are of course all in favour of administrative simplification for all economic operators , but administrative simplification should not be used as an alibi for deliberately weakening the principle of Community preference still further .
In the present system , there are two rates for calculating import duties on agricultural products : the customs rate and the agricultural conversion rate .
It seems to me logical to want a single rate , but why choose the customs rate which , by its very structure , is significantly different from the agricultural conversion rate ?
I shall therefore support the two amendments which have been tabled , since they seek the same administrative simplification as the Commission 's proposal , but still preserve the principle of Community preference and equity between Member States .
Finally , Mr President , may I say that the Commission 's proposal is a serious precedent harmful to the European agri-monetary arrangements .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and the rapporteur Mr Jacob on their support for the Commission 's proposal .
In the exceptionally complicated sector of agricultural finance , it is seldom possible to simplify matters without affecting important interests .
This is certainly true of the present situation , which proposes a significant administrative simplification and eliminates an erroneous economic practice .
This concerns the use of a single conversion rate for the conversion to national currencies of all expenses relating to the import of agricultural products , which are expressed in ECU .
In that way , the present dual system , in which expenditure is converted on the basis of one or other of the conversion rates , will be abolished .
Though this would lead on average to a very slight reduction of certain duties in terms of the national currency , the cost of the measure would be insignificant in relation to the fluctuations caused by the markets , which influence own resources of agricultural origin .
From the standpoint of Community preference , this measure has no practical consequences , granted that its minimal effect cannot influence decisions on whether or not to bring in imports .
Finally , the solution proposed by the Commission involves no difficulties either at legal or international level .
So we now have an opportunity which must not be missed , for an administrative simplification that business men are waiting for and which does not affect Community interests .
Besides , we must not forget that this simplification will avoid many errors and much litigation .
There is always the question why agricultural conversion coefficients are not used more generally in place of customs duties .
Such a solution , however , would bring no advantage for the Union , since the use of one or another conversion coefficient does not influence Community preference ; on the contrary , it could be regarded as provocative by our trading partners and create unnecessary difficulties with third countries .
Mr President , I am sorry to say that the amendments tabled cannot be accepted by the Commission .
The first , because it eliminates the motive for which it was proposed , without in any case affecting the present proposal , and the second because it restores the present system and so deprives the Commission 's proposal of any effect .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Supplementary premium to sheep producers in Ireland and UK
The next item is the report ( A4-0209 / 96 ) by Mr Gillis , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation fixing a supplementary premium payable to sheep producers in non less-favoured areas of Ireland and the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland ( COM ( 96 ) 0152 - C4-0315 / 96-96 / 0102 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I would like to say a word of thanks to everybody for the report on setaside , I think we dealt with it very speedily .
This being Friday morning and everybody wishing to start the long journey home I would hope that we could dispense with this one quite quickly as well , it is a very short report .
In the spring of 1995 , there was a complete collapse of the sheep market in Ireland .
Prices collapsed totally ; producers suffered a severe price drop , especially for their early lambs .
These producers are a very necessary part of sheepmeat marketing , as their lambs are produced and brought to market out of the main season , thus producing a continuous supply of quality product all the year round .
This eliminates seasonality , it eliminates the need for storage and in fact it is based on a natural form of production .
These lambs are usually born out of season during November , December and January and for this reason they are very costly to produce .
They require cereal feeding and they require housing .
The proposal before you seeks to provide a supplementary premium of ECU 6.5 per ewe in the lowlands .
That is in the non-disadvantaged area .
Mr President , I think when you were introducing you said in the less-favoured areas , it is actually in the non-less-favoured areas and it applies for one year only , that is for the 1995 spring .
It will affect approximately 10 , 000 sheep farmers in both southern and northern Ireland and will alleviate some of the losses incurred in 1995 .
It is hoped that this measure will encourage farmers to continue with this type of lamb production and it should encourage them to continue supplying a valuable market on an all-year-round basis .
This is something we have being trying to stimulate right across Europe for a very long time , to remove the seasonality .
It is very important that Parliament gives its approval as quickly as possible , so that that money can be paid to these farmers without delay to encourage them to continue within this production .
Otherwise they will slip back to a cheaper form of production and we will lose those valuable markets .
Mr President , I want to express my appreciation of the way the Commission brought this proposal forward .
It is an exceptional measure for Ireland and Northern Ireland .
Farmers and sheep farmers in Ireland have always made the point that the sheepmeat regime does not create common conditions throughout the European Union .
We fix the guide price and then base compensation on the average market price .
But the Community is a big place and Ireland is an island and far away from its main markets .
Therefore , the price in Ireland can often be very different from that in the rest of the European Union .
That is what happened in this case .
Sometimes the sheepmeat regime is severely criticized because of the cost per kilo of meat produced .
But to look at it that way is to misunderstand the policy .
There are 70 , 000 sheepmeat producers in the European Union and 80 % of them live in disadvantaged areas .
It means that in those areas there is very little else that they can do .
Their only alternative would be calves from suckling cowherds .
If you look at the stocking rate you will find that if you replace the four or five ewes with one cow - which is the equivalent stocking rate - it will be more expensive to stock this land with cows and you will be producing a product of which there is a one-and-ahalf million tonne surplus .
So , the sheepmeat policy is a very good one .
It supports difficult areas both in the south and north of the Community .
At the same time , it contributes to a reduction in the amount of beef produced .
I congratulate the Commission on its flexibility in coming forward with this .
It does not add to production in any way and it is a relatively small amount of money .
It shows that big as the European Union is , we have institutions that are capable of dealing with the problems which arise from day-to-day .
That gives confidence to people , particularly in the peripheral areas .
Mr President , I should like to join with my other Irish colleagues in acknowledging the Commission response in helping to alleviate what was a very serious problem for Irish early lamb producers .
If we are to maximize the full potential of Europe 's agricultural resources , we must add value to the greatest possible extent to the indigenous resources of rural areas .
Nowhere has this opportunity been more ignored than in the processing of wool .
There are almost 100 million sheep in the Europe and yet we do not have a sustainable EU wool sector .
Ireland is the fifth largest producer of sheepmeat and wool .
Yet we export all that wool unprocessed .
Why should we in Europe hand over this opportunity and this potential to New Zealand and Australia .
The wool sector report , which was recently approved by Parliament , puts forward reasonable and achievable proposals for a structured and cost effective programme to develop the EU wool sector and Parliament must bring pressure to bear on the Commission to bring forward its proposals at an early date for the establishment of that sustainable wool sector within the European Community .
Mr President , the green fields of Ireland made a great impression on this Finnish Member when I visited Cork and its surrounding countryside a little while ago .
I understood how important agriculture and sheepmeat production are to the Irish and to Irish agriculture .
I also agree with the rapporteur , Mr Gillis and the Agriculture Committee fully that a disaster which affected sheep-rearers as a result of a sudden drop in prices should be compensated responsibly .
In any case the continuation of traditional production is in the balance , and it is at any rate hard for me to imagine Ireland without an important sheepmeat sector .
The situation in Ireland and Mr Gillis 's report demand a comparison of sheepmeat production in the various peripheral regions of the European Union and in particular the Union 's less favoured regions .
It is rather difficult to understand the Council 's line on sheepmeat production .
While it justifiably considers additional support to sheepmeat production in Ireland , its policy seems to lead to a collapse in sheepmeat production and clearly to its abandonment in Finland .
Finland has not hitherto been self-sufficient in sheepmeat , but now in addition to the collapse in profitability , wool is now only being accepted if it is given away .
It is clear that if sheep-rearing is to continue in Finland urgent special measures are needed .
Unfortunately , sheep rearing is only one example of the unfair approach of the common agricultural policy to the most northerly regions of the Union , north of Stockholm and Helsinki .
In southern Finland there is a danger that farmers in what have traditionally been among the EU 's most purely agricultural areas will have to give up production because it has become unprofitable .
Normal support for production is unfair in northern regions because the harvest level is always lower there .
Mr President , I therefore look to the Agriculture Committee to treat the Member States logically , since there are particularly serious difficulties affecting their agriculture , as has now happened in Ireland and similarly also in Finland .
How is it possible that the committee has not noticed that Finnish farm incomes fell last year , in the first year of EU membership , by over 25 % on average , on some farms as much as 40 % and in wheat , egg and pigment production even more than that ?
In spring 1994 the European Parliament ratified the accession treaty between the European Union and the Finnish Republic .
In Article 141 of that Treaty it is laid down that compensatory support may be paid to agriculture in southern Finland in accordance with its special conditions where serious difficulties are noted .
Should not the European Parliament , since it ratified the membership treaty , ensure that the letter and the spirit of the treaty are not trampled under foot ?
I look to the Agriculture Committee to support the Finnish smallholders as energetically as it is now supporting the Irish sheep rearers .
Mr President , Mr Gillis , when it is a question of the farmers of Europe receiving support , then you have me on your side , even if , as in the present case , they are Irish sheep farmers .
However , I do not think that this type of support is the right way of going about it .
We shall therefore abstain from voting on the regulation .
What you are proposing is not forward-looking .
We have just been told that by our Finnish colleague .
When there are subsidies on one side , and when the market prices collapse , then that means that there is a chance for these sheep farmers to continue to exist , after a fashion , even when market prices are low , while other farmers , who do not receive support , then get into serious difficulties .
In addition , you have not proposed any system of staggering , such as the one that applies to less-favoured areas .
This means that if you pay a premium per sheep , then that premium will most probably not go to the farmer , because the dealers will include the premium in their calculations and will put even more pressure on prices , which again will result in difficulties for Finnish farmers and sheep farmers .
A further point concerns the assertion that the value of sheepmeat will be enhanced .
The value of sheepmeat will not be enhanced by EU premiums , by public money .
All that this can do is to make up for a loss .
The value of sheepmeat is enhanced by its having a value in the market , by Irish sheepmeat 's having a reputation in Europe .
Consumers are prepared to pay for that .
We are going in the wrong direction if we think that we would be able to stabilize the market this way , by pumping public money into it .
This is the wrong direction , and it has nothing to do with quality .
Nevertheless , I do not begrudge the Irish sheep farmers the money that is now being paid to them by the EU .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and the rapporteur Mr Gillis , as well as the Committee on Budgets and the rapporteur Mr Gallagher for their cooperation .

The issue we are debating today relates to the unfortunate situation of the sheepmeat market throughout Ireland during the critical period at the end of Spring , 1995 .
The production of sheepmeat in Ireland is seasonal .
Its productivity at the end of Spring depends on good market prices , given that the cost of animal feed tends to be very high at that time of year .
In the spring of 1995 a combination of factors , including a much greater availability than usual in Northern Europe , led to low market prices all over Ireland .
Although the Commission reacted by activating a number of support measures for the formation of private stores , the markets recovered very slowly .
In fact , the Council expressed its concern about sheepmeat prices in Ireland , in the context of the bundle of measures concerning 1995 prices .
Later , in December 1995 , it announced that it was ready to decide on a Commission proposal to grant supplementary premiums , which would be strictly limited to the marketing period 1995 , in full awareness of the economic consequences for the producers involved in Ireland and Northern Ireland .
The present proposal is a response to the Council 's concern and its readiness for action .
It proposes a supplementary premium of 6.5 ECU per female animal , payable only for the marketing period 1995 to producers in non-disadvantaged areas of Ireland and Northern Ireland .
The cost of this one-off supplementary support will be less than 10 million ECU and is allowed for in the budget for 1996 .
Now , as for the comment by Mr Olli Rehn , I would like to say concerning the problems faced by Finnish animal breeders , that the Commission is aware of the situation and has already begun making appropriate efforts in that direction in Finland .
The European Commission is watching the situation closely and can cooperate with the Finnish authorities in any eventuality .
We have chosen to abstain in the vote on this report .
It seems absurd now to spend ECU 9.5 million because sheep farmers suffered a fall in prices in spring 1995 .
There are many industries which suffer falling prices and whose operational costs are higher at certain times of the year .
Purely as a matter of principle the EU cannot start financing all sectors which suffer these problems .
It therefore seems absurd to us to support this report .
Protocol to Agreement with Andorra
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0241 / 96 ) by Mr Galeote Quecedo , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision on the conclusion of the Protocol to the Agreement in the form of an exchange of letters between the European Economic Community and the Principality of Andorra following the accession of the Republic of Austria , the republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden to the European Union ( COM ( 95 ) 0745 - C4-0383 / 96-96 / 0009 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Mr Galeote has worked intensively on this report and on this agreement .
All the more reason , then , why he regrets not being able to present his report in person here today .
However , it is for me a pleasure and an honour to be able to deputize for him , and for two reasons . The first reason is that I come from a Member State from which Andorra is probably a long way distant .
But we ought to recognize that we in the European Union are a community in which Spain borders onto the Czech Republic , and in which Bavaria also borders on Andorra .
And I believe that this community , in which we are not only regionally oriented , but also able to see problems as a whole , is important for the future .
Secondly - and I believe that this is important too - Andorra is a state which has special connections and relationships with the European Union .
Both of its Princes are citizens of the European Union , and one of them is even the President of a Member State of the European Union .
Of the 64 , 000 inhabitants of Andorra , only 13 , 000 are Andorrans ; the others are citizens of EU countries , namely France , Spain and Portugal .
Not for that reason alone , but also because of all the historical and economic links between the European Union and Andorra , we should accord great importance to this country , even though it is such a small one .
This country has succeeded , in a poor , barren region , which has not been blessed by nature , in achieving an amazing level of prosperity .
The per capita GDP is $ 15 , 000 , which means that the people , by their hard work and inventiveness , in a difficult situation in which one might think they could only exist by living on charity , have actually created something out of their predicament , and have developed this country in an amazing way .
I believe that this means that we should speak with more respect than we have done hitherto about the small countries of Europe .
If Europe is structured in the way we want it to be , then it should not be centralist , but rather the regions and ethnic groups should be protected as communities with rights , and the small countries must be given their place as well .
So often , on the subject of Slovenia , I hear people say that it is not really ready for accession because it is small - and yet its capital city alone has more inhabitants than one of our Member States , a state which I also rate very highly .
And it is said that Malta is too small to be represented in the European institutions . If these things were true , then of course the same thing would apply to the really small countries of Europe .
But I believe that they are very important , not only because of their historical and cultural role , but because they are a symbol of liberty , because they are manageable areas in a Europe that so often tends towards a mania for the huge and spectacular .
And I am of the opinion , precisely because I represent a very large Member State , that we should attach a new importance to the small , manageable state within Europe .
For this reason , I welcome the fact that this adjustment , which is essentially a technical one , and which is necessitated by enlargement , offers us an opportunity , for once in a while , to sing the praises of the small country in Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I am pleased to be able to announce the vote in favour by my group , the Liberal Group , to the Protocol to the agreement with Andorra since the latest enlargement of the European Union .
It is very important to bear in mind the reality of Andorra in the European framework and its relations with the European Union .
Andorra is a political , social and economic entity that has undergone a very interesting evolution in recent years , since conversion into a sovereign State in 1993 , when the country gave itself a democratic constitution and joined the United Nations and the Council of Europe , as well as other international organisations .
The present government , led by Mr Marc Forn , of the Partit Liberal Andorr , is concluding an important process of international and European planning , as well as the modernisation of the Andorran economy according to the strictest rules of western European economies - as such it is not possible to apply the term ' tax haven ' as the explanatory statement of this report does .
On the contrary , one of the most important efforts of the Andorran government has been to ensure a proper functioning of its institutions and the machinery of the Andorran State , fully in keeping , as I have already said , with the States and economies of the European Union .
This is an activity also being carried out by other operators in the economic and social fields such as , for example , the Banca Andorrana , which now has a code of conduct similar if not practically identical to that gover