Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 19 December 2002 .
I must apologise for the late arrival of Mr Pat Cox , our President , but he is currently on his way rather slowly from Frankfurt .
We expect him sometime soon .
The House learnt with great sadness of the death last weekend of Roy Jenkins , a distinguished political leader , and a former Minister in the United Kingdom .
The House will recall his four years as President of the European Commission .
During his stewardship he launched the European Monetary System , the forerunner of the single currency .
He was an outstanding and committed European and statesman , and I invite the House to observe one minute 's silence in his memory .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence )
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 9 January 2003 has been distributed .
Monday
You are too late to change today 's agenda .
That should have been notified by 4 p.m. today .
Thursday
I have received from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance a request to remove the item ' Humanitarian crisis in North Korea ' from the debate on breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
Mr President , I would just like to explain why we are asking for this item to be removed from the agenda - moreover , we would then be in favour of the item on Illinois being included - and we would like to ask whether a statement on North Korea might be included on the agenda of the Brussels part-session at an appropriate time , given the country 's announcement that it intends to withdraw from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons .
We feel it would be more appropriate for this item to be addressed in a more formal , more in-depth manner than will be possible in a last-minute topical and urgent debate .
I will just clarify for the House that you are proposing that North Korea be taken in the second part-session this month .
Mr President , our group has just been discussing this issue , and it is our opinion that the topicality and urgency of developments in North Korea make it imperative that this issue be dealt with this week .
In the event of further discussion of this issue becoming necessary , we will sort that out at a future date .
We are therefore against the topic of North Korea being removed from the list of topical and urgent matters for debate .
Mr President , I would like to make a proposal to the Liberal Group that they withdraw this proposal and that the whole House should ask the President to make a statement on its behalf , addressed to the speakers of both Houses of the US Congress , expressing our pleasure at the decision of the Governor of Illinois .
The reason is very simple : in Europe we are abolitionists and this is an issue which is even proposed as one of the Copenhagen conditions .
Our colleagues in the US Congress are aware of our position , and it would be very difficult for my group to vote against the Liberal Group 's proposal for procedural reasons , since we agree with it .
We believe it would be more forceful and more helpful to the abolitionist campaign in the United States if we were to express our complete agreement and support for this decision by means of a statement by the President than to invoke urgency , which may seem somewhat polemical .
Since we are in complete agreement , we could maintain the urgency and , at the same time , send a constructive and positive message to the US Congress , which is a partner of ours .
Mr President , I am delighted with the support we have received from Mr Barón Crespo and the PSE Group .
I can assure you that my group is deeply concerned about the situation in Chechnya and it is something which must command the attention of this House .
However , it is something on which we have frequently expressed ourselves and there is no particular urgency .
The action of the Governor of the State of Illinois in the United States is something we very much welcome .
The position of this House , over many years , on this issue has been so consistent that we should take this opportunity to welcome what has happened , and indeed we should call on the 38 remaining states in the United States of America which still apply the death penalty to follow the example set in Illinois .
It is for that reason that we maintain our request for an urgency on this subject .
Mr President , I do not need at this present moment to say anything more about whether the motion from the Group of the European Liberals and Democrats should stand , or whether we are opposed to it .
As Mr Barón Crespo has already expressed his opposition to the deletion of Chechnya from the agenda , I will not speak further on the subject .
I am very much in favour of our also discussing Chechnya .
Speaking on behalf of my group , though , I wish to associate myself with Mr Barón Crespo 's proposal that we should - in view of the Liberals ' inability to gain a majority on the subject - mandate the President to issue a statement in which , without risking our position being misunderstood , and without the statement being tinged with any sort of anti-Americanism , we express our opposition to capital punishment .
Whilst being friendly towards America , we very definitely oppose the death penalty .
That is hardly a matter for the agenda .
It should be raised at another time .
We will , however , take note of your comments .
Mr President , I wanted simply to point out to Mrs Frassoni that we could still have added the subject of capital punishment in the Congo to the list of matters for topical and urgent debate without further ado if her group had not , at that time , needlessly voted to restrict the list of matters for topical and urgent debate to three topics on each occasion , which is of no use to anybody , and does not help matters .
Thank you Mr Gollnisch .
You are beginning to get into a very political matter .
We are dealing with the agenda .
I will inform you , if you listen , that the Iraq question will be debated at the Brussels part-session , at the end of January .
You will have the opportunity to raise the matter then .
Brussels part-session , January 2003
Wednesday :
I have received from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance a request for the inclusion of a Council and Commission statement on North Korea 's withdrawal from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty .
The information brochure from our very own Parliament is being attacked by the chemical industry , by CEFIC .
I have heard that our own President , Mr Cox , has decided to stop distributing this brochure , which is called Troubled Waters .
I would like to ask you to make this brochure , which is presently only available in English and French , available to all representatives so that they can see for themselves that it does not mention any chemical companies at all by name .
I think that Mr Cox 's compromise of inserting a sticker or a sheet stating that the story is fictional , is unnecessary ; to do so would be to bow to pressure from the chemical industry .
That is something we must not do .
It is an information brochure and a comic strip .
I have the brochure here , and everyone can see that it is a comic strip and therefore fictional .
In any event , I would ask that all representatives be given a copy of this comic strip , and I also think that it should be translated into all European languages .
I understand that the document has not been withdrawn .
It will be made available in all languages to colleagues in the House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while we were on our Christmas holidays , Touria Tiouli , a Frenchwoman and a citizen of the European Union , was in prison in Dubai .
Having accused three men of rape , she was taken into custody as long ago as October , accused of relations sexuelles adulterines - extra-marital sexual intercourse - a bizarre interpretation of the law that degrades the victim still further and gets her jailed into the bargain .
We have enshrined European human rights in the Treaties , and human dignity in the Charter , and regard these things as binding throughout the world .
This scandal in Dubai , Mr President , makes it necessary that this be pointed out .
I ask you to write on behalf of the European Parliament a letter that will get Touria Tiouli set at liberty and make it clear that we want nothing to do with states that treat human dignity with such contempt .
I will make sure that is passed on to the President .
Mr President , the news in recent weeks that initiatives to clone human beings are taking place in different parts of the world is very disturbing indeed .
I very much welcome the support that has been given by the European Parliament and the European Commission to promote a worldwide ban on human cloning .
We need to implement the necessary measures to stop those seeking to clone human beings in their tracks .
It is an abhorrent and unethical practice which is totally irresponsible from a scientific point of view .
We need to implement a worldwide convention which will ban human cloning within the next few months .
The international community must act on this issue immediately .
Only last November the European Parliament voted in favour of a proposal which I tabled calling for a universal ban on the cloning of human beings .
We must work now towards achieving this objective via the structures of the United Nations .
I would call on this Parliament and on your good offices , Mr President , to forward that immediately as a matter of urgency .
Mr President , you did not draw attention to the fact that this month we are celebrating the 30th anniversary of the accession of the United Kingdom , Denmark and Ireland to the European Union .
In the case of the United Kingdom , this accession has brought tremendous benefits to the citizens of the United Kingdom , creating jobs through increased trade , bringing in considerable investment , creating jobs , and benefiting our citizens through increased travel opportunities and education and employment .
It has also particularly benefited the United Kingdom in relation to the social agenda , in particular the role of women , where the women 's cause has been furthered in the United Kingdom , largely due to European legislation .
This should therefore be an occasion to celebrate .
You mentioned Roy Jenkins in your opening remarks .
He , with the late John Smith , was responsible on the Labour side for ensuring that Britain became and remained a member of the European Union .
Mr Titley , I am sure you are much more eloquent in these matters than I would be .
Mr President , I would like to point out that the dialogue between the governments of the different Member States must be the main tool for resolving problems , especially in the case of neighbouring States .
I am referring here specifically to the attitude of the Portuguese Government to the Andalusian fishermen .
Simple violations , such as entering Portuguese waters , have recently , on two occasions , been responded to with machine-guns which , thanks to Providence , have not injured anybody .
I would appeal for sanity and responsibility in order to find a solution to a problem we have had for decades .
That matter should and will be referred to the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , I wish to bring what might appear at first sight to be a more prosaic matter to the House 's attention but which relates , I think , to the way in which Parliament conducts its public relations and tells European citizens about how it works .
We were told just a few days ago that the Bureau had approved the Quaestors ' proposed decision on planned and approved per capita expenditure by the European Parliament which , contrary to all expectations , has been cut .
And as far as I know , for my country and region at least , these are swathing cuts .
For example , the week after next I shall be inviting a group of fifty people from Crete and , as far as I can see , the money approved so far will not even cover their tickets .
As far as I am concerned , this is not just out of order ; there is also a moral dimension to this issue .
If the Bureau and the Quaestors wish to reduce planned expenditure , they should not tell us at the eleventh hour because we have already made other plans .
I suggest that , if we want a serious decision here , this - to my mind , and I know others agree - unacceptable decision on the part of the Bureau to approve this proposal should be postponed until further notice .
I am sure a number of colleagues would express similar concerns .
I can assure you that the College of Quaestors will look into the matter and will possibly come forward with new proposals .
The existing arrangements , however , will stay in place until that change is actually made .
Your visitors from Greece will be adequately covered .
Mr President , I would like to inform the House of an extremely serious incident which took place last Friday in Italy , in the town of Verona to be precise .
Thirty or so members of a neo-nazi organisation burst into a local television studio where a debate was being held and brutally attacked a representative of an Islamic community .
The fact that this person was expressing very dubious , extremely provocative views did not , of course , prevent all the democratic groupings from condemning this very disturbing incident .
The most worrying thing of all , however , Mr President , is that a Member of this House , Mr Borghezio , a member of the Lega Nord , not only justified the act but said that he was in favour of this kind of behaviour .
You will understand , Mr President , that , henceforth , it will be extremely difficult for me to stay in this House if Mr Borghezio takes the floor .

Mr President , in response to the comments by Mr Titley , I would like to say that I raised the issue of the 30th anniversary of Britain , Ireland and Denmark 's membership of the European Union at the last part-session in December and asked our President , Mr Cox , what was going to be done to mark this .

I am delighted to say that Mr Cox is hosting a reception tomorrow evening for Members of Parliament and I hope that Mr Titley , among his other invitations for this week , will find the opportunity to attend that reception being offered by the President .
I certainly intend to be there myself .
Mr President , I would like you to ask the Commission what measures it intends to take to demand the reimbursement of the subsidies granted to the Daewoo corporation .
It is scandalous for this corporation to keep the monies received , while closing down the three factories it has in Lorraine , France , as well as many other factories world-wide .
I believe that granting subsidies to capitalist companies on the pretext of promoting employment equates to misappropriation of taxpayers ' money , where these companies simply add the sums received to their profits and shareholders ' dividends .
Once the money has been received , how many of these companies cut jobs , or even close factories , thereby ruining whole towns and even regions .
This is fraud , to the detriment of both workers and taxpayers , and it takes place with the complicity of the European institutions or other bodies , which continue to grant these subsidies .
Mr President , we were talking a short while ago about the death penalty , and Iran is one of the countries in which many death sentences , especially by means of stoning , are pronounced .
Certainly , there has been a moratorium on stonings , but everyone knows of course that , in the autumn of 2002 , there was a series of large-scale demonstrations in Iran in favour of human rights and democracy and against executions and stonings .
In particular , there were a number of students at the head of the demonstrations and , if I raise the issue now , it is because four of these students were sentenced at a court in Shiraz to have their arms and legs cut off .
They are all under 25 years of age .
None have criminal records .
This is one more example of the mediaeval methods used by Iran .
I would ask you to approach the Iranian Government and , if appropriate , break off the critical dialogue until such methods are no longer used .
This is a matter of great urgency .
Mr President , please allow me to add something to what Mrs Gebhardt has said .
The things she has described have made a deep impression on me , but , Mrs Gebhardt , there was just one thing missing .
The reason why these violations of human rights outrage us is that a European woman is involved .
We should , though , be aware that Muslim women - and not only in Dubai - are exposed to the same violations of human rights on a daily basis .
Mr President , following on from what Mrs Frahm said , I should like to express my great disappointment at the fact that the Iranian regime , which distinguished itself in 2002 as being one of the world 's most repressive towards its own people , which breached human rights more than any other , has not been condemned by the United Nations because the European Union decided not to propose this condemnation .
Such action makes no sense and makes me think that what we are seeing is opportunism in the EU 's human rights policy , which I can neither accept nor understand .
We will make sure the President draws the correct conclusions from that and takes appropriate action .
Mr President , as you may recall , last month I raised the issue of the extreme right-wing British National Party claiming that sympathetic serving police officers in Oldham have provided confidential police videos of the riots in that town , obviously calling into question evidence given by such biased officers in the ongoing trials .
It turns out that , instead of investigating the claims that the BNP had received such material , the police have obtained an injunction imposing a ban on the showing of the videos , which I understand , but also on the reporting of the fact that BNP is making such claims and even on the fact that an injunction has been obtained .
Will you write to the appropriate authorities expressing Parliament 's concern that this attempt to bury a problem , rather than to investigate it , is not the way to deal with these issues ?
We will refer that matter to the President .
Mr President , a while ago , one Member quite rightly condemned cloning in this plenary and called for it to be universally rejected .
What he failed to do , however , was to make a proper distinction between reproductive cloning and therapeutic cloning .
With regard to reproductive cloning , I am sure we all agree that this is an inhuman or dehumanising technique that must be rejected .
The same cannot be said , however , for therapeutic cloning .
A way must be left open for science , scientists and the scientific community to experiment in innovative fields that have enormous potential for medicine .
The dogmatic individuals who are opposed to any type of cloning are the staunchest allies of those who would allow secrecy , charlatanism and trafficking to flourish in this field .
We must agree on this fundamental point : if we want to obstruct science and research in the field of cloning , there will always be chancers and unscrupulous individuals who are willing to exploit this area of knowledge .
That concludes the item .
The next item is the report ( A5-0427 / 2002 ) by Giorgio Napolitano , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the role of regional and local authorities in European integration ( 2002 / 141 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , it is on the initiative of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs that the European Parliament is , for the first time , addressing the issue of the role of regional and local authorities in European integration with a specific report and a motion for a resolution .
The reasons for this initiative and its goals are not difficult to understand .
Indeed , particularly over the last decade , a widespread trend towards decentralisation , regionalisation and increasing autonomy of local authorities has become apparent in the Member States of the Union , and it is right to recognise the importance of this trend when reflecting on and discussing the state of the European Union and its future .
The regional and local authorities have taken on a more important role in transposing Community legislation within the individual States and in running Community programmes .
They should therefore feel involved in the preparatory work on the Union 's policies and acts too .
To this end , the motion for a resolution which is now to be put to the vote in the plenary session of this House contains important proposals : the inclusion in the new constitutional framework of the principles of respect for regional and local identity and , therefore , of the application of subsidiarity , not just in relations between the Union and the Member States but where regional and local authorities are concerned too ; committing the Commission , not least on the basis of its White Paper on Governance , to involving the representatives of regional and local authorities in the preparatory work on its proposals ; calling upon the Member States to promote and enhance - each in accordance with its own constitutional system - the participation of regional and local authorities in the Union 's decision-making process .
With the resolution we have drawn up , which , if adopted by broad consensus , will be an important point of reference for the subsequent debate at the Brussels Convention in early February , the cause of recognising the role of the regional and local authorities in European integration will receive a considerable boost .
I hope that due consideration will be given to certain concerns expressed in committee by myself and other colleagues and that a number of amendments correcting and clarifying the text adopted by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs will be adopted , so that misapplication and unilateral measures which would harm our cause are avoided .
In this regard , I would like to stress the criteria I adopted as rapporteur .
Firstly , we need to consider all the autonomous territorial entities which operate within the Member States as a single unit .
As we are all aware , they vary greatly in size and nature but they all , from the largest to the smallest , whatever their role or powers , represent certain shared values - the value of proximity , of the closest possible adherence to the views , opinions and needs of the citizens , the value of the most immediate and widespread democratic participation possible - and the European Constitution must recognise that they all have a key role to play in the achievement of the goal set for the Convention on the Future of Europe : the goal of bringing Europe considerably closer to the citizens , of making the Union more democratic as well as more effective .
I have therefore not proposed in my draft report to subdivide regions or local authorities into different categories .
Giving a specific category of autonomous territorial entity special status or exclusive rights within the Union would lead to difficult , counterproductive disputes , even as regards defining and establishing the boundaries of a particular category - the category of regions with legislative powers , for instance - and would conceal the value of recognising all the regional and local authorities together as one whole , as one overall entity .
Secondly , we need to ensure that we do not create a more cumbersome institutional system and procedures which we all agree actually need to be simplified , and in this ' institutional system ' I include the Court of Justice and its procedures too .
As a general rule , we need to take care not to reduce the effectiveness of a decision-making process which is already subject to a large number of constraints by applying a set of checks and balances of varying degrees of rigidity .
In conclusion , I trust that the Members will reflect on the points I have made and that there will be broad consensus in tomorrow 's votes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the united Europe , which was embarked on in Copenhagen will be an extremely diverse Europe , first of all in terms of economic and social diversity .
Never before has there been such great economic disparity within the European Union and , at the same time , furthermore , never before has a genuine cohesion policy been so crucial .
There will be cultural and political diversity , but also territorial diversity .
In fact , I used this exact expression - territorial diversity - as one of the three themes of the Second Report on economic and social cohesion entitled ' Unity , solidarity , diversity for Europe , its people and its territory ' , just over one year ago .
It is this diversity that explains why the task given to your rapporteur , Mr Napolitano , on this matter , was extremely difficult as regards defining the role of regional and local authorities in the European Union .
As he said , we shall hold a sitting specifically devoted to this subject within the Convention on 6 and 7 February .
Mr Napolitano , you have completed this task with your usual talent and wisdom and , ladies and gentlemen , it will not surprise you to learn that I agree with the rapporteur on many of the points in his report .
Mr Napolitano was wise enough to point out that if the European Union wishes to function without becoming a super-State , it must respect the right of each State to organise itself as it sees fit .
It is not , therefore , the role of the European institutions or the Commission to propose , or even less , to decide , in Brussels , how competences are to be divided within each country , or how relations between territories should be organised within each Member State .
It is therefore with this restriction in mind that the Commission is able to approve the main points of the report presented .
We are in favour of a more prominent role for the Committee of the Regions provided that the interinstitutional balance remains as it is today .
The Committee 's right to recourse to the Court of Justice deserves consideration , if necessary , in order to defend respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
We are in favour of what your report calls ' new participatory methods ' so that regional and local authorities might be more directly involved in Community procedures .
In its White Paper on governance , the Commission advocated systematic dialogue with the associations representing these authorities , and we are currently finalising arrangements for this dialogue which , following extensive consultation , will be operational at the end of the first half of 2003 .
We are in favour of adapting the implementation of EU legislation to take account of individual local circumstances and needs .
The Commission will thus try out a pilot scheme of tripartite contracts , involving Brussels , the national capital and the region .
Above and beyond this , generally speaking , the Treaty already provides us with plenty of room for manoeuvre through framework legislation .
The three institutions responsible for legislative activity share responsibility for preventing these framework laws from entering into too much detail .
We must , however , take care to preserve the uniform , and therefore equal or fair , application of European law .
We must not weaken the rules we adopt here , through democratic debate , by allowing the territorial authorities variable-geometry application , even on an exceptional basis .
I have talked about what happens initially , when drawing up Community texts , and what happens downstream , when they are implemented .
In its contribution to the work of the Convention before the end of last year , the Commission prepared the ground in this area while expressing its desire to find the means to increase the involvement of the regional authorities throughout the process of European integration , while respecting the institutional system of each country .
Lastly - and this is my fourth point of agreement with your report , Mr Napolitano - we are in favour of a strong European and territorial cohesion policy , which means something real for each region of the Union and the citizens of the Union .
In this area , which I am familiar with because it is my responsibility within the Commission , both the Commission and Parliament will have a great deal of work to accomplish together in the months ahead , before I present , at the end of this year , the Commission proposals for future regional policy after 2006 .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is precisely because , as I have just said , we agree on the broad lines of this report that I would like to express the Commission 's concern on a point that I know has also been the subject of debates and questions here in Parliament .
It concerns the opportunity for certain regions alone , those with legislative powers , to defend their rights before the Court of Justice .
Furthermore , I spoke very frankly to these regions with legislative powers a few weeks ago in Florence , at one of their meetings .
I believe it is neither realistic nor desirable to establish this kind of distinction between European territorial authorities .
For example , how can we confer important , individual rights on these regions , while not all the current and future Member States are organised in this way ?
Our institutional system must not favour one system over another .
It must , I repeat , be neutral , fair and impartial .
Regions with legislative powers , however , which have their own responsibilities , are facing difficulties that we do not want to ignore .
Why , therefore , to respond to one of their requests - and this is an option I raised with their president - do we not take inspiration from the positive experience of Article 203 of the Treaty , as intelligent use of this article enabled us to facilitate the participation of these regions in the Council itself ?
Why should access to Community justice not follow this example , or at least its spirit ?
That is why I find it interesting that some of you - in particular Mr Corbett , and also Mr Méndez de Vigo , I am told - have made progress in finding a way out of this dead end .
This would consist of giving each State clear responsibility for taking cases to the Court of Justice on behalf of these territorial authorities .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are not trying to pit the regions against the States or against Europe , or even less so the States against Europe .
We are trying to choose a culture of cooperation rather than maintaining a culture of confrontation .
The regions must be able to count on the Member States to obtain genuine political and legal representation within the Union .
The regions must be able to count on the European Union to involve them systematically in all stages of the European decision-making process .
The European Union , for its part , must be able to continue to count on the constructive , loyal cooperation of all the territorial authorities : the regions , of course , but also towns , cities and subregional territorial structures .
It must be able to count on their contributions to the debate on European democracy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the regions are the very foundation of the European Union , and it is not without reason that we increasingly speak in terms of a Europe of the Regions .
Recent years have seen an increased awareness of what the Member States ' various regional and local authorities do , and of their autonomous nature .
These authorities have an important part to play in bringing the European Union closer to its citizens , and it is the regional authorities in particular that make a decisive contribution to the success of cross-border cooperation and of the ever closer union of the individual Member States .
As it is in the regions that the EU 's grass-roots democracy does its work , it is obvious that the regions have to be involved in European policies .
In its opinion on the Napolitano report , ' The role of regional and local authorities in European integration ' , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities devoted special attention to gender mainstreaming .
Democracy works only when everyone is involved , and that means women and men equally .
We point out the democratic deficit arising from the under-representation of women in decision-making bodies and administrations in all areas of political , economic , social and - not least - professional life .
The European Union 's regions are significantly handicapped in their cohesion and in their development as democracies by the continuing under-representation of women in decision-making processes .
Regional and local bodies play an important part in the labour market , among other areas , in that their superior grasp of local needs and obstacles gives them better proximity to jobseekers , and it is through them that the best ways of removing these obstacles may be found .
It is vital to work towards the development of new social policies , and this includes , in particular , assessing support for equal treatment and its implementation .
According to a Chinese proverb , women carry half of heaven on their shoulders ; we are striving to open up the whole horizon as a means of shaping a Europe belonging to the regions ' citizens .
We are well aware , Commissioner , of this Parliament 's inability to act in this area , but constant dripping wears the rock away , and the highlighting of deficits is for us both a task and an obligation .
Mr President , this is an important issue , as Commissioner Barnier has pointed out , since the European Convention is going to hold a debate on this issue on 6 and 7 February .
This report must therefore form the basis of that debate .
I would like to congratulate the Chairman , Mr Napolitano , on the good sense , which is the least common of the senses , of his proposal .
Mr President , in this case you have done justice to your talent and reputation .



This resolution is clearly regionalist , because what we are asking the Convention is that it recognise the objective of territorial cohesion in Article 2 ; because we are asking for recognition of regional and local autonomy in Article 6 ; because we are asking for inclusion of linguistic diversity in Europe and the protection of minority languages in Article 151 ; because we are asking for recognition of cross-border cooperation in Article 158 ; because we are asking that the Committee of the Regions , within the context of subsidiarity , should be able to bring cases before the Court of Justice - in this regard we cooperate with the working group on subsidiarity which it is my honour to chair in the Convention ; finally , because in paragraph 2 of Article 299 we ask for the situation of the outermost regions to be consolidated .


You may ask me , why has the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats voted by a majority against in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , if it is so positive ?
Well , I will tell you ; because there are two issues which concern us and we believe that they have not been properly resolved in committee :
The first issue is Recital 2 , into which an amendment was introduced empowering regional and local authorities to adapt the way in which they apply the legislation of the European Union , in order to take account , it says , of exceptional local circumstances and needs .
I know that it then adds a paragraph saying ' while respecting the integrity of EU law ' , but I believe that , as it stands , this paragraph is detrimental to the common internal market and that led the Group of the European People 's Party , which has always defended the four freedoms of the internal market , to vote against .

We have therefore presented an amendment , No 21 - I believe we have reached an agreement with the Socialists - to bring together our Amendment No 21 with the Socialist No 5 in a compromise amendment , which I believe takes us in the right direction .
Finally , another issue which concerns us , Mr President , is the current wording of Article 8 , which , along the same lines mentioned by Commissioner Barnier , grants all regional and local corporations with legislative powers the right to bring cases before the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
We believe this is over the top , we believe this is not the way to build Europe , and we have therefore presented an amendment , No 24 , which allows the regions , under the authority of the State , to defend its prerogatives before the Court in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
We would ask the Members to examine these amendments , and if we reach an agreement on them , the Group of the European People 's Party , in accordance with the reasoning we have given , will be able to vote in favour of this extremely important report on which it is my honour to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Napolitano .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate our rapporteur , the chairman of the committee , for having dealt with such a complex issue and brought us together around a compromise position which , on all but one or two little details which still need to be settled , can command the overwhelming majority of this House .
Our European Union is not just a union of states , it is a union of citizens .
The Treaties have always conferred certain rights directly on citizens and therefore on the way that citizens are governed within Member States .
Subnational authorities therefore already have an important role to play , both in the application of European legislation - for instance much of our environmental legislation imposes requirements on local authorities to deal with packaging and waste - and even , in some cases , in the transposition of directives into domestic legislation , as is the situation in Belgium , for example .
It is right that we should look at how our regions are involved in the running of this Union .
What rights should we give to our regions ?
What responsibilities should we give them in the Treaties ?
The principle of subsidiarity does not stop with national governments , but nonetheless , by virtue of that principle of subsidiarity , it is not up to the Union itself to tell the Member States how to organise themselves internally .
Nonetheless the Union must recognise the fact that many of our Member States are organised internally in a way that gives substantial responsibilities to regions and other subnational authorities .
It is therefore right that we should look , as this report does , at how we should adapt to that reality , that we should recognise it in the Treaty , that we should provide for better consultation and information of the regions , that we should make fuller use of Article 203 of the Treaty where appropriate , and that we should give proper consideration to the views of the Committee of the Regions .
On all these issues there is consensus .
But one issue leaves us divided : should regions be able to appeal to the Court of Justice against acts which they dislike , notably because they feel they violate their own responsibilities or the principle of subsidiarity ?
On the one hand there is an argument to say that they too should be able to defend their prerogatives .
On the other hand there is an argument that we would be overloading our Court , which is already facing the challenge of enlargement , with a whole raft of cases which may be brought sometimes for dubious political , rather than real legal , reasons .
My group is offering a compromise on this question .
Regions should be able to bring a case either via their national governments or via the Committee of the Regions .
The committee would therefore be a sort of filter .
It would check what level of support there would be for a court case .
A case would not necessarily be brought if only one region were interested , but if several regions felt there was a real violation of their rights , then the Committee of the Regions would proceed and bring a case .
That is a reasonable compromise : to allow regions the right to go to court , not individually , but to raise the matter and check , either via their national government or via the Committee of the Regions , whether there is a wider feeling that subsidiarity has been violated ; if so , then a court case could be brought .
I commend our amendment on this point to the House .
I hope that other groups , even those for whom it is not their preferred amendment , will nonetheless rally behind this as an acceptable compromise and a workable one , which our Union would be wise to take on in its new Constitution .
Mr President , as previous speakers have said , precisely what to do to give regional and local authorities a higher profile and standing is proving to be controversial under the Convention .
Many of us would want the Union to enjoy more direct interaction with regional and local authorities , because they are frequently more sensible intermediaries between the citizen and the Union than the more remote and centralised national governments .
We appreciate that such a direct relationship postulates the federal nature of the integration process in a fairly dramatic form .
It is appropriate that the treaty provisions on subsidiarity should be reformulated to reflect this .
Liberals believe decentralisation is essential if the Union is to manage its common policies more effectively .
More of a relationship with provincial politics will improve the quality of our supranational democracy .
This report provides many of the answers , but the issue of the approach to the Court of Justice is still controversial .
The Liberal Group wishes to improve access across the board for the citizen , to improve citizens ' approach to their constitutional court .
This implies clear lines of approach for all democratic representative bodies , especially regional authorities with parliamentary powers of law-making independent of their Member States .
Mr President , I also want to express my gratitude and satisfaction that the Parliament is today debating this report on an initiative which came from Mr Napolitano himself .
Of course my group prefers the report in what we regard as the strengthened form in which it emerged from the committee , but which on some points Mr Napolitano thinks was pushed too far .
No doubt that will be where the votes will be concentrated on Wednesday .
However , it is a matter of common consensus that democracy in the European Union is necessarily democracy at many levels .
The principle of subsidiarity is an iterative principle which works down the line and which should , as far as possible , enable people with local knowledge to apply that local knowledge , with common sense , to local circumstances , taking account of the purposes of the European legislation in question .
It is often said that a characteristic of the European method of legal interpretation is its purposive quality , and I feel that to some extent the local enforcers of European law should act with regard to the purpose not only to the letter of the law .
That is not to say that I wish to see a different law operating in different parts of Europe , but it is difficult to have the same law operating identically where there are very different circumstances .
For example , very arid countries will necessarily apply the same water law in a somewhat different way than very wet countries because the circumstances that lead to the application of the law vary and these need to be taken into account .
That surely is important .
Another important matter is that the transposition of the directive should take account of the local circumstances ; it is yet more important that the protocol on subsidiarity should encourage local and regional authorities to exercise a constructive discretion in enabling the directive to make the most possible sense at local level .
There are other points that have been raised which we think are vital as well .
The regional authorities should on occasion be able to take matters to the Court of Justice .
Just at the moment , in Scotland , the government , the Scottish Executive , the opposition parties , are all of the view for example that a recent compromise reached at the Fisheries Council violates the principle of proportionality .
Why should it be left to the fishing people to test that ?
Why cannot the regional authority responsible for enforcing the law test it itself ?
Many other such examples sprint to mind .
There should also be opportunities to take things into account during the legislative process and before it .
The EFA parties which I represent here do not just represent regions .
Of course the countries we represent are regions in the technical constitutional sense .
However it should not be forgotten - and Mr Lamassoure in his famous remarks about partner regions was not forgetting it - they are also among the ancient nations of Europe which deserve to be taken seriously .
If it comes out of this Parliament , or out of the Convention , that there is nothing for a region between being a Member State and being nothing , then you know what answer you will get .
Mr President , As someone who has spent many years serving on a local and regional authority in Ireland , I broadly welcome this report and I wish to thank Mr Napolitano for his work .
Often we forget the role and relevance of local and regional government .
It is the closest level of governance to the people of the regions .
It implements many of the policies and legislative processes agreed by the European Union .
A prime example of this , in the Irish context , is environmental legislation .
We should therefore enhance the role of regional and local government in responding to and developing European policy .
It is my belief that the European Charter for Local Self-Government has many merits .
It commits the parties to applying basic rules guaranteeing the political , administrative and financial independence of local authorities .
Consequently , the Charter considers that public responsibilities should be exercised by the authorities closest to the citizens .
In many cases these are the local and regional authorities .
As a person who has always encouraged the promotion and safeguarding of lesser-used regional languages , I am pleased that this has been included in the report as a proposed amendment to Article 151 of the Treaty .
It is by embracing our cultural and linguistic diversity that we enhance the understanding of Europe , its diverse peoples and its many different regions .
Linguistic and cultural diversity is not about defining or redefining boundaries ; it underpins the cultural strength of our enlarging European Union .
It is my belief that the work of the European Committee of the Regions is important .
It has become more focused in its opinions and it has to be further recognised .
A region is not about its boundaries , it is about its cultures and its languages , and , even more so , it is about its people .
The citizens of Europe are always reaffirming their demands for a Europe that is much closer to them and this should not exclude the level of governance closest to the people .
Mr President , if I ax my mates back home where they come from , they would say Devon .
Not Cornwall , across the river Tamar , which is foreign parts , nor Zummerzet where all they toffs live .
That 's too close to Lunnon for my liking .
As for Lunnon , well that used to be three days on the fast stage coach , and there are many of us folks who never did get used to they newfangled things like horseless carriages and they motorway things that bring all those foreigners to our neck of the woods .
So when I tell them that they bureaucrats over the water have made us citizens of Europe , most of my mates say ' thank ' e very much guvnor , but we 'm Devon folk and we 'm British , we don 't need that Europe over here , thank ' e kindly ' .
' But , ' I says to them , ' they want to bring that Europe much closer to our citizens , so that 's all right , isn 't it ? '
My mate says ' what be 'm going to do about it then , dig it up and put it in trucks and pile it up on Dartymoor so we can go and have a looky at ' n ? '
' No , ' I says , ' they 'm going to make us into regions , they 'm going to take away our counties and they 'm going to make us all one big happy family , along with they foreigners to Cornwall and they toffs to Somerset .
They 'm even going to throw in they folks up to Gloucestershire and other foreign parts .
We 'm are all going to be part of the south west region .
That is going to bring Europe much closer to our citizens , so we will be all right then , won 't us ? '
When my mates looked a bit mazed , I said " tis obvious really , by making us big happy families in regions , with fifteen times more votes than those Luxembourgers , we will really feel part of the European culture .
This chap Giorgio Napolitano says we can then be an autonomous territorial entity .
Then the likes of me can be on the Committee of the Regions which has recently affirmed its exclusive legitimacy as an institutional discussion partner .
With one of they regions , we will be off like a long dog , and then our citizens can all take a fuller part in the integration of Europe ' .
' What 's a Luxembourger ? ' says my mate .
That is the reality of bringing Europe closer to the people .
The only people who want it are the political elites , but the price in the United Kingdom is losing our long-established county structure and with it the rich local dialects that abound .
It is a price not worth paying .
Mr President , the Napolitano report on the role of regional and local authorities in European integration has a number of good points - and one major fault : it should not exist .
According to the principle stated in the report itself , which the Community has obeyed since its beginnings , the European institutions are based on a Union of States ; they respect the internal structure of the States ; their only interlocutors are the States and , where regions are involved in certain European policies , it is because the States , and behind them their national democracy , wanted this and because they are in charge , and must remain in charge , of the process .
In any case , it is not the place of the Community to decide - or even suggest - that regional and local authorities should play a greater part or participate otherwise in a given European decision-making process , as indicated in the Napolitano report .
Quite the opposite . As I explained in a minority opinion annexed to the report , the increased number of Member States following enlargement makes the role played by the Member States as coordinators and intermediaries more crucial than ever .
It is difficult to imagine the European Union maintaining direct relations with 250 regions or more , or listening to all their opinions .
That would be impossible to manage . In any case , national identity and the peoples ' right to organise themselves as they see fit must be respected completely .
The European Union has no supreme power to intervene in these matters .
If , however , it did manage to worm its way in , it would open up a Pandora 's box which would eventually lead to dislocated nations and a Europe that would be impossible to govern .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we owe a debt of gratitude to Mr Napolitano for taking on the difficult subject of the role of regional and local bodies in European integration , on which he has shed light in his meticulous and comprehensive report .
The many amendments tabled here and in committee testify to the topic 's capacity to engage our emotions .
Whilst the EU is being enlarged , that process also demands internal integration .
People may well move around , but they think of themselves primarily as citizens of their region and of the places where they have their abodes and domiciles , long before they start describing themselves as Italian , English , German , Spanish or even European .
This gives these local structures crucial importance when it comes to imparting the tradition of European thought and implementing European legislation in practice and on a day-to-day basis .
The fact is , though , that the Member States ' constitutional arrangements also differ to an extremely wide degree .
Our rapporteur has distinguished himself with the survey he has compiled and included in his working paper on the relationships between the central and local levels in the EU 's Member States and in the candidate countries , which reveals that , below the level of a Member State 's central government , the regions or federal states possess the most diverse legislative competences .
It is not intended that Europe should tamper with this autonomous approach to national structures , which has the deepest of roots in the nation state .
Let us not , though , delude ourselves ; discussion of this topic brings the Member States , those with centralised constitutions and those constituted on federal lines , with their own conceptions , head to head with each other .
This alone explains why so much emotion is called forth by the idea of the regions having an independent right of appeal to the ECJ when their own legislative rights are directly affected .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is the European Parliament that , alone , possesses the power to integrate Europe .
We , its Members , represent the people for whom ' home ' means their regions and their communities .
If we are now to work on the even greater Europe that we all - for a diversity of reasons - desire , we have to take care to stand on a secure foundation ; what we must also give this Europe is a soul - and we must do it with popular consent .
Our regions are that foundation , and it is for that reason that we have to treat them with respect rather than passing their concerns through a filter , as Mr Corbett suggested .
Mr President , the future European Constitution must lead to a more democratic and effective Union , that is , one that is closer to the citizens and their concerns .
In this regard , the role of the regions is quite simply essential .
What the Convention must do is formalise something which is already a reality .
How is it possible that the regions are applying Community legislation and that this is not formally recognised in terms of rights within the institutional framework of the Union ?
How is it possible that these regions transpose Community legislation but their situation is clearly undervalued in the Treaties in force ?
We must correct this in the following way : firstly , the regions must be consulted at every stage of the legislative procedure in the European Union ; secondly , we must urge the Member States to allow them the greatest possible participation throughout the European decision-making process in each of the States , including at the level of representation within the Council of Ministers ; we must also increase the role of the Committee of the Regions and allow the regions to be able to act within the framework of the principle of subsidiarity .
If somebody has to apply and transpose legislation in accordance with this principle , then logically they must also be able to defend their prerogatives and rights .
Also in the European Union the courts are there to ensure the better legal operation of the institutions and policies we have decided on jointly .
By whatever means , the important thing is that the Napolitano report , in the form it is in today or the form it will be in , probably , after the vote in the plenum , will recognise the right of the regions to defend their prerogatives before the Court of Justice - this is the fundamental thing - and also to apply the policies of the Union , in a more effective manner , within the framework of Community law , as the Socialist Group 's Amendment No 5 states .
The Spanish Socialists voted in favour of the Napolitano report in committee and we will do so again tomorrow because it represents a step forward .
What will be approved will probably be somewhere in the middle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that we must take the opportunity afforded by Mr Napolitano 's report - and all credit is due to him for succeeding in this difficult , complex task - to stress , with all the institutional weight of the European Parliament , the need for the new Europe , which will be founded on the Constitutional Treaty on which the Convention is working , to apply the principle of subsidiarity completely and transparently .
This means that the result will only be achieved if subsidiarity is not just applied to relations between the Union and the national States but is extended to the territorial authorities - the regional and local authorities - with all due respect for the constitutional systems of the respective countries , of course .
Indeed , it is the territorial authorities - the regional and local authorities - alone which give substance to the democracy of proximity . It is they that make it possible to strengthen the roots of genuine democracy and to bring the citizens closer to the institutions , including the European institutions .
The Convention is the forum which has been assigned the task of resolving this thorny issue .
It started off focusing its attention solely on the first level of subsidiarity , the subsidiarity between the Union and the States .
We need to free ourselves from this trap because , if we endorse this system of two levels of subsidiarity - subsidiarity between the Union and the States and between the States and the territorial authorities - we prevent - and I feel that this is the crux of the matter - recognition of that direct connection between the European institutions and the territorial authorities which now exists and which is yielding promising fruit , where it is not misinterpreted or destroyed at birth .
We must resist this temptation at all costs and , to this end , I hope that the Convention will take on board the lengthy debate which has taken place in Europe , particularly in the Council of Europe , on the matter .
My hope is that the Convention will succeed in recognising and endorsing the right to local and regional autonomy .
This right will then be regulated within the respective legal systems of the individual countries but will have to comprise the single level of subsidiarity , the equal dignity of levels of government , the right of local autonomies to their own financial resources and the right to have access to justice , which can balance the technical needs to prevent this getting out of control against the needs of the territorial authorities , but which cannot stop it happening .
It may be that the idea of strengthening the link through the Committee of the Regions is the solution we all need .
Mr President , it is not only dictatorships that traditionally evoke resistance from many of their inhabitants ; centralised states and multiethnic states do so as well .
Centralisation means arrogant governments that think they know better than the people who are experiencing the regional problems and who choose solutions for them themselves .
Furthermore , if the national language is not the language widely used in education , government and the economy , there will be a split between first-class citizens who have grown up with the dominant language from birth and second-class citizens who have merely acquired it .
Democratic government in Europe cannot exist if cultural diversity and regional differences are not taken into account .
The existence of the European Union is resulting in the power of the governments of the Member States growing in comparison with their national parliaments and their regions .
This expansion is at the expense of the positions that Scotland , Catalonia , Friesland , Corsica , Flanders or the Valle d 'Aosta have now acquired , while in these areas in particular the people yearn to be put on a more equal footing with the Member States .
The Napolitano report , in which the regional and regional governments [ sic ] are protected against large-scale centralist thinking and actions , is therefore an indispensable contribution to democracy and peaceful coexistence in Europe .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mr Napolitano for his excellent work and focus on what has been the most controversial point of his report , paragraph 8 ( I ) .
I believe that , as a clear , natural consequence of the European Union changing from a system based on an international Treaty negotiated by diplomats to a political Union which is of a federal nature , that is a Union based on a Constitution , the instruments of constitutional control will have to be overhauled and consolidated .
The argument that giving some regions with constitutionally recognised powers - legislative powers - direct access would result in congestion at the Court of Justice would appear to be really very weak , for , if this were the case , then we would have to find a way to strengthen the Court of Justice and make the system more robust and better able to cope with the demand .
Moreover , as Mr Duff has already said , it would appear necessary to make it easier for the citizens to approach the constitutional court and to identify the channels open to them , and not just where the regions are concerned but in cases of violations of the citizens ' fundamental rights too .
I feel that this is an important aspect of the future European Constitution , and it is why I believe that it is , quite frankly , going too far to paint such a negative picture of the opportunity presented by this report , which I see as the more innovative , original part , treating it as some kind of impending disaster which we will not subsequently be able to control .
Moreover , I feel that the compromise put forward has two major shortcomings , for it proposes two filters , two filters which are themselves inadequate .
The state cannot act as a filter for the regions because , in many cases , it is in a position of opposition to a region and its powers , and the Committee of the Regions , which was created to be weak on purpose , cannot be another filter for the powers of the regions because , not least , that would introduce and preserve the idea of a false neutrality , as Commissioner Barnier said , and a false equality between the regions .
This equality cannot exist because the regions have different powers , and that is just as it should be .
Mr President , all candidate countries except Turkey have adopted during the last two decades special policies to improve the situation of minorities , in some cases even through the implementation of self-determination to the benefit of several stateless nations .
Serbia and Montenegro are using the principle of self-determination to try to reach a definitive settlement of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia .
The European Union itself , on the contrary , lacks a comprehensive approach to the issue of stateless nations .
This is very regrettable .
But it is much more regrettable to read in the explanatory statement of Mr Napolitano 's report that it is unacceptable to suggest the recognition of the right to self-determination , because that falls within the sovereign and exclusive competence of the Member States .
That means that those stateless nations cannot claim the right of their peoples to exist as such .
How can the European Union ignore the principles of universality , indivisibility and interdependence of human rights proclaimed in 1993 by the Vienna Declaration ?
Could that be possible in an area of freedom , security and justice ?
Self-determination is the key to peaceful relations between nations because self-determination equals democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Napolitano report addresses one of the most controversial issues facing the Convention .
It is an issue which puts to the test the principle of subsidiarity and the very ideal of Europe as a community of diversities , and it involves different national historical traditions and systems whose attitudes towards regional power vary .
I believe it is right for the proposal on the Union 's powers not to interfere with the systems of the individual States .
We cannot , however , disregard the fact that some national Constitutions confer major legislative powers on the regions , and the Convention will have to recognise this , although without creating privileges , without upsetting the internal market and without removing the need for a political Europe .
For all these reasons , I feel it is right to give the regions with legislative powers the right to approach the Court of Justice directly when their prerogatives are affected by European measures .
I believe that it would be a mistake to overlook the fact that some Länder or regions - in Germany , Italy or Spain - are territorial authorities which are much larger than some of the entities established in the national States .
Widespread consensus on this report , which Mr Napolitano has rightly called for - is necessary to the constitutional process , which must facilitate the participation of regional and local authorities in Europe 's future as a community .
Having previously served in local government , I regard the Napolitano report on the role of local and regional entities in European integration as a significant step towards getting Europe 's feet firmly back on the ground .
After all , the officials and politicians in the European Union are spending much too much time in the corridors of supranational power and are forgetting that Europe is really made up of four governmental levels : local , regional , national and European .
Europe 's roots lie at local and regional level .
That is where the European lives and works ; that is where most of the policies that we make in Europe are carried out .
The Napolitano report recognises the importance of the local and regional entity for the continued existence and consolidation of European integration , and not only the formal regions with constitutional powers , but all regions , from Dutch provincies to English counties to German Länder and Spanish comunidades autónomas .
That is because , in a Europe in which all citizens are equal and therefore have equal rights , it is not possible to differentiate between territorial entities and to grant one region more rights than another .
Of course , every Member State can determine for itself how its own constitutional system should be organised , however , and that naturally means that decentralisation in one country is organised differently from decentralisation in another .
I think that Mr Napolitano has made a number of very good proposals for improving the involvement of regional and local entities in the European policy process .
I am referring here to the participation of the regions involved - both in the draft phase and in the execution phase of the policy - the appropriate application of Article 203 , the possibility for the region to ask the Committee of the Regions or their own government to go to the Court if they think that the principle of subsidiarity has been violated , or to take action , and finally to develop a statute for border regions .
A statute of this kind for border regions could make the lives of many Europeans who live on both sides of the borders every day quite a bit easier and more pleasant .
I hope that as a result of this report , the Convention will actually bring Europe and the regions closer to the people and we will anchor the region firmly in a new European constitution .
Mr President , by local powers , we all understand the same thing , but when it comes to regional powers , there are different types of regional powers in Europe , some with recognised legislative powers .
And it is these legislative powers which must allow these regions , these territories , to have the right to bring cases before the Court of Justice when their competences are encroached upon .
The rapporteur says that there is no need to establish differences between the various regions .
But in his country there are still regions a statuto speciale , which have different prerogatives .
We also believe that the principle of subsidiarity should not be restricted to relations between the European Union and the Member States , but that it should also apply to other tiers of government .
Today in Europe there are certain regions with legislative powers which are genuinely Stateless nations , such as Catalonia , or , as the next speaker will surely say ...
Finally , cross-border cooperation is also an essential element in European construction , and we are pleased that the Napolitano report recognises this .
Mr President , if the principle of subsidiarity is one of the basic pillars of Europe , if we want to bring the European institutions closer to the citizens and improve the democracy and transparency of Community policies , it largely falls to sub-State regions to apply Community decisions and if , furthermore , there are regions with legislative powers whose competences are directly affected by the policies of the Union , we cannot continue to deny those regions the opportunity to participate in the process of European construction .
I do not agree with those people who have said that this is a responsibility of each Member State , which is contrary to the principle of subsidiarity .
Because the possibility of participation by the regions in the taking of decisions which affect them is the result , and not the cause , of the internal organisation which each State has laid down .
The Napolitano report attempts to define the role of local and regional powers in the Union 's decision-making process .
But it is too timid an approach , which does not respond to the needs of the regions with legislative powers , which - on the basis of their democratic legitimacy - have the right to be active members in the process of European construction .
The regions with legislative powers , Mr Napolitano , Commissioner Barnier , wish to participate in the Council of Ministers when it is dealing with issues which fall within their competence and , contrary to what has been said here , they want to be able to bring cases before the Court of Justice in the event of violations of the principle of subsidiarity .
This participation and will , if recognised by the future Constitution , would not represent a free concession , but a right of the regions , such as Catalonia , which the European Union , and this Parliament in particular , as the representative of the European people , must respect if it really wants to listen to the citizens .
Mr President , there are many areas in which the Convention is meant to move European policy into a new stage .
This topic , the position of the municipalities and regions and their involvement in European policy , is one of them .
It is my belief that both local self-government and regional identity are fundamental principles , and must be reflected as such in the European constitution .
I also wish to thank Mr Napolitano , whose task was a difficult one in view of the concepts involved being very much a matter of dispute .
In many respects , this report advances the position of the municipalities and regions and their involvement in European policy , but I am surprised that such impassioned controversy has been unleashed by the right of municipalities and regions to go to the Court of Justice .
I do think that the constitution has to give everyone who possesses a right , the additional right to approach the ECJ in Luxembourg , a right that 380 million Europeans are meant to be given by the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
To that , we all say ' yes ' , yet there is division in this House when it comes to the regions .
I think that further thought needs to be given to this .
No attempt whatever is made to tamper with the way states are organised internally , something that does , indeed , vary a very great deal , in that many regions possess competences , while others have merely administrative responsibilities or simply the name of ' region ' .
This diversity must also be reflected when it comes to the right to appeal to the Court of Justice .
Commissioner Barnier has proposed the application of Article 203 in the event of us not succeeding in this .
That may perhaps be a way ahead , albeit only the second best .
It may be that a further stage is needed to enable us to find the best way forward .
There is something else of great importance that I would like to mention .
Commissioner Barnier , you have been to the border region that is my home .
The lives of those of us who live on the borders are still made more difficult by bureaucratic and legal obstacles , and a European statute on cross-border cooperation would be a help to many millions of people .
Reality has already burst the bounds of the legal framework , and to a substantial extent .
That is what European added value actually amounts to .
There must be room in the constitution for this sort of statute on cross-border cooperation , which will then benefit many millions of people .
I hope that a large majority will endorse the Napolitano report .
Rather than being in competition with them , Parliament exists to be the regions ' and municipalities ' natural partner .
Mr President , ' The states are the skeleton of Europe , and the regions its flesh and blood ' .
That is the view expressed by the Catalonian President , Mr Pujol .
Certainly , it is the case that , for many citizens , not only regions but also districts - that is to say , the local administrative units - feel closer and perhaps more natural than , in particular , the European institutions .
Moreover , it is regional and local authorities that implement a large portion of EU decisions .
It is therefore only fair that they should be given a strengthened role to play now that we are reviewing European forms of governance .
These bodies must be involved at an early stage in some form of consultation procedure when proposals are formulated .
As proposed , for example , in the report , they can play an important role in terms of evaluation and follow-up , as well as seeing to it that the principle of subsidiarity is applied .
We cannot solve internal constitutional conflicts in this Chamber , but we must give a clear signal that we attach great importance to local and regional levels and specify this in the treaty .
It would therefore be excellent to incorporate , for example , the statute on local and regional authorities .
I should like there to be as few changes as possible to this report .
I am convinced that it will form an excellent basis for discussion in , for example , the Convention .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the core of this debate on the role of the regions in the European structure is the necessary acknowledgement in the European constitution that the European Union does not only comprise states but has a more complex composition .
Ten years ago , when the Maastricht Treaty was negotiated , there seemed , in my view , to be a more favourable climate for the regional package of requirements than there is today .
There are even signs of a countermove in the European Convention now .
The draft constitutional treaty put forward by Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing causes me great concern in this regard .
It does not contain any references at all to sub-state governments and is a step backwards in many respects .
All this is happening against the background of enlargement .
Many of the states that will soon be acceding are smaller than the existing regions and nations with legislative powers .
The candidate Member States will soon be participating fully in the European structure .
It is therefore only fair that nations such as Flanders , the Walloon provinces , the Basque country , Catalonia , Wales , Scotland and Galicia can do that too .
The report by Mr Napolitano has arrived at an opportune moment , a few weeks before the debate on this in the Convention on 6 and 7 February .
I fully support the strengthened version of the Napolitano report that Mr MacCormick mentioned .
Commissioner Barnier and Mr Méndez de Vigo have just commented on the proposal to offer constitutional regions direct access to the Court of Justice .
If I understand correctly , they are arguing for controlled access under the authority of the Member State in question .
This little trick , however , is rather too transparent .
It means in practice that , for example , the three historic nations of the Basque country , Catalonia and Galicia , would more or less be denied access to the Court of Justice by the centralist powers in Madrid .
As a representative of Flanders , one of the historic regions that acquired quasi-autonomy without the use of force , I would like to ask you not to go down the route proposed by Mr Méndez de Vigo at all .
Mr President , Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , with this report , Parliament is getting the new year off to a good start - such a good start , that I have almost forgotten that I have forgotten to wear a tie .
Ladies and gentlemen , this report 's political message is that Europe 's Parliament is drawing much closer to its regions , thus abandoning its former attitude , which was somewhat aloof .
As far as the regions ' right of appeal is concerned , I am glad that we have already come to an understanding about so much .
We have agreed that the situation demands that the regions should have the option of laying claims before the European Court of Justice .
We are also as one in believing that , on the other hand , the Member States must have some sort of monitoring role in this .
In practice , this means that all that remains to be decided is what the role of the Member States is to be .
Mr Corbett , your compromise proposes that it is only to the Member States that the regions should be able to make some sort of application , but that , unfortunately , gets us no further and is no sort of compromise .
The fact is that the regions can of course do that already .
Furthermore , it labours under the great disadvantage that we would be doing precisely what you advise us not to do , in that we would be interfering in the relationship between the regions and the Member States , and prescribing what that relationship should be .
That is why I wish , again , to commend to you the compromise motion No 24 , which would enable the regions to appeal under the Member States ' supervision , as it were .
This would leave room for flexible solutions in all the Member States , solutions that might be different in Germany from what they are in Great Britain .
For this reason , I really do beg you to reconsider this .
This is a sensitive issue for the regions , who are awaiting a signal from us , and I would be glad if we could join in sending that signal tomorrow .
Mr President , in his original draft report , our rapporteur , Mr Napolitano , quite rightly described the dual challenge of taking account of the citizens ' attachment to their regional and local roots and , in moving from fifteen to twenty-five Member States , avoiding any weakening of the institutions ' operation .
Regional and local authorities should therefore be offered the opportunity to contribute to the creation of Community policies and , where appropriate , to promote them , without ever replacing the Member States and the peoples of the Union , upon whom alone political and legal legitimacy rest .
The European Union should not interfere in any way with the territorial organisation of its Member States .
Furthermore , the Member States are completely free to organise , each for their own part , the participation of the regions in their decision-making processes .
It should be the role of the Committee of the Regions to consult the regions at Community level and defend their interests .
This process should also apply to monitoring the principle of subsidiarity .
Contrary to what Mr Wuermeling has just said , the Committee of the Regions did not until now have the right to involve the Court .
Any other solution would inevitably lead to an inactive and ineffective Union .
Since a close vote in committee has altered the delicate balance secured by our rapporteur , it now falls to Parliament to reestablish this by voting for Amendment No 17 by Mr Corbett , intended to replace the controversial paragraphs 8 and 9 of the motion for a resolution .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must recognise that we are talking about a report on regional policy of great importance and scope , which advocates that the regions should play an active role in their European future .
We must therefore continue to insist that this House maintains Mr Napolitano 's report , produced by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which included , amongst other things , increasing the participation of the regions in decision making , the adaptation of Community legislation and the right to bring cases before the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
It would be a good idea - as I pointed out in an amendment to the Napolitano report - to ask the Convention to guarantee the inclusion in the European Constitution of the famous paragraph 2 of Article 299 of the EC Treaty , which deals with the special application of Community provisions in the outermost regions of the European Union .
Mr President , the question addressed by the Napolitano report is not simple , particularly when seen against the backdrop of the process of integrating the European Union which is currently underway .
Yet , although it is not an easy issue to resolve , the rapporteur addresses it in a commendably balanced , not to say quite pragmatic way .
There is , in fact , undeniable tension between the supranational and regional dimensions : tension which is historical , for the more European development has tended towards the supranational , the more - I regret to say - we have lost sight of the fact that , within many States , regionalisation processes were developing with characteristics and approaches to decentralisation which were different from what we were developing in the European Union .
Thus , a sort of grey area has been created , there have been injustices , if we consider what has happened in recent years . We have witnessed a process of Europeanisation of powers conferred on the regions by Constitutions .
We have witnessed a complete lack or only relative participation of the regions in the Community decision-making processes . We have witnessed the transfer of responsibilities from the States to the Community and thus the loss of the interactive powers conferred on the regions by national Constitutions .
The Länder participate in the federal legislative process through the Bundesrat and the Italian regions have powers of initiative at national level . Then the regions are further penalised in that they no longer have any guarantees as regards jurisdictional protection in the event of encroachment on their competences .
I feel that the Napolitano report endeavours to provide a very interesting legal response to all these concerns .
It is the basis for a debate which will take place formally in the Convention , probably at the beginning of February . The report and the amendments tabled - further reflection may be necessary on some amendments where too much emphasis is placed on access to a Constitutional Court - will enable Parliament to provide the Convention with a plan for the construction of the Europe of the citizens which we want .
Commissioner , Mr President , I would like to speak out in favour of the equality of the regions with each other .
Even if some have legislative competence , this would not give them greater or additional rights in relation to other regions .
Otherwise , we would be establishing two-speed citizenship with first- and second-class Europeans .
It falls to each State to give power to its regions if it wishes to do so .
The matter is being debated in many of our countries , and in particular in my country , France , but not only there .
It falls to each State to consult its local authorities and its regions within the context of European policies and their transposal .
The Member States do not necessarily do this well , and could do better , but this is a good start .
I would point out that the European Union is not the sum of its regions .
It is a Union of States and peoples .
Each State must remain master of its internal organisation , both at institutional and territorial level .
That is laid down in the Treaties in their current wording and we must retain both the spirit and the letter of the Treaties .
No country can claim to have a better system than another .
No country can impose its system on another .
Europe is a contract , not a constraint .
If I had to summarise , I would say : yes to strong , fraternal regions within the European Union , yes to regions that cooperate outside their borders , but no to a Europe of regions which would be an unfair , variable-geometry Europe .
Mr President , I would like to ask you if you would be so kind as to ensure that our Amendment No 24 , which has not been distributed with the other amendments to the Napolitano report , is made available to all the Members of this House for tomorrow 's vote .
Mr Méndez de Vigo , I share your opinion , and if the amendment has not been distributed , we will give instructions that it is and that it has the same opportunities as the other 23 amendments .
Mr MacCormick has the floor for a point of order .
Just for confirmation , according to the final draft agenda , the vote is not tomorrow as Mr Méndez de Vigo implied , but on Wednesday .
It has been changed back to tomorrow ?
Right , we need Amendment No 24 very quickly then .
Yes , Mr MacCormick , because according to my information , the plenum of this Parliament has decided that the vote will take place tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0451 / 2002 ) by Mrs Swiebel , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the human rights situation in the European Union ( 2001 ) ( 2001 / 2014 ( INI ) ) .
The annual report on human rights in the European Union engenders many differences of opinion and much confusion every year .
There are two problems causing this .
Firstly , it is not easy for any Member of this Parliament who has been elected on a national list , but who wants to be re-elected , to agree with criticism about his or her own country .
If they wanted to act in accordance with their own consciences , they would have to distance themselves somewhat from national and party political loyalties , and that is sometimes expecting too much .
Secondly , until recently it was unclear which human rights these reports were actually supposed to be about .
What is the yardstick ; what are the terms of reference ?
In the past , various rapporteurs have made their own selections from the problems , and that has not always benefited continuity and credibility .
The decision by the committee mainly responsible and by Parliament as a whole to make the Community Charter of Fundamental Rights the starting point for these reports was therefore a good one .
The European Parliament 's control function is of a political and not a legal nature , however .
For the purpose of these annual reports , therefore , we must view the Charter as a political reference framework , a sort of table of contents .
That gives us the scope to use this Charter to check whether the Member States are observing the provisions relating to human rights , which are in fact binding and which are included in innumerable conventions of the United Nations , the Council of Europe , the ILO etc .
Human rights are universal , indivisible and interrelated .
The human rights discourse is by definition global .
The European Union 's human rights policy is therefore only credible if human rights violations at home are measured against the same yardsticks as failings elsewhere in the world .
The European Parliament speaks out against specific human rights problems elsewhere at every session , and correctly places great store on human rights in discussions about the candidate countries .
We must , however , take an honest look at ourselves as well .
That is why I have consciously chosen the naming and shaming approach in my report .
It may not be pleasant but it is certainly honest .
The European Union is a community of values .
We hear that ad nauseam .
We must also be willing , however , to regard serious human rights violations in one or more Member States as a European matter and to ask ourselves what the European Union as such can contribute towards improving the situation .
That is why the recommendations in my report are not only aimed at one , several or all the Member States ; they are also aimed at the Commission and the Council where applicable .
I am delighted , as usual , to see Commissioner Vitorino sitting here again , but I am naturally disappointed that the Council is conspicuous by its absence - or perhaps there is an official hidden under the seat .
What are the main human rights problems in the European Union ?
I name some of them and I pose a number of specific questions relating to them .
First and foremost , there is the risk of civil rights being compromised in the regrettably necessary fight against terrorism .
It is therefore important to couple specific legislation with a sunset clause and to list and evaluate these anti-terrorism measures .
My question is : are the Commission and the Council willing to list and evaluate them in this way ?
Secondly , misconduct on the part of police and prison staff , which we observe year in , year out and in which the most vulnerable groups are often the victims , happens in all EU countries to a greater or lesser degree .
Internal correction mechanisms are not particularly effective .
In my opinion , the time has now come for this problem to be placed on the agenda of the European Union and for an extensive investigation into these abuses to be carried out at the very least .
My question is : will the Commission investigate the opportunities for doing so ?
Thirdly , racism , xenophobia and other forms of discrimination are on the increase , but protection against them is a patchwork quilt which suggests a hierarchy of forms of discrimination rather than a coherent approach .
I would like to see a coherent and uniform European strategy of equal treatment .
My question is : will the Commission take the lead in this ?
Fourthly , partly thanks to my colleagues in the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , I have observed a significant lack of compliance with the European Social Charter , the ILO treaties and so on by all the Member States .
We need to clarify how these treaty obligations in the social sphere relate to the same Member States ' obligations under secondary Community legislation .
My question is : will the Commission take the lead in this as well ?
Finally I would like to ask the representative of the Council - who is not here , but perhaps the official who is hidden away somewhere can pass this on - what has become of the decision by the General Affairs Council in June 2001 to coordinate our internal and external human rights policies better ?
The Commission and Parliament itself should in fact also be able to answer this question .
If you would allow me to make a final comment on Mr Ribeiro e Castro 's alternative draft proposal , I must say that I find it rather funny .
You would have to be a true optimist to put forward that proposal .
Anyone who supports this resolution obviously wants to shut their eyes to reality .
It is a nice example of wishful thinking , but it is too good to be true .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by thanking the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and Mrs Joke Swiebel for this opportunity to discuss the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union in 2001 in plenary today .
The report that has been presented to you today is a document that is both vast and ambitious , because it attempts to provide an overview of the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union and its Member States and because it calls on the national authorities and the European institutions to adopt practical measures .
By way of example , I might mention the need to pursue a consistent policy of combating discrimination - all forms of discrimination - and of promoting integration in European societies in order to prevent demonstrations of racism and xenophobia and to protect the rights that underpin European citizenship .
The European Parliament 's Annual Report on the situation of fundamental rights in the Union is an important instrument in terms of due regard being given to these rights , both at European level and at the level of every Member State , either within the current Union or in a Union of 25 Member States .
The Commission , for its part , has a direct interest in the report that Parliament will be voting on , since , as Mrs Swiebel has just stated , we are also required to adopt a set of practical actions .
For my own part , I give a commitment carefully to study whatever recommendations Parliament wishes to make to us , and we shall , of course , adopt the appropriate measures to ensure that these are followed up .
The Commission has always been equal to the challenges Parliament has set for it and I believe that we have together taken up these challenges in a positive way , in order to develop fruitful cooperation between the two institutions in this field .
An excellent example of this cooperation is surely the Commission 's creation , following Parliament 's resolution of July 2001 , of a network of experts in the field of fundamental rights .
In this resolution , based on Parliament 's report for the year 2000 , drawn up by Mr Cornillet , Parliament clearly expressed its commitment to adopting a serious and practical approach to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , calling for an appropriate control instrument to be set in place and for an assessment to be made of the situation of fundamental rights , both at Member State and European Union level .
The Commission , like Parliament , is convinced that being well-informed about the state of protection of fundamental rights is crucial to our being able to assess the quality of this protection , and this assessment must always be rigorous and efficient .
This is the task of the Network of Experts on Fundamental Rights .
This network will enable both Parliament and the Commission to remain vigilant and to ensure that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is complied with and given due consideration .
We are of the opinion that the network must be allowed to work and to start publishing its findings before we move ahead with more complex institutional solutions , such as setting up a monitoring centre .
By the same token , this network will be obliged to provide Parliament and the Commission with information on the sensitive issue of the balance between security and freedom in the context of the fight against terrorism , an area that will receive particular attention in the report that is currently being drawn up as part of the network 's work .
This network of experts in the field of fundamental rights became operational in October 2002 , and the report that it is drafting must take account of changes in national law , the case law of the Luxembourg and Strasbourg courts and significant case law of the constitutional and other courts of the Member States .
In this context , the importance of the role that Parliament and the Commission are called on to play has two strands : on the one hand , to have an even clearer view of the situation in the field of fundamental rights in the Member States in order to adopt the actions and decisions necessary in this area in a targeted and precise way by virtue of the powers conferred on the European institutions by the Treaties ; and , on the other , to show Europe 's citizens that the protection of fundamental rights is more than just a political declaration ; it is a real concern of the European institutions .
To this end , I should like to recall that placing fundamental rights at the heart of European integration means defending the thesis that the Convention on the Future of Europe and the subsequent Intergovernmental Conference must include the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Constitutional Treaty of the Union and give it binding legal force .
The European Union is an area of freedom , security and justice which fails to provide a rigorous protection of fundamental rights .
Drafting a Treaty of a constitutional nature , an authentic European Constitution , of which the Charter of Fundamental Rights is an integral part , and which at the same time and in parallel authorises the European Union to sign up to the European Convention on Human Rights , is a major challenge facing us and one that we must overcome .
At the same time , however , a pragmatic and effective assessment must be made of the quality of protection of fundamental rights .
This report , the debate in this plenary and Parliament 's final resolution will certainly make a major contribution to the Commission 's actions over the next year in the field of fundamental rights .
Mr President . Without wishing to deny that the work carried out by Mrs Swiebel is indeed considerable , I would nonetheless like to be slightly critical of this report , as I feel it has missed its opportunity and might even serve no purpose at all .
As Commissioner Vitorino pointed out , last year , Parliament clearly established a number of points based on the new fact of the adoption of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which we hope and pray for , to make them the preamble to a constitution .
There are three points therefore : drawing up a procedure , which I shall come back to ; establishing resources , either parliamentary resources or external resources which could help us , without replacing us , however , which would be available to the network of experts ; and the call for joint action , in other words , in fact , to work with the three rapporteurs , namely those from the year underway , the previous year and the following year , so that a consensus might be established , provided that this work concerns facts and is therefore not , a priori , too controversial .
Unfortunately , the idea was not followed up and I feel that this report is more a reflection of the rapporteur 's views than the extensive analysis that would have been desirable .
The methodology could be summarised as follows : the whole Charter and nothing but the Charter .
The whole Charter , meaning that we therefore need , first of all , an analysis carried out article by article , State by State , of which there are fifteen this year , and of which there will soon be twenty-five , providing an opportunity to check whether or not they were respecting the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and then value by value , on the solidarity and justice chapters , making it possible to provide an overall view of these great values , to find out whether they are observed within the European Union .
This is an opportunity to go beyond the strict application of the Charter with regard to the legislation of the Union of States derogating from the legislation of the Union , and Parliament had an opportunity there to acquire the power to control the actions of the States , which nobody can challenge in a Parliament , with regard to public freedom .
I therefore believe some humility was needed to accomplish this painstaking task .
Naturally this did not prevent the emphasis being placed on a number of subjects dear to the rapporteurs , which terrorism allowed this year , following the events of September 2001 .

The whole Charter , therefore , and nothing but the Charter , in other words the articles as they are and not as we might like them to be ; this Charter was subject to a consensus and I should point out that the report upon which we are going to vote tomorrow has absolutely no effect on the Charter , since only a new Convention , which would have to be convened , is able to change the articles of the Charter .
There are other means of action , resolutions , on occasion , directives , etc .
We can also call a new Convention , as I have just said .
We can also protest in our own countries since each Member State is free to go beyond the minimum standard constituted by the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I would like to take this opportunity to criticise very briefly a certain attitude that I consider to be irresponsible and populist , and which has enabled some amendments tabled by the far left and the Verts / ALE to be reconsidered , thanks , I would say , to the complicity of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
I abhor this , because by acting in this way , it has accepted things that are not found in any programme of any socialist party in any country .
Mr President , in brief conclusion , I would like to express my regret .
Here we have a report which could have been much anticipated by the press and feared by the Member States , which could have served as a beacon to mark our position .
Sadly , I am afraid that the 2001 report , which , moreover , was adopted too late , might be buried with other useless reports ; as the PPE-DE does not intend to join in this burial , it will vote against it .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , I would firstly like to welcome this report and thank the rapporteur for her work and I would also like to welcome what Commissioner Vitorino said in relation to the procedure to be followed in order to be able to hold a genuine annual debate on human rights in the European Union .
This has historically been a conflictive report , to the shame of this Parliament .
In this house we are capable of deciding on a weekly basis what the human rights problems are in any corner of the world , but we are not capable of agreeing once a year on what standards should be complied with within the European Union in relation to fundamental rights .
The charter should be a good instrument for measuring them .
We are moving in the right direction , formulas are developing so that we can work jointly with the Commission .
This work involves the political control , as the rapporteur said , of the degree of compliance , in each of the Member States , with the fundamental rights in the Union .
While this is happening , while we are evolving , we should have the generosity to do it together and to do it well .
I believe Mrs Swiebel 's report is a balanced report , because it is sincere and transparent , it mentions sources , without judging them , it does not oblige us to vote against or in favour of certain facts , but it draws attention to existing complaints which the executives must investigate and assess .
I would point out to Mr Cornillet that this report has always been controversial .
Just last year , Mr Cornillet , your report , which , according to you , moved in the right direction , was approved unanimously by the Socialists and with more than one hundred votes from your own group against and only 38 in favour .
I believe that amongst all of us we can make an effort to find the main route to the positive development of the control of human rights within the European Union .
Mr President , in her intervention the rapporteur begins by saying that the right to life and human dignity are essential rights , and I entirely agree with her , and in order for that life to be dignified , the right to work , to health , to education and to housing are essential .
The report points out quite correctly that seven Member States are failing to comply with the principles of the European Social Charter , for example in relation to access for foreigners to employment , their rights of assembly and trade union rights .
As the rapporteur for the Committee on Social Affairs also says , there is a tendency to restrict social and economic rights within the context of reforms of the labour market .
I will only comment on certain aspects , Mr President , given the time available .
The UNHCR also expresses its concern at the increasing tendency to link asylum seekers to possible crime and terrorism , particularly following 11 September .
I believe that a common asylum and immigration policy that respects human rights is essential , as the rapporteur also points out .
The repercussions of anti-terrorist measures on the Rule of Law and human rights should be assessed , above all in terms of the rights of asylum seekers and immigrants .
Mr President , every day in Spain we see a horrendous tragedy involving people who come looking for a better life .
Finally , Mr President , the Committee on Petitions , by means of the report by its rapporteur , points out that family grouping , the right to asylum and free movement are daily problems in the European Union .
I do not understand the proposals of some Members of this house which discredit the essential nature of this report .
Mr President , my group certainly welcomes this report and will not be supporting the alternative resolution .
We consider it to be a thorough and wide-ranging piece of work that highlights many positive points about the state of human rights within the European Union , even if many parts of it make extremely uncomfortable reading .
As others have said , it is essential that we look at ourselves very critically , at least as carefully as we have been looking at accession countries and indeed third countries .
We are critical about the human rights records of other governments , but seem very unwilling to criticise when it comes to the European Union itself .
I want to pick out some examples , such as the treatment of the Roma people .
My country sees no problem in sending the Roma back to their countries of origin .
It threatens to break up families .
It lays on special chartered aircraft in order to deport them en masse and there is no follow-up to see what happens to them when they get back to their countries of origin .
And yet we have criticised accession countries heavily for their treatment of the Roma people .
Mention has already been made of the asylum issue .
When you read the comments in the explanatory statement , about my own Member State and others , many of them are critical .
The UK Government , for example , recently introduced a human rights act .
All proposed legislation is to be benchmarked against that act .
Yet virtually everything that comes through is stamped as being fully compatible , even though it is obviously not .
I hope that in Conclusion 9 , where we refer to the Commission 's decision to review its own legislative proposals against the criteria of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the Commission will be more rigorous in this than some Member States .
The comments about the accountability of police services make very uncomfortable reading , particularly when we are concerned with the core standards that people should expect across the European Union in , for example , the implementation of the European arrest warrant .
I know that this report will be at least a recognition of some of the battles being fought in my own country by organisations such as INQUEST , where families are still trying to find out after many years what exactly happened when family members died in police custody , yet nothing is being made public and there is no proper retribution .
We welcome many of the recommendations in this report , particularly Conclusion 5 , where we are looking at this report being incorporated in future into an early warning system on Articles 6 and 7 of the European Union Treaties , picking up petitions we have also had in the Committee on Petitions .
Mr President , as Mrs Swiebel said in a Dutch newspaper , if Europe imposes stricter standards on others than it does on itself it will lose credibility .
Indeed , we should take a good look at ourselves before we point a finger at others .
In the light of the situation the world is in , however , this statement is a long way from reality .
I do not want to play down the violations of human rights in EU Member States .
We need to remain vigilant so that the relatively good human rights situation in the EU does not deteriorate .
Any layperson can , however , see that the violations of human rights that take place here and also the human rights themselves that have been violated are of a different order from those taking place elsewhere .
In Pakistan people are being sentenced to death for belonging to a religion .
Mrs Swiebel mentions a political party in the Netherlands that does not admit women as members as a serious case of violation , along with the fact that it takes too long to take legal action in some states .
This kind of occurrence cannot be compared with the others .
At present , the reality is that Europe is imposing stricter standards on itself than on others .
The very suggestion that it might be the other way round makes us lose credibility in the eyes of the outside world .
The Swiebel report pleads for a clear framework , preferably a constitution , as we would otherwise not be able to arrive at an independent , unambiguous assessment .
In fact , this report reveals a clear political colour and the ' values and standards ' tag that goes with it .
That these standards and values are obviously not universal is demonstrated not least by the number of opponents in the committee responsible and by the alternative proposal put forward by the UEN .
A constitution of our own would be undesirable and unnecessary .
The EU consists of solid nation states with their own perfectly good constitutions .
These are contained in an existing democratic order with a process of judicial review and an involved civilian population .
If the European Union were to get a constitution of its own , this would at most be able to supplement the national Member States ' own constitutions .
What is more , in Europe we have the excellent ECHR and the Court associated with it .
So now we are supposed to go and review ourselves when the need arises ?
Europe is a community of values , not only an economic community , as Mrs Swiebel rightly says .
Our Member States ' constitutions and the ECHR prove that .
The review framework and the review process already exist .
We do not need a politically tinted report from the European Parliament or a European constitution for that .
Mr President , the protection of fundamental rights is undoubtedly one of the driving forces of the current evolution of the European Union .
Therefore the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , in December 2000 , was an unprecedented event in terms of the recognition of a Union which is increasingly close to the citizens and sensitive to their needs .
The European Parliament , an institution which is particularly sensitive to the issue of protecting our citizens , had no hesitation in making it the key element of its annual report on respect for fundamental rights in the Union , the aim of which is to assess the degree of compliance with the rights contained in the Charter in any particular year .
In this context , I believe that this annual resolution is a wonderful opportunity for the European Parliament to demonstrate its interest in safeguarding fundamental rights , as well as controlling their application , especially with the invaluable support of the network of experts which the Commissioner referred to and whose work I had the honour of inaugurating together with him .
Furthermore , so that we are not hindered in this task , I believe it essential that the European Parliament tries to achieve the greatest possible degree of consensus , seeking to bring together the positions of the political groups and thereby becoming a genuine institution for controlling compliance with the fundamental rights of the Union .
Nevertheless , I must unfortunately acknowledge that this has not been the situation , quite the opposite .
Opting to include party-oriented versions on issues such as the family or the treatment foreigners must receive within European territory simply overshadow the other extremely important issues referred to in the text , such as the fight against terrorism or against torture .
In fact , the report which we are to vote on in the plenary goes much further than its own objective and diverts attention from the important thing - assessing whether or not rights have been respected - towards party political issues , which consists of adopting positions on certain issues which are still under discussion within the framework of other reports and which also reflect positions which are different from that which the government of the colour of the rapporteur maintains in the Council .
I must therefore unfortunately say that my group will be obliged to vote against the report , since it is impossible to support a text which is not suited to its purpose or the continuity set by its predecessors .
Mr President , first of all I would like to apologise to the rapporteur that I was unable to be here at the beginning .
I have only just arrived in the Parliament because of delays .
I welcome the fact that we are able to have a debate on the fundamental rights within the European Union .
It is very important , particularly when we are urging the applicant countries - and indeed countries which are not yet applicant countries - to address certain issues , that we should be prepared to look openly at ourselves .
Having said that , I regret some of the statements made in the report criticising the United Kingdom and other countries , on matters to which there are no easy answers .
I refer particularly to the points about asylum and immigration with regard to the United Kingdom , which is not perfect on these issues , but which is faced with a real challenge .
This is not an easy situation .
The United Kingdom , along with many other countries within Europe , has many applicants for asylum , and there are large numbers of people on the move , seeking to migrate from one country to the other .
We need to work towards a common European asylum policy .
When this is in place , we will be able to make certain that not just the fifteen Member States , but twenty-five countries , have policies that are working and are fair to the countries themselves and to applicants .
The report contains references ( at second hand ) to prison facilities in the United Kingdom and indeed in other Member States .
However , it is very difficult to spend huge amounts of money on prisons when there are demands from other areas .
It is indeed a mark of a civilised country that it takes its prison service seriously , and all allegations in the United Kingdom , and I imagine in other countries , against malpractice or cruelty in prisons are properly investigated .
The same is true of the police service , and the British police take seriously any allegations of malpractice or racism by police officers .
It is right that we are able to have this debate , it is right that these issues are being brought to our attention , but I do not believe that the United Kingdom should be singled out any more than other countries .
Mr President , Mrs Swiebel has done good work in her survey of human rights breaches in Member States and I am sad that the Christian Democrats and Conservatives are so opposed to it .
Mr Cornillet was himself a distinguished previous rapporteur .
Human rights issues are intensely political but it is a pity when they become the subject of partisan divisions .
I hope we can get back to working together on the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , because the years ahead will see intensified challenges to , and dilemmas regarding , fundamental rights and we have to be even more systematic in our work .
Briefly , I just want to mention and explain why the Liberal Group is seeking to remove the wording in paragraphs 83 and 84 which urges the Member States and the EU to ensure marriage is open to same-sex couples .
We are certainly not opposed to this in principle , but this really is a matter for national decision , as in the Netherlands .
Introducing the marriage issue distracts from the real priority , to which Liberals are absolutely committed , which is to give legal recognition to same-sex and unmarried partnerships : that really is a matter of fundamental rights .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Swiebel for her excellent work or , at least , what we believe to be excellent work .
We endorse the content of the report and , above all , the courageous approach the rapporteur has adopted in naming , giving specific , practical details , the States which have violated human rights or have not signed or ratified international conventions on the protection and safeguarding of human rights .
Of the many issues raised in the report , as this debate shows , there are two which are particularly important and sensitive .
Firstly , the concern that blindly waging war on terrorism might lead , if this has not already happened , to less care being taken to promote , protect and safeguard sacrosanct civil and human rights .
In this regard , there are already people in the United States who would like to see torture legally introduced .
This is a debate which greatly concerns us and which we must vigorously oppose , using the weapons of the law and legislation to oppose the weapons of violence , insofar as this can be deemed lawful .
The other issue which the rapporteur has courageously highlighted is the recognition of same-sex marriages .
In our opinion , we also need to enshrine in legislation the individual 's right to freedom in a broad sense , which is true freedom .
As other Members have pointed out , it will be necessary to pay greater attention to the Commission and the Council 's work in the area of human rights .
We radical Members condemn the fact that , all too often , the failure of the European institutions to take action in the field of respect for human rights , both in third countries and the countries of the Union , has serious , catastrophic implications for the citizens and for the institutions themselves .
Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union , and what is known as the democratic clause too , are now completely devoid of meaning , thanks , primarily , to the Council and the Commission .
To put it more simply , the principle of respect for human rights and the safeguarding of human rights are wholly theoretical .
Once again , as regards Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty , the European Parliament has , for the first time , used the procedure laid down in Rule 108 of the Rules of Procedure to call for Community measures to be taken against Italy for the serious , ongoing violation of human rights and the rule of law with reference to the ongoing , unlawful failure to establish the plenum required by the Constitution , by the Italian Parliament and by the Constitutional Court .
Violations in Italy continue to be very frequent .
A few days ago , the Italian Parliament established what is known as ' 41 bis ' , the special incarceration regime , whose application we have documented evidence consists of genuine torture within a democracy .
The Italian Prime Minister himself , Silvio Berlusconi , has declared this law to be illiberal but necessary .
We will discuss this matter another time , however .
Meanwhile , the radical Members will vote wholeheartedly for Mrs Swiebel 's report .
Commissioner , you described this report as very wide-ranging and ambitious .
I will take these two adjectives as the basis for a number of minor points for reflection .
It is certainly wide-ranging - too wide-ranging in terms of the issues addressed .
Is it ambitious ?
It is not ambitious enough in its conclusions , which are limited to a few political objectives - the same objectives as always .
Indeed , the rapporteur puts ingredients that are too different and too unrelated into a cocktail shaker in the hope that the result will be a digestible , well-balanced cocktail with an approach that can be submitted for the approval of all the Member States , an approach including shared , common principles on which legislation and positions can be based in the endeavour to guarantee the fundamental rights of all the citizens .
Alongside a few principles which we support , for example in the field of combating discrimination and xenophobia , the rapporteur actually includes an undertaking which is too partisan in the section on freedom , going so far as to place in the stocks the police , the legal systems and the media of some - only some , take note - Member States for events connected with street riots caused by the Black Blocks and their supporters in white overalls .
The rapporteur has been influenced by bad counsel of the sort we can easily imagine - by partisan and party interests - and has wasted and bungled the opportunity she had to present a serious discussion on human rights , losing herself in empty tirades and gratuitous accusations worthy of a low-profile debate .
The judges and police officers of some of the Member States are described as torturers , accused of beating up innocent people .
This is a line which is unacceptable as well as out of place in such an important report as this one , just as the family model the rapporteur proposes is entirely unacceptable . It is in line with her own personal beliefs , but it contrasts with the attitude of the vast majority of Europe 's citizens , who certainly do not see homosexual unions and the right to adopt as the ideal formula on which to build the European society of tomorrow .
Mr President , in drafting her report , my colleague , Mrs Joke Swiebel , has chosen a very exacting working method .
She levels her criticisms regarding failures in the area of human rights directly at countries that are mentioned by name .
The method provides a specific context for any evaluation of the human rights situation in Europe but anyone who employs such a method has an enormous responsibility for ensuring that the picture presented is an accurate one .
Unfortunately , this has not entirely been the case here .
Item 27 gives the reader the idea that there is no viable alternative to military service in Finland .
In it , Finland and Greece are called on to recognise the right of conscientious objection to military service without restriction and without reference to any religious grounds .
There has been such a right in existence in Finland , however , since 1931 .
Under the law at present anyone obliged to do military service can in practice choose a non-military form of service .
Every year approximately 2 500 people exercise this right , which is 7 % of those liable .
Around 80 % do their military service and a little over 10 % are excused .
The concern expressed in the report presumably refers to the fact that in Finland the period of time spent doing alternative , non-military service is twice as long as the minimum period of service .
There is also concern regarding the fact that there is a total of 20 people in prison who refuse and are unwilling to fulfil their civic duties in any way .
The reason why in Finland the period of time spent doing non-military service is longer is that those concerned are obliged to work eight hours a day , during a normal working week , whilst those doing military service are on duty 24 hours a day .
I think that in the future it will be the task of the Finnish Parliament to get the balance right .
The fact that the vast majority of young men in Finland do military service is not because there are no alternatives to it .
In Finland we still remember all too well how important a conscripted army is for the country 's independence .
During the Second World War , apart from London and Moscow , Helsinki was the only capital city of a country at war that was not occupied .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in making out that it is a champion of human rights , the European Union tailors them to its needs .
It has no problem , for example , defending the rights of homosexuals , but has nothing to say about the right to a job , to health care , to an education , to culture or to sport .
At the same time , it systematically encourages existing democratic rights to be undermined or abolished , using terrorism and illegal immigration as its pretext .
The European Union 's version of human rights is set out in the so-called Charter of Fundamental Rights which the Communist Party of Greece has denounced as inadequate and misleading .
The report measures human rights against this charter , which is why there is not the slightest reference to the slavery introduced with new forms of work and to the decimation and commercialisation of social benefits .
It has no objection to the plethora of new terrorist laws and it ignores the personal electronic files kept by the Schengen system and the fact that ideas which upset the system are passed over , distorted or even expelled and persecuted .
The good thing about the report , however , is that it identifies a whole series of infringements , such as the torture of prisoners , trafficking in human beings and the suppression of rights in Genoa .
Another good thing is that it calls for church and state to be separated , criticises child labour , highlights the adverse impact of measures to combat terrorism and asylum and immigration laws and discusses the social emancipation of women .
Neither the situation on the ground nor the report , however , are of any benefit to the European Union and improvements will only come about if the grass-roots movement steps up its fight .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the importance of today 's debate lies in Article 6º of the Treaty of European Union itself , which states that the Union is founded on the principles of freedom , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law , principles which are common to the Member States . In other words , European integration has been achieved on the basis of fully respecting , guaranteeing and promoting fundamental and human rights , in which the well-being and dignity of its citizens must be the inspiration and goal for every and any action taken by any Member State and by the Community institutions .
Hence the importance of the European Parliament 's Annual Report on Human Rights , which has provided the ideal opportunity to take a close look at the EU 's human rights policy , within the Union and beyond it , and at the role that the European Parliament has played , of which we can be proud .
Hence my disappointment with the report that has been presented ; with its lack of balance and rigor .
The report presented to us last year by Mr Cornillet was rich in ideas and analysis and constituted a milestone and an extremely positive step towards defining a methodology for monitoring and evaluation , which should underpin any human rights policy , based of course on the European Charter covering these rights .
Whilst containing aspects that deserve our support , such as the issues of terrorism , trafficking in human beings and human rights and the highly topical problem of achieving the necessary balance between security and human rights , the report we have been presented with this year , however , gives way in some points to demagogy and generally shies away from the rigorous principles which a resolution adopted by the European Parliament should uphold .
This is why , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree more with the text of the alternative resolution tabled by Mr Ribeiro Castro , which shall have my vote .
Madam President , I personally am very happy that Mrs Swiebel 's report sums up the human rights situation in the European Union and even within the Member States .
I believe it to be a cornerstone of the work of this Parliament because it enables us to take a step back , which is so unusual here , and consider a clear , coherent policy with specific actions to achieve the goals we proclaim so often .
I shall not insult you by citing the various conventions and treaties that we must observe or by restating our will to anchor the Charter of Fundamental Rights unconditionally in European consciousness in order to establish the rights and freedoms of these European citizens .
Each year , however , when we draw up a report on human rights , when we lament the violations that have taken place , when we adopt resolutions , we only talk about third countries .
How can we have credibility and impose these rights in our relations with these countries , if we ourselves do not respect them ?
Some Members here will be horrified at the thought of naming certain countries in this report .
We must not , however , shy away from this .
As democrats , we are representatives of our citizens ; we are not protectors of the policies of our national governments .
We must confirm , here in Parliament , that the defence of fundamental rights and freedoms in the European Union is more than just words ; it affects every aspect of life , for all human beings , wherever they may be , whether or not they live in an area of freedom .
Defending human rights is a duty and a right which must not be hampered by the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of the Member States .
The purpose of this report is therefore to assess the situation .
It is our role to act if this situation does not satisfy us , so that these fundamental rights might be a fact of everyday life in our own Member States .
I shall end on two points : first , I am very happy that economic and social rights are assessed at European level and I believe this Convention should take inspiration from that .
I would then ask our Member States to do what it takes to establish clear statistics , sorted by gender , in every area , and provide them to our next rapporteurs .
There are many very good points in Mrs Swiebel 's report and a huge amount of hard work has gone into its preparation .
Inevitably , it makes many of us feel uncomfortable when we find our own countries being referred to as not having ratified many of the human rights conventions .
On a day in which we celebrate the action of the governor of Illinois on the death penalty , I am glad to see that Mrs Swiebel congratulates the Irish Government on having finally abolished the death penalty .
Of course , it has not been used for a great many years and was maintained on our statute books only for the killing of policemen .
But I would particularly like to welcome her section on the rights of children .
I have been a Member of this Parliament probably longer than most people here at the moment .
Until the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child was drawn up , the rights of children , the intrinsic rights of children , were not recognised , discussed or seen as part of fundamental human rights .
However , the UN optional protocol on the sale of children , child prostitution and child pornography is also referred to .
We did not consider any of these issues when we started discussing human rights and holding the annual discussion on human rights .
For example , the issue of the exploitation of children on the Internet was not even a twinkle in the Commission 's eye until relatively recently .
It was not an area about which we actually had a great deal of knowledge or information .
The section recognising these as important rights for children that have to be protected is to be warmly welcomed .
I hope we will see this section enlarged as the years go by and as we discover , unfortunately , just what a dangerous world it is for many of our children .
I would like to thank Mrs Swiebel for making this such an important part of the report .
Mr President , Mrs Swiebel 's report contains a couple of interesting points .
I endorse what Mrs Banotti has just said about children 's rights .
Examining this in detail in a parliamentary report is an excellent idea .
I would like to add something to Mrs Swiebel 's wish to see such reports play a role in criticising and possibly punishing Member States who fail in their duties when it comes to enforcing the constitutional state and democracy .
Since the Treaty of Amsterdam , then the Treaty of Nice and possibly as part of the Convention , we do in fact have more opportunities to give Member States a good ticking off if they make mistakes , and even to kick them out of the Community .
It would be excellent if Parliament had a role to play in this .
Her suggestion that the European Social Charter be compared with the European Charter of Fundamental Rights is also a very good one .
I think that the Charter of Human Rights should be given priority , but it is a good idea to measure everything we do against both of these charters .
That must be an absolutely basic requirement .
The European Parliament would then win the confidence of the Council , for example , with a view to communitisation .
The Council , the people , the Member States and the parliaments of the Member States must know that we are using our powers in the proper manner .
In the event of a procedural opportunity - in other words if we were to play a role in criticising Member States - I would be in favour of personally coming clean if we make a mistake .
The report does , however , fall short when it comes to the severity of the treatment , and could thus become a millstone in the struggle for the communitisation of the third pillar .
There is , after all , no real consistency in the application of the Charter of Human Rights .
You could much rather regard Mrs Swiebel 's ideology and views as a guide for assessing Member States .
A country can easily be respectable even if it is criticised by Mrs Swiebel .
Certainly if I read paragraph 133 .
If you tell the public that a climate of immunity from punishment is developing in Austria , Belgium , France , Italy , Portugal , Sweden and the United Kingdom , they will laugh their heads off .
That really is too ridiculous for words .
Nevertheless , you also cannot say - to give you yet another example of sloppiness - that unmarried couples should have the same rights as married couples .
That is idiotic ; it will not make you popular with unmarried couples .
The fact is they do not want all these rights .
I am very much in favour of promoting gay rights , but not by saying that you will also get the rights you do not want .
The report is thus riddled with all sorts of examples that are also impossible from a legal point of view .
Mr President , the major split in the vote on this report in the relevant committee must mean that Mrs Swiebel has not sought a unifying solution .
She has selectively presented a list of areas which are not only deeply controversial politically - for example , in their view of the family and of family legislation - but also demonstrably do not belong among the European Union 's areas of competence .
Mrs Swiebel would have to search high and low in the UN Charter on Fundamental Rights , the European Convention 's Charter of Human Rights and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights for a reason why these issues should be included in a report on fundamental rights .
Mrs Swiebel , does , for example , the fact that polygamy is not accepted in the European Union mean that Muslims resident in Europe are discriminated against ?
Is this a crime against human rights ?
The question no doubt needs to be answered when so many new subjects have been added to the topic of human rights .
I would also ask Mrs Swiebel why , in addressing so many new subject areas , she makes no mention , for example , of the fact that the Netherlands has legalised prostitution .
There is therefore a need to ' import ' women into a country in which prostitution is , strangely enough , considered to be a lawful and approved activity .
Why does Mrs Swiebel make no mention of her own country 's assisted euthanasia policy , which is abused by some doctors and which leads to people ending their lives without dignity ?
There are instances in which so-called assisted euthanasia is abused .
Why is no mention made of parents ' right to allow their children to grow up in a drug-free society in which parents know that the law is on their side ?
Mrs Swiebel has been very selective .
We Christian Democrats will of course vote against this report , because Mrs Swiebel has failed in an important task of the European Parliament .
Mr President , I subscribe to the general comments made by my honourable friends in the Europe People 's Party and shall confine myself to commenting on two criticisms levied against Greece which , because they go too far , undermine the credibility of the report and real fundamental rights .
The first concerns the ban on women pilgrims entering Mount Athos in Greece .
This ban has been in place for 1200 years and is enshrined in the Treaty of the European Union and the Greek constitution .
It cannot therefore be changed , nor should it , because to do so would be to accept that the home is not inviolable .
Mount Athos is home to 5 000 monks and it is their right to receive whomsoever they please in their home , just as it is our right , as simple citizens , to receive and offer hospitality to whomsoever we want in our home and keep out anyone we do not .
This is not a tourist area and any women interested in how Orthodox monks live need only visit the hundreds of other monasteries in Greece and other Orthodox countries in order to satisfy their curiosity .
My second comment concerns conscientious objectors .
Unfortunately , religious convictions or an aversion to the violence which the army may stand for are used as a pretext by a number of people to avoid military service and while away their days in the civil service at the state 's expense , even though some of them have no hesitation in using violence if it serves their ideological purpose .
May I inform you , my honourable friends , that some of the November 17 terrorists who were recently arrested in Greece , whose much-publicised trial is due to start in a few days ' time , and who have so far murdered some 50 foreign diplomats , ministers , politicians , journalists and judges , have stated that they are conscientious objectors and have been exempted from military service , while another conscientious objector serving in a mental institution has been getting his kicks out of torturing the inmates .
It is a pity that we always go too far and end up ridiculing fundamental rights .
Mr President , the weaknesses of this report do not lie in the fact that it condemns breaches of human rights where they exist but , in my opinion , in the way in which it has been drafted and in the methodology used to present these condemnations .
In choosing to give , in the explanatory statement , a lengthy and detailed description of possible breaches of fundamental rights by some Member States , this report has led to claims and accusations against these Member States that cannot be refuted and have not even been submitted to a democratic vote because they are not included in the text of the motion for a resolution .
These claims are therefore unfair , because they do not allow for any response , even though they clearly have no validity in plenary since they are not included in the motion for a resolution .
Furthermore , with regard to the sources the report has used , and without wishing in any way to call into question the credibility of many NGOs , I must point out that a report drawn up by the European Parliament ought to distance itself from and even reject the conclusions of each of these organisations , and avoid including , sometimes inaccurately , aspects of these studies .
For example , regarding Portugal , it is claimed that discrimination exists on the grounds of sexual orientation , on the basis of the conclusions and observations of one NGO , which I shall not name as it appears in the text , and the rapporteur states that the Portuguese Penal Code contains legislation that discriminates in this field , an assertion that I reject on the grounds of a simple reading of the law .
In fact , the Portuguese Penal Code makes no distinction in the field of sexual orientation with regard to the age of consent .
Mr President , I believe that the European Parliament must responsibly assume its powers for safeguarding human rights and should never confine itself to simply transcribing the opinions of third parties .
This will clearly always be the case until we have a legally applicable Charter of Fundamental Rights ; only then will things be done differently .
We all want to ban breaches , but there are no political breaches of rights - there are legal breaches or practical breaches and these either exist or they do not .
No amount of political flexibility , no interpretative criteria will enable us to uncover breaches of rights where these are not considered to be breaches under the law .
Nor , on the other hand , can we allow any breach of rights to be justified by political criteria .
This is why I shall not be voting in favour of this report : the fundamental balance that is needed for delivering an opinion on such sensitive matters is absent from this text and it has therefore failed to win my support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0449 / 2002 ) by Mr Pirker , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament entitled ' Towards integrated management of the external borders of the Member States of the European Union ' ( COM ( 2002 ) 233 - C5-0505 / 2002 - 2002 / 2212 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what we are dealing with here is the integrated management of our external borders , which is where , I am sure that we are all agreed , security , for the European Union , begins .
They are also the starting point for defence against such menaces as organised crime , terrorism , smugglers , and illegal immigration .
We know , though , that our external borders continue to be the weakest link in our internal security system as a whole , and the reasons for this are well known .
They have to do with the different ways in which Schengen is interpreted , with differences in technical standards , and with the various agencies engaged in border control , with differences in training and , in general terms , with the lack of any Community , or even joint , action in matters concerning border control .
If , however , we want to improve border security and hence make the EU more secure , we need equally high standards on all our external borders , both as they are at present and as they will be in the future , all of us being aware that the EU is about to be enlarged and that this demands that action be taken .
The security that we are aiming for is something on which our internal security as a whole depends , as also does our ability to make a reality of the fundamental principle of freedom of movement .
I welcome the initiatives taken by the Laeken European Council in December 2001 , when it mandated the Commission and the Council to take appropriate steps to deal with this .
I certainly welcome the Commission proposal , congratulate the Commissioner on the excellence of his preparatory work , and welcome the Council 's plan of action .
On these things there is broad agreement .
I can also tell you - and I am glad to be able to do so - that these proposals met with broad consensus in the committee .
I want , therefore , to express my gratitude for the close cooperation , which has seen all parties united in a concern for security .
I believe that , in going ahead in this way , we have set a very good example , and I would be delighted if the same broad support and consensus were to be demonstrated tomorrow .
What , then , are the crucial points in my report , on which there is such agreement ?
I would like to single out five of them .
The first is that we need to analyse and redefine the tasks involved and establish a common set of legal regulations .
In order to do this , we also need to analyse the operational practice involved in the transposition of the Schengen acquis , which we know varies to a large extent .
The Common Manual on border control should be revised to include the common standards and to take account of best practice .
It strikes me as particularly important that we should have not merely a Common Manual , but should also establish a monitoring body to verify , at regular intervals , that the provisions are being implemented and adhered to , which is what common standards and high quality are all about .
Leading on from that , the second priority is joint training and re-training .
We must at long last give tangible effect to Article 7 of the Convention applying the Schengen Agreement .
We are already engaged in drawing up a common core curriculum for border guards .
What we need , however , in order to create a multiplier effect so that high standards may be guaranteed in the long term , is the establishment of a European Staff College for the training of senior officials , which should be supported through the ARGO programme , thus enabling the standard of training , as well as the common operating standards , to be maintained in the long term .
The third priority is that the equipment used should be interchangeable .
In this area , there is a lack of compatibility within the Member States , and practical cross-border cooperation is made utterly impossible by the completely incompatible technical standards involved .
If we go over to using shared satellite or radar systems or start cooperating across borders , then compatible equipment becomes an absolute necessity .
It would , moreover , make sense in the future - for reasons of economics as much as any other reason - to have these standards in the joint procurement of technical systems , which can be very expensive .
Fourthly , we should carry out an ongoing risk analysis .
As Europol also has systems for analysing organised crime , we should have them carry out a risk analysis , the results of which - reporting on situations and outlining any assistance needed - would be communicated to the Member States and made available in order to make the common standards a reality here .
It would be desirable - and , in terms of increased efficiency , an overall objective - for data to be exchanged between the Schengen , Europol and Eurodac systems , with , of course , all necessary data protection provisions being adhered to .
There is no doubt that this could achieve certain synergies .
The fifth priority is that a European Corps of Border Guards should be established , made up of specialist units and with Community funding , which would , in an emergency and at the request of the Member States , support the national authorities at vulnerable border points for limited periods .
This would enable us not only to achieve an optimum standard of security at particularly vulnerable sections of our external borders , but also to share the burden of dealing with a specific situation on the external border , which the country involved cannot be expected to bear alone .
By doing this , we would be providing assistance and sharing a burden , although it has to be said that , in principle , general competence in matters of control of the external borders should remain at national level .
It is my hope that all this agreement will give us the necessary stimulus to at last bring about in reality what we owe to the public - a greater degree of security even when enlargement has taken place .
We can get down to work .
Parliament will give its full support to the endeavours of the Commission and the Council if they go down this road .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to thank Mr Hubert Pirker for his report , which has focused not only on the Commission communication on the management of the EU 's external borders , but also on the action plan adopted by the Council .
We might also say that the two documents , the Commission proposal and the Council action plan , contain a great deal of common ground .
I believe that , in fact , the four fundamental objectives that were set for us at Laeken form part of this action plan : increasing mutual trust between the Member States with regard to controlling our external border , which is a common border , which means that poor control over the border in one State has inevitable knock-on effects on the security of all the other Member States of the European Union , the effectiveness of the fight against illegal immigration , the particular priority that must be given to controlling the external borders to prevent the entry of terrorist groups or agents and , finally , to safeguard the high level of internal security in the European Union , without which we cannot preserve freedom of movement and the abolition of controls at our external borders .
As Mr Pirker emphasised , the objectives of this action plan are clear ; and I believe that , rather than talking about objectives , we must define targets and work out what actually needs to be done .
Firstly , in the legislative field . We have the Schengen acquis , that , as Mr Pirker quite rightly underlined , is implemented very differently in the various States .
We need to harmonise the way in which the Schengen acquis is implemented and we are doing so in two ways : firstly by revising the Common Schengen Manual , and the Commission will , in the first six months of this year , be submitting a proposal for this revision . Secondly , however , by also establishing a code of good practice for establishing common standards .
The second objective is the training of border guards .
I believe that , at this very moment , a meeting is taking place in Vienna , in which the Commission is participating , to define a proposal for a common curriculum for the training of border guards . This project is being led by Austria and by Sweden .
The third objective is to use modern information technologies to improve the control of our external borders .
In this field , the Commission plans at the Salonika European Council , this coming July , to present a viability study into the launching of the on-line visa system at European level .
We will similarly be presenting the first proposals on the control of the European Union 's external sea borders .
The fourth objective is to define a common risk analysis model for controlling our external borders .
In this field we already have a model , defined on the basis of a proposal presented by the Government of Finland , and a first meeting was held under the Danish Presidency of the so-called ' SCIFA + ' , which is the body that coordinates the border control services of all the Member States of the European Union .
As a result of the functioning of this new body at European level it has been possible to develop , as early as in 2002 , two practical operations .
The first was the operation ' Ulysses ' , which was coordinated by Spain and involved joint teams from various Member States on controlling the Mediterranean ; and the second was the operation of a joint team led by Germany to control its land borders .
These two operations were , in 2002 , funded by the ARGO Programme and new actions for operational cooperation have already been presented for 2003 .
Finally , the Seville European Council supported the principle of sharing responsibilities for controlling the external borders .
This is a sharing of responsibilities in financial terms , in terms of sharing equipment and also with a view to creating , eventually , a common border guard force .
The Commission presented an initial evaluation of the financial situation .
We must acknowledge that the data that the Member States provided us with on the real expenditure of each of them on controlling the external borders were very different and were hard to compare .
The Commission therefore requested further clarification and intends , during the Greek Presidency , to propose criteria for sharing financial responsibility for controlling the external border of the European Union .
I hope that , with the motion for a resolution tabled by Mr Pirker , which will be voted on here tomorrow , Parliament will be able to give a decisive boost to this ambitious , demanding and crucial programme of action to control the external border of the European Union in order to enhance the domestic security of all Member States .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Coelho .
Free movement within the Union is one of the most cherished achievements for this House and for many citizens in the European Union .
The rules which regulate the free movement of persons within the Union are Community rules .
Many of the measures it has been necessary to establish in order to guarantee it are scattered around our legislation .
To guarantee this free movement requires a high degree of trust and cooperation between the Member States , particularly in the management of external borders .
There is plenty of information on the reality of the situation to demonstrate that we have difficulties here , including the arrival on the coasts of the south of the European Union of people who hope that this will be the first stage of a journey but for whom it is often dramatically the last , the women rescued on a daily basis from their captors and exploiters , who offer them to Europeans who ask no questions about their origin , or the tragic spectacle we have witnessed for months in relation to the Sangatte centre .
We believe that the European Commission has raised the need to deal with this issue correctly and in a timely manner .
Firstly , because the enlargement of the European Union obliges us to do so .
Secondly , because their proposal is a good signal to the Convention that it should resolve the legislative mess involving one of the Union 's fundamental distinguishing marks ; internal free movement .
Thirdly , because it presents today , with the legal framework we have - and perhaps also the financial framework - the possibility of making progress on this objective .
I agree with the notion that there is room to better guarantee both the freedom of security of those people who are in Community territory and the situation of those who wish to pass through it .
Therefore , and despite our extremist tendencies , the Socialist Group will vote in favour of the Pirker report .
I hope that the enthusiasm and broad support of this House are contagious and that the Council will go beyond its political declarations and actively and enthusiastically support this proposal .
As the Commission itself says , the topic in this case is integrated management of the Member States ' external borders .
Even if the motion for a resolution in this report is adopted , moreover , it will , of course , in itself have no direct legal effects . Rather , the motion and the Commission 's communication will acquire significance in the light of a series of other decisions concerning the development of police cooperation .
In this context , the proposal signifies a development that , in my view , is a threat to democratic control and the rule of law .
This is a policy that would considerably weaken the national authorities in favour of the EU authorities .
The unmistakeable ambition is to develop a supranational border police force in the longer term , one of several steps on the road towards an actual federal police force .
This expansion of the police service is , at one and the same time , about unthinking EU integration and the securing of Fortress Europe .
The latter is an obvious consequence of that outside pressure that is due to the prosperity of the EU countries as compared with the wretched social conditions endured by our neighbours , a contrast basically due to the EU countries ' policy , pursued for many years , of exploiting our neighbours .
So much for the motion 's real background .
The content of the motion is no less alarming .
The common legislative body , the system of coordination and operational cooperation , the interoperational facilities and the permanent exchange of information and data , in short the overall development of the police service , does nothing less than dismember that rule of law which , on the basis of experience in the Nordic countries , I see democratic activists as having sought to establish over the years .
What does the Commission have to say about democratic and judicial control ?
What we have is a non-binding and ill thought-out policy to the effect that control must be ensured .
How ?
No answer .
What does the report have to say ?
Not a word .
EU border police and a common body for external borders ?
No thank you .
Mr President , here , at last , is a report which is genuinely Community-focused , although it takes as a starting point the specific , technical issue of the management of the Union 's external borders .
It is a very topical subject , as has been pointed out , if you consider that the Union 's current external borders will be radically changed and extended in May 2004 when the 12 new Member States become part of the political and geographical structure of the current European Union . It is therefore more than appropriate that we should now be proposing the model used thus far on the basis of the consolidated experience of the 15 current Member States before the entry of the new candidates .
The Pirker report drops into this wide-ranging framework a number of practical proposals on how to achieve integrated management of our external borders , without interfering in the territorial sovereignty of the individual States but rather defining the ideal formulae for harmonious cooperation .
This is an acceptable approach which will involve the creation of a Community corps of border guards in the coming years - not straightaway but after we have fine-tuned techniques and procedures with appropriate measures for training staff and achieving cooperation between the different current corps of border guards .
Hitherto impromptu experiments with mixed patrols have yielded excellent results . As far as my country , Italy , is concerned , these have been developed on borders with Member States such as France and Austria and on borders with third countries such as Switzerland too , and with a candidate country , Slovenia .
The section which addresses the issue of combating illegal immigration is extremely innovative .
This involves a difficult , daily undertaking , particularly on the part of border States such as Spain , Portugal , Italy and Greece .
However , the problem is everybody 's problem , not just the problem of these States , for , thanks to Schengen , an illegal immigrant who succeeds in penetrating the Adriatic coast has automatic access to many other Member States , at least those in the Schengen Area , which therefore have a major responsibility as well as a great opportunity .
Therefore , the rapporteur is right to propose to call upon all the countries to work together to contribute to and bear the costs of external border controls , whether they have external borders or not .
Indeed , it would appear to be clear that it is appropriate for all the countries to contribute if we are to achieve an effective control and monitoring service , particularly in the places where the flow of illegal immigrants is currently greatest - a genuine flood of new illegal immigrants is , even as we speak , pouring into the Union - for this is not just a problem for those who are directly involved in the daily fight against illegal immigration : it is also a problem for all those countries which are the automatic destinations of these illegal flows .
Mr President , I echo the thanks of others to the rapporteur , the Commission and the Council for bringing this forward and recognising the need for further cooperation in this field , a very difficult area .
I disagree , to an extent , with Mr Krarup , in that this is an issue that no one country can address on its own .
It is vital that there are common policies , agreements and understandings between the 15 Member States .
Having said that , we recognise the different situations in each Member State .
Mrs Terrón i Cusí spoke earlier about the situation on the southern border of Spain .
My own country , the United Kingdom , consists of one large island plus the north of Ireland .
Other countries each have their own circumstances that need to be addressed : Greece , for example , has some 400 islands , and Luxembourg is land-locked .
We all have very different situations and , in their own ways , these are very difficult to monitor and manage .
But we do not manage very well with 15 countries at the moment .
Mr Coelho quite rightly drew attention to the fact that when we are 25 countries in the EU - and later on 27 or 28 - it will be even more challenging .
It is very important that we at least make the effort to get into position now something that is trying to address the issue , trying to face up to the challenge .
We must make certain that we respect the rights of the individual .
I agree with Mr Krarup on that .
We can only do this if Member States work together , if we copy good practice from one country to another , if we do not repeat the mistakes that have been made in the past .
Effectively , this means border management , hand-in-hand with common policies on asylum and immigration .
It means being prepared to constantly update and upgrade , and it means border management which takes account of citizens ' rights of movement .
If we put those together we will address the issues for the years ahead in an enlarged European Union .
Mr President , when Commissioner Verheugen reported to the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the subject of eastward enlargement , I put two questions to him .
The first was whether the Commission regarded a common framework for border control as necessary ; and the second was whether the Commission believed that the candidate countries would be in a position to secure their borders with countries outside the EU to the same high standard of protection as the existing Member States already did .
The Commissioner 's reply was that the candidate countries would have no problem with guaranteeing a satisfactory level of protection on their own , and that there was no need for a European approach .
The Commission has now changed its mind and presented a sensible proposal for a common framework for control of our external borders .
Mr Pirker 's report supports it and adds to it at various points , and Mr Coelho is unfortunately no longer here to hear me say that it goes without saying that I wholeheartedly support it too .
It is to be regretted that Commissioner Verheugen has wasted a lot of valuable time by talking rubbish .
One example of why this is a matter of urgency is the border between Germany and Poland , 456 kilometres long and formed by a river , where traffic across it is at present monitored by some 10 000 border guards .
Poland 's border with its non-EU neighbours is over 1 200 kilometres long and runs across fields for the whole of its length .
The belief that , within the next few years , Poland will be able to secure this border on its own in anything like the same way as external borders used to be secured , is utterly illusory .
This is where European solidarity is needed , as the defence of the external borders by a number of Member States is to the ultimate benefit of all Member States .
Denmark , Sweden , Belgium , and the Netherlands reap the benefits of a high level of external border control .
Any European concept of external border control must , at the end of the day , be enshrined in the Treaties , both by the allocation of combined powers to the EU and , on the other hand , by giving it institutional form as a European body in parallel with Europol and Eurojust .
And , in these present times , as Cato did in the senate of ancient Rome , I will end all my speeches with the same words : Commissioner Vitorino , I wish that the Convention would demonstrate greater courage in this area .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I feel myself honoured to be allowed to say the last word here today .
Before wishing you good-night , I would of course like to avail myself of the opportunity to tell you what I think and , as one who comes from Germany , to set out in clear terms the importance of external border control , Germany being , as Mr von Boetticher has just said , a country with a vast external border .
So , Commissioner , we are very glad that you have presented this communication , and also that the report by the PPE-DE Group 's Mr Pirker has proposed the right thing and enjoys our support for that reason .
I assume that Parliament 's united manifestation of agreement with the Commission in this area will , perhaps with the Greek Presidency 's help , make it possible to win the Council over , as the Greek Presidency has already signalled the importance it attaches to combating illegal immigration and smugglers of any kind .
I have high hopes of them .
This Parliament does of course have Members who persist in regarding the reinforcement of police or border control units as problematic , and who tell us how much better all these things should be done .
Over and over again , they ask why we need the police so much .
I can tell them in all frankness that I should prefer to deploy as many police officers as possible and have a secure border that prevents refugees escaping to their deaths .
I become really fed up with it all and find myself thinking that the responsibility must be shouldered by us all together .
We cannot keep on standing idly by while people die , and the only way we can prevent people dying is if our borders are secure and illegal immigrants are no longer exploited or abused by gangs of smugglers .
It is for that reason that I hope we can all reach our objective together .
Good night .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 9 p.m. )
The strange thing about the Swiebel report is that it contains a detailed account of the reasons why the Resolution that it is proposing should be rejected .
The rapporteur invokes the ' decision taken last year by Parliament 's Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms , Justice and Home Affairs ( LIBE ) to use the Charter as a guideline for the annual report on the human rights situation in the EU ' , and adds that ' Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ( ? ) has given [ this work ] greater focus and direction ' .
Now , if this is the case , we should stick to this particular guideline very closely , not going too far , exceeding the rights set out in the Charter ; not allowing ourselves to be side-tracked into an endless course of nit-picking , taking the report away from its aim and from what it should confine itself to and seeking to make the resolution on which we are voting an instrument for abuse - something truly insane - for passing endless judgments on the Member States .
The European Parliament does not , in fact , have the power to do this , except in very specific situations ; situations so serious that they could be seen as potentially having the punitive effects of Article 7 of the EU Treaty apply to them .
Furthermore , we all know that it is the Charter itself that sets out its own scope : ' The provisions of this Charter are addressed to the institutions and bodies of the Union with due regard for the principle of subsidiarity and to the Member States only when they are implementing Union law ( Article 51 ) .
Consequently , both the report and the resolution should directly consider the institutions and bodies of the Union ; and , with the exception of the specific comment relating to Articles 6 and 7 of the EU Treaty , should consider the Member States only indirectly , when they are implementing Union law and only in these circumstances .
We were therefore all quite astonished , when the rapporteur finally said that exactly the opposite was true : that , on the one hand , the ' report deliberately addresses only the human rights situation in the EU 's current Member States ' - which is exactly what it should not be doing , and on the other , that the report ' does not include any detailed list or assessment of the actions of the Council , the Commission or Parliament ' - which is what it should be doing .
If we add to this flagrant methodological deviation the regrettable inconstancy with which many of the comments about these Member States are made without sufficient objective and appropriate grounds ( as the rapporteur herself admits ) , we have a set of basic reasons why in accordance with its own premises , the Swiebel report must be rejected .
In its place , the alternative resolution that I tabled should be adopted , setting things back on a proper footing and enabling this Parliament to fulfil the recommendations that we ourselves defined .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Swiebel on the fruitful work she has done this year ( particularly in recognising the rights of third-country nationals and in introducing the rejection of double punishment ) , but I regret the fact that the time limit for the drawing up of the report has been exceeded to such a great extent , hindering my work and that of my future colleagues .
As successor to Mrs Swiebel for 2002 , I wish to work within the spirit of this Charter , to work in a spirit of continuity and to make the Charter as fully visible as possible .
To this end , two public hearings are scheduled , with the innovation that young people will be involved , by means of delegations of secondary school children , as will the media , with the participation of representatives from prominent sections of the media .
It is our duty to ensure participation by young people , to increase their awareness and provide them with information , and also to involve and mobilise opinion formers , since they are our best vehicle for coming closer to the citizens and for allowing Europe to become more closely involved in the daily lives of Europeans .
Specifically , in relation to its examination of the human rights situation , my report , like previous ones , will be based on the structure of the Charter and will highlight certain points which I will treat as my political priorities .
In general , I wish my report to be a progressive one .
( Statement abbreviated in accordance with Rule 120 ( 7 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Community railways
The next item is the joint debate on the following four reports , drawn up on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism :
A5-0417 / 2002 by Mr Jarzembowski on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 91 / 440 / EEC on the development of the Community 's railways ( COM ( 2002 ) 25 - C5-0038 / 2002 - 2002 / 25 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0424 / 2002 by Mr Sterckx on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on safety on the Community 's railways and amending Council Directive 95 / 18 / EC on the licensing of railway undertakings and Directive 2001 / 14 / EC on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure and safety certification ( COM ( 2002 ) 21 - C5-0039 / 2002 - 2002 / 0022 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0418 / 2002 by Mrs Ainardi on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 96 / 48 / EC and Directive 2001 / 16 / EC on the interoperability of the trans-European rail system ( COM ( 2002 ) 2- C5-0045 / 2002 - 2002 / 0023 ( COD ) ) and
A5-0441 / 2002 by Mr Savary on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on establishing a European Railway Agency ( COM ( 2002 ) 23 - C5-0046 / 2002 - 2002 / 0024 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to warmly thank the four rapporteurs for the excellent work they have done , which means that the plenum is being presented with some generally positive reports , which move in the same direction as the Commission 's proposal and support the Commission 's approach .
I would like to thank Parliament , which , furthermore , has dealt with these reports as a global package , resisting the temptation to divide it up , which would undoubtedly have hindered our common objective of finally creating a genuine European rail area .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is the second stage of a prolonged process .
Following the entry into force on 15 March 2001 of the three directives of the infrastructures package , which will have to be incorporated into the Member States ' legislations from 15 March 2003 , we must now complete the legislative framework in order to speed up the creation of a genuine European rail area .
The four proposals we are going to debate today fall within the framework of this process .
I will firstly comment on the proposed amendment to Directive 91 / 440 / EEC , extending access rights to infrastructure and freight services within the Member States , and to speed up the opening up of the market .
The rapporteur is Mr Jarzembowski , who has done a wonderful job .
Ladies and gentlemen , the White Paper on European transport policy provides an alarming description of the development of rail freight transport .
Over the last twenty years , the quota corresponding to this sector - within the overall distribution of goods transport in the Union - has been reduced by half , from 15 % in 1980 to 8 % in 1999 .
Over this period , the quality of services provided to clients has not improved and in certain Member States it has worsened .
This is therefore an extremely pressing issue . I do not believe we can wait until 2008 to open up international goods transport to competition throughout the European network .
We must also deal with domestic transport .
That is why certain modifications are proposed to replace the timetable and methods for opening up laid down in Directive 2001 / 12 / EC , without waiting any longer for the opening up of freight transport , both national and international , to the whole of the network .
In practice , this total opening up of access rights in the field of freight would be effective by 2006 , which would mean bringing forward this opening up to the whole network by two years .
Ladies and gentlemen , the second proposed directive relates , of course , to rail safety .
I believe that the issue of safety in transport is something which occupies and preoccupies all of us , especially at the moment .
I would also like to thank Mr Sterckx for his work .
We must guarantee that the integration of the European rail network does not mean a reduction in the maximum levels of the safety standards in the various Member States of the Union .
But at the same time we must guarantee that the establishment of common rules prevents any possibility that , as a result of safety issues , the market may be harmed or there may be any discrimination in access to the networks .
The creation of an internal market in rail services would not be possible without the establishment of common safety rules .
Furthermore , the opening up of the markets and the end of the monopolies considerably modify such an important factor as the system of responsibilities in the field of safety , and it is therefore necessary to establish a coherent , transparent and clear framework which prevents any doubt in this area .
The safety directive focuses on four areas : the designation of national safety authorities , separate from the operators , with clearly defined responsibilities ; the determination of the essential elements of safety systems in relation to the operator of infrastructures and rail companies and the establishment of a mechanism for determining and adopting common safety objectives and methods - a role to be played by the rail Agency ; the establishment of a common system for the issuing , content and validity of safety certificates ; finally , the introduction , as in other sectors , of the principle of independent technical investigations in the event of accidents .
We now come to the third proposed directive .
If we establish the network , if we guarantee a common level of safety , with clearly defined responsibilities , it is also necessary to establish an interoperable system .
Hence the amendment of Directives 96 / 48 / EC and 2001 / 16 / EC on interoperability , whose rapporteur is Mrs Ainardi .
As well as the modifications which experience suggests we should make , it is essentially a question of guaranteeing coherence in the scope of the network in which opening up of access is carried out and the network in which the interoperability standards must be applied .
It is also a question of sending a very clear message about the need to standardise equipment , with a view to reducing costs .
We cannot just remove administrative borders , but we must also remove technological borders in order to create this European rail network .
I would like to express my gratitude for the work done on an enormously technical and arduous subject , but on which the work of Parliament and the rapporteur have once again been of the highest quality .
I will finally comment on the fourth proposal , to create a European Railways Agency , on which Mr Savary has done some very considerable work .
The Agency is the cornerstone , it will complete the circle and will be the instrument which will allow us to make progress in the field of the interoperability of rail safety and therefore to guarantee the integration of the European rail network .
This Agency will provide technical support for decision making , without autonomous competences , and will provide the Commission with opinions and recommendations .
The texts in question will be adopted by the Commission in accordance with a comitology procedure , as is currently the case in relation to interoperability .
Its main fields of activity will be as follows : the technical drawing up of texts planned for the directive on safety - common safety objectives and common safety methods - and for the directives on interoperability ; the creation of a network of national safety and interoperability authorities ; technical advice to the Commission and the national authorities on specific cases in the field of safety rules .
This Agency , which will be made up of some 100 people , will be responsible for promoting the work of the technical approximation of rail systems and will be independent , although it will work in close cooperation with experts in the sector .
Mr President , to conclude , the texts proposed intend , on the one hand , to ensure that 15 incompatible national systems develop technically towards an integrated and competitive European rail area and , on the other , to speed up the opening up of the market in freight transport , so that operators can provide effective services in any part of the Union .
Let us finally opt for a modern railway , worthy of the twenty-first century , which is able to compete effectively with other modes of transport .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this is a good day , even if there are not so many people listening at the moment - and I hope that the press will report on this important debate - because we are finally on the way towards also establishing an internal market in the rail sector .
This is an absolutely crucial point , because this is the only internal market that is actually still lacking in the transport sector .
That is why , Commissioner , our four reports express our full agreement , in principle , with the Commission 's basic ideas .
However , being a self-assured Parliament and co-legislator , we have also tabled some substantial amendments to the four Commission proposals .
I hope that the Commissioner will support all of them .
Why have we tabled amendments ?
By tabling these amendments we are seeking to hasten the revitalisation of the rail sector in the European Union .
We must create the necessary framework conditions sooner , because if we do not manage to revitalise the railways , we will not meet our European transport policy objective - laid down in the White Paper - by 2010 either .
By 2010 we want to bring the different modes of transport back into balance , which in practice means that we want to carry more freight by rail instead of by road and more passengers by rail instead of by air or road .
To achieve this objective of putting a larger proportion of the overall volume of traffic back onto the railways , we need to create appropriate framework conditions .
These must be such that the rail networks really are opened up throughout the Union to existing and new railway undertakings , that is that network access is liberalised .
In addition , by adopting European standards we must also physically cross internal borders , meaning that trains must be able to cross borders without stopping or slowing down , so that we can also make the advantages offered by the internal market a reality from the technical point of view .
And we need a high level of safety .
Since in the future we will not only have the national railway companies in the Member States but also increasing numbers of private railway undertakings , operating across the Union , it is no longer sufficient for the national authorities to be responsible for safety standards . Instead we need common , high European standards of safety for the benefit of passengers and railway staff .
Finally , we need a European railway agency to energetically push forward all of these measures and monitor them .
We have made progress on interoperability , but too slowly .
At a conference , technical experts informed us that it would take 30 years to achieve interoperability , that is for trains to be able to use different networks without stopping .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we wait that long there will not be any railways left in Europe that are operated on a commercial basis .
However , we want the railways , and so all of us here need to energetically drive these measures forward , and that is why we need a European railway agency .
In an internal market for railways designed in this way , it will be crucial for modern , forward-looking railway undertakings to attract more freight and more passengers onto rail by providing services that customers want and that run on time .
If we continue to have the kind of planning system that we have today , which means that a railway undertaking cannot guarantee when a train travelling from Germany to Italy is going to arrive - there are hour- and even day-long delays - then rail is not going to be able to compete with HGVs .
But we want to create the framework conditions to ensure that trains can compete with HGVs .
I should like to make four brief comments on my report .
The first , Commissioner , is one on which I think we now agree .
The Commission wanted to postpone the introduction of the special rail network for freight services in Europe , the so-called Trans-European Rail Freight Network , which the first railway package already states will come into being on 15 March 2003 .
We are against this and think that we need this special rail network on 15 March of this year so as to gain experience of cross-border freight transport .
I hope that the Commission agrees .
Secondly , we think that the aim set by the Commission of opening up the whole network to freight - both cross-border and national services - by 1 January 2006 , as the Commissioner also indicated , should be clearly stated as from now , and not expressed as one-and-a-half years or two years after entry into force . We want everyone to know that on 1 January 2006 they can be prepared for the networks actually to be opened up to freight services .
Thirdly , it is our view , Commissioner , that we also need to extend these rights to use rail for freight transport to other transport operators , not only the traditional railway undertakings or the new railway undertakings , but also the shippers and carriers .
Because only if all the players in the sector are on board - and that includes the shippers and carriers - will we be able to transfer freight from road to rail .
I therefore hope that you will also agree to the independent rights that we want to grant them .
My final point , Commissioner , relates to something that you did not address just now , but I should in any case like to make this request .
You said that the Commission did not want to table proposals to open up the networks to passenger services as well until 2003 .
We in Parliament are one step ahead of you and have said : no , we do not want there to be so much domestic air traffic in Europe and would prefer passengers to take cross-border passenger train services . We therefore also want the rail market in passenger services to be opened up .
We are proposing making it possible for cross-border passenger services to operate from 1 January 2006 , like freight services , and national passenger services at a later date , from 1 January 2008 .
Commissioner , it is precisely if we want to ensure that airspace is used sensibly that we need to attract more passengers onto the railways .
I hope that you will support us in this .
Two final comments on the Sterckx report : I think that this report on safety standards is so magnificent that all I can say is that its main points go to the heart of the matter , in that it makes the provisions more precise and advocates a high level of safety in the interests of passengers and staff .
That is why we will be fully supporting this report .
Finally , Commissioner , I hope that you agree with us that we should encourage the Greek Presidency actually to adopt the common positions in March so that we can move the procedure forward and perhaps conclude this chapter , on opening up the railways in the European Community , by the end of the year .
Even if one or two Member States should have problems , the Community Treaty allows a decision to be taken by a majority in the Council of Ministers , and we should encourage the Greeks to take advantage of this possibility .
- ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that most of us in Parliament agree that we need a European approach and that national monopolies have no future .
It is , however , clear that in a European market such as this , where more players are entering the arena , there must be proper safety arrangements .
The safety situation is satisfactory at the moment .
Rail is a safe means of transport , it must remain at least as good and we must try to improve safety levels wherever possible .
The directive we are now producing is an initial step towards European safety policy .
At the moment there are still too many different rules and regulations which make this railway market in Europe too complex in many cases .
We must therefore develop a standard procedure for the different Member States in this directive .
Firstly , a structure .
Who is responsible for what ?
The railway companies are naturally responsible for what they do , and as a Parliament we are adding the infrastructure managers to this .
Every Member State should therefore have a safety body which operates independently and openly and is transparent .
Everyone must know how things stand .
With regard to the operational side of things , however , I think that the safety bodies must be able to make use of the existing railway companies ' know-how , knowledge and experience .
Secondly , we must have a common approach to safety , a common safety goal .
As a Parliament , we think that , once established , this goal must be put before the Council and Parliament again and must not only be assessed by a committee of national experts .
We must not only have a common goal but also a common working method , and I am somewhat stricter than you are when it comes to discouraging new national rules .
We will have to be as strict as possible in this regard , and the Commission must have the last word .
We must also - and I am somewhat more ambitious than the Commission in this regard too - establish a European objective , and we must state that our objective is to achieve one single set of European regulations .
We do not necessarily have to achieve this tomorrow , but we must at least be able to say what we are aiming for .
All players must have a management system , and there must be common safety certificates for staff , for rolling stock and also for the infrastructure manager .
As far as staff are concerned , I think that a European driving licence for train drivers is important .
We must work on this .
Communication is also important ; that is something I have added to my report .
If you cross language boundaries you must also make sure that you solve language problems .
The agency must have its say about how this is to be done .
It is an important point , however .
Thirdly , we must develop a common method of investigating accidents , investigating incidents , an independent investigative body and criteria that must be respected in these investigations .
I think that we have achieved a balance between making our approach as European as possible with supervisors who are as independent as possible , and achieving a theoretical model that is also workable in practice .
So you must not simply dismiss the knowledge that the old monopolies have at their disposal ; you must use it to create a workable system .
I am convinced that where we are now is an initial phase , that this is an initial step .
We will have to discuss safety a few times more and amend and adapt directives over the next 10 , 15 and 20 years .
The structure we are now setting up will also have to prove its soundness in practice , and we must ensure that we are flexible enough to acknowledge our mistakes and to do something about them if necessary .
I also think that we have achieved a good balance when it comes to the involvement of the staff concerned .
It is important for the people who work on the railways to be involved in the things that concern them .
Safety is also the work of man , and the people who are responsible for this work must be involved in the decision making .
I think that this is in fact clearly stated in the directive .
With Mrs Ainardi 's report on the technical obstacles and Mr Savary 's report on the Railways Agency , which will be very important in the future as it will have to do a great deal of the work , we are thus taking a significant step towards a European railway environment .
Mr Jarzembowski 's report is also a significant step forward .
What we need are open , dynamic , commercially-oriented railway companies that think European , not just nationally or locally .
The culture of the national monopoly is still very much in evidence and too often prevents Europe 's railways from operating efficiently .
As Mr Jarzembowski and the Commissioner have also said , we need a dynamic rail industry .
When you see how the transport economy has developed , you cannot do without railway companies .
I get terror-stricken whenever I hear people from railway companies saying that if we do not adapt quickly we will have no more goods traffic on the railways , and we will be priced out of the market - not by the prices themselves but by bad working practices .
Rail is a sustainable means of transport and we must look after it .
With our reports and your proposals , Commissioner , I think that we are taking a significant step forward , for we need to progress towards a European transport market .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , given that the European Union has published a White Paper explaining the need to revitalise rail transport , it is essential to ensure interoperability within the European rail system if it is to be developed . This is crucial to the future of European railways in the twenty-first century .
Rail is a more sustainable means of transport , entailing fewer external costs than road transport .
It is also more environmentally friendly and safer . Despite all this , rail freight has declined over the last twenty years .
It is my view that there are three main reasons for this decline .
Firstly , we have industrial strategies favouring road transport and ' just-in-time ' management , resulting in a greater number of journeys and greater dispersal and fragmentation .
Furthermore , there is distortion of competition between road and rail transport . The level of social regulation relating to road transport is notably low when compared to that for rail .
I am thinking , in particular , of the fact that the regulation outlined in the Markov report to be discussed this morning does not address the question of a limit on driving time adequately .
Despite the fact that Mr Markov and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs proposed reducing driving time to 45 hours , the limit remains at 56 hours , which is clearly still far too long .
Lastly , I share the view that the development of different networks according to national specifications has limited trade and has lead to inadequate cooperation and incompatible standards .
My report on the high-speed network and the conventional network respectively , therefore seeks to make standards more compatible by bringing the two existing directives into line with each other . The report also includes a series of proposals to speed up harmonisation and to extend its scope .
I would like to point out that my report is closely linked to the report on establishing a European Railway Agency .
Consequently , a number of decisions on points concerning the Agency are included in my report as they stand in order to ensure that the package is coherent .
While preparing my report , I met with operators , experts , the Commission , trade unions and public authorities on many occasions . As a result of the meetings , I identified a number of issues to which I would like to draw your attention .
Firstly , in order to achieve interoperability , I think it is absolutely essential to take full account of the skills and know-how of the professionals working within the sector .
The European Union must ensure the involvement of the sector if it is to harmonise the rail system .
For example , during one of the meetings I had with railway staff , they proposed a recording device .
I took this on board , as I believed it to be relevant .
The introduction of a recording device now has universal support and is included in my report .
Secondly , further to all these meetings , it has become clear to me that harmonisation and safety rules are inextricably linked .
Harmonisation in this area cannot be carried out at a minimum level .
Safety standards vary across the European Union .
Lowering safety standards to facilitate access to infrastructure would be counter-productive and even dangerous .
Reducing safety would not be in the interests of harmonisation .
One question remains unresolved , namely funding .
Enormous investment is needed to achieve this new stage of development .
No specific budgetary provision is envisaged , though this is certainly called for .
I am delighted that agreement has been reached on Article 29 of the Sterckx report , which promotes social dialogue .
I also consider the agreement reached on the Savary report to be very important . This concerns the participation of staff representatives in drawing up technical specifications on interoperability ( TSIs ) which are of direct concern to them .
To ensure consistency between the various reports and the unity of the package , I would like to propose three oral amendments which take account of the agreements reached on the Sterckx and Savary reports .
I would also like to propose an amendment on the financial questions . Whilst I am aware that not everyone will share my point of view , I hope you will all understand the importance of the issue .
The package as a whole is extremely important , given what is at stake .
We bear an enormous responsibility for the future , as we are planning the European rail system for the twenty-first century .
I would in addition like to express my opinion on the package as a whole .
The Jarzembowski report proposes the complete liberalisation of rail freight services by 2003 , and of national passenger services by 2008 .
I must say that I am concerned about the proposals aimed at speeding up liberalisation , following up those proposed by the Commission .
The transposition of the first package is only just taking place in Member States , and an assessment of the consequences has therefore yet to be undertaken .
I am still concerned at the conclusions of the Barcelona Council , which sensibly called for a report to be drawn up and an assessment to be made before any new proposal is presented .
I agree that we need to revitalise the rail system .
It is my view that the harmonisation of standards is a very relevant issue , as is the need for an Agency and strict safety rules .
I do not however see why and how it should be deemed necessary to undertake the development of the rail network and opening it up to competition at the same time .
The Sterckx report on safety is also very important since , like the Commission , it is concerned in particular about the harmonisation of safety standards .
The harmonisation of safety standards should , however , take account of the real situation of the sector , especially as regards implementation time .
It would be useless , or even detrimental , to attempt to apply European standards too quickly .
In conclusion , I would like to reiterate my conviction that both the long-term development and the revitalisation of the sector are at stake . The players in this sector count , be they operators or railway staff .
Their skills and knowledge are valuable . The European Union can and must show that it intends to involve them in the development of the rail system .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for a long time transport policy was a poor relation in European policy .
In plain language , for a long time nothing happened at all .
It required a judgment by default from the European Court of Justice for things slowly to start inching forward , step by step .
Admittedly , we have seen some movement on air and maritime transport in recent years - this is pleasing , and we are grateful for this , not least to the Commissioner - but the tragic events off the Spanish coast have shown that we are still a long way from where we actually should be .
It is above all in the sector that is being discussed here and now that we are still a long way from where we should be , namely in the rail sector .
Much ought to have been done here in the last few years and it still has not been done , including establishing genuine coordination between the Member States .
Mr Jarzembowski has already pointed out that the rail sector is the only one in which the internal market is not a reality .
I would perhaps express this in even stronger terms : where rail is concerned we have probably not even started to make it a reality .
That is why the necessary balance between the individual modes of transport is still lacking .
This has also been mentioned once already today .
It cannot be stressed often enough .
The results are as bad as you would expect , particularly between road and rail where the gulf is tending to widen in the absence of sensible joint solutions .
The European rail system and its connection to the system in the candidate countries , which will soon be members of this Union , needs to be revitalised and made to work ; otherwise a lot more will go wrong on our railways and we will have even more problems than we do now .
As an Austrian I am not only referring to transit across the Brenner Pass and the Alps ; essentially this applies to all regions of Europe , all of which are sensitive to a greater or lesser degree , not only those that have been under intensive discussion over the last few days .
In this context , I should like , en passant , to apprise you of one fact , which is not without interest , because unfortunately it is never adequately taken into consideration in the discussion : the Austrian railways are the only ones to have increased their share of the freight market in the last few years .
All of our other neighbouring countries have continued to let road strengthen its lead over rail .
Now what is at issue specifically in the Ainardi report , for which I was also responsible as shadow rapporteur ?
Interoperability should and must be made a reality across the entire network .
We cannot concentrate , as we did originally , on individual parts of the network - high-speed lines and so forth - and treat them separately .
We have to try actually to find one single structure , obviously with the necessary exemptions for regional railways - if they really are regional railways - for heritage railways and others .
When it comes to drafting and adopting these technical specifications we must firstly bear in mind that this is not the job of the European legislator , but that specialists must set to work on these , and European politicians are only called on to monitor progress .
What is important here are reasonable costs and a high degree of safety .
Both aspects have been addressed often enough here today .
I do not need to emphasise this particularly , but I do think that we should take them seriously .
Where safety is concerned , I would specifically point out that we have now tabled a proposal to extend the black box system to the railways .
This means that we also want to make progress on research , so as to ensure that in the long term we arrive where we need to arrive , at a functioning European transport system .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank all the rapporteurs for their work in this very important area .
This is a difficult and complex subject not made any easier by the position that the whole railway industry finds itself in .
If you look at rail freight in Europe , for example , the drop in traffic is quite alarming .
If nothing is done , then within the next 15 years rail freight will not exist .
There has to be change in how railways work , both in the passenger and freight sectors .
The industry itself has to recognise that its service levels have been unacceptable and Member States must also recognise that investment levels have been in decline for many years .
This is nowhere more apparent than in the field of interoperability : 15 different systems , different signalling systems , different power currents and an obsession at national level with working their own system to the detriment of international cooperation and to the detriment of interoperability .
It is the inability of a train to cross borders without changing locomotives , changing drivers or even changing bogeys that is the problem for our railways .
A 40-tonne heavy goods lorry is fully interoperable .
A freight train is not .
That is the difficulty that faces the industry . It is not an easy problem to overcome .
We need to give the railways time to improve their interoperability , but we must also remind them that time is running out and frankly with regard to freight the industry is now drinking in the last chance saloon .
I , on behalf of my group , have followed the report by Mr Sterckx with regard to safety more closely than the others .
It is our belief that in any work in the area of safety those who work in the sector must be involved .
In this regard a difference exists between us and the PPE-DE Group .
Our main goals are to ensure higher levels of safety whilst fully integrating our European rail system .
We must get away from the 15 different systems I mentioned earlier ; however , we must ensure that Member States have an input , and in those areas where higher standards exist we must insist that they are maintained .
Dilution of safety standards is not an option .
That is why , as a group , we have submitted a number of amendments to Mr Sterckx 's report .
All of us here are supporters of railways .
Indeed some of us are somewhat fanatical and are often called anoraks by our colleagues .
I hope the Commission proposals and Parliament 's response are seen by those in the railway industry as an honest attempt to ensure that Europe 's railway industry has a future .
In order to reach that goal we need politicians , we need governments , we need the Commission , but most of all we also need all sides in the railway industry working together .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I should firstly like to thank all the rapporteurs involved in the railway package .
They have done some excellent work .
Development of the railways , however , was far too late in getting started .
Now such areas as the promotion of competition in both freight and passenger transport services , increased interoperability and improvements in safety are huge challenges which really do require swift action to be taken .
The competitiveness of the railways has seriously decreased .
There has been a shift to transportation along congested roads as well as by air , because the railways have not been able to improve their services quickly enough .
This railway package will enable us to promote the competitiveness of the European railways , and improved competitiveness will mean that companies and the public will have the chance to utilise a more environment-friendly form of transport .
At the same time congestion can be relieved and short flights replaced by railway transport services , which will result in a better balance between transport operators .
Development of the railways will also clear the way for increased use of intermodal transport , as at the same time attention will be paid to improved interoperability of the ports and railways .
As shadow rapporteur , I have followed Mr Savary 's drafting of the report closely .
Mr Savary has also done good work .
A properly established Railway Agency would boost development of the railways and monitor and promote innovation and good practice .
Our group believes , however , that the same principle should be followed regarding the composition of the Agency 's administrative board as that which applies to the Maritime Safety Agency .
We have tabled an amendment on this for which we hope there is support .
These days , people and goods are travelling ever longer distances .
Much too much of this travelling is taking place on the motorway or by air .
Travelling by rail is more environmentally friendly , but most of our railway networks date back to an era when we stayed within our own state boundaries much more than we do now .
Virtually everyone now agrees on the need for modernisation with trains that can travel on the other side of the border with the same carriages , the same crew , the same voltage and the same safety requirements .
This can be achieved quickly by improving cooperation between national railway companies or by merging large-scale and cross-border activities into one single European operation .
Regrettably this increase in scale is now being misused to force all the Member States of the European Union to allow other companies with private capital to access the railway network .
Liberalisation means that we will only be able to travel where entrepreneurs can expect to make a profit .
The additional costs for planning , supervision , safety and infrastructure are being paid by the government , in other words the taxpayer , and the financial benefits go to international companies .
This compulsion to liberalise will make it more difficult to guarantee continuity and safety .
Despite the European unity that has been achieved , there is currently less cross-border rail traffic in many places than there was in the time before the EU was created .
International night trains are being cancelled , long-distance connections are being severed , railway timetables for ' abroad ' are no longer being issued , boarding bans are being introduced and there will be no railway facilities for the rapid transportation of perishable goods .
Even before the compromise of the end of 2000 concerning corridors for goods transportation by other companies comes into effect , attempts are already being made to push through even more far-reaching liberalisation with the aim of putting international goods traffic first , then domestic goods traffic , then international passenger traffic and finally all traffic in the hands of companies that have fewer obligations to society as a whole .
In the Netherlands , which wanted to take the lead , liberalisation has resulted in a significant reduction in the quality of train services .
Part of the package of four reports that have just been presented will have a detrimental effect on the railway company 's duty of service .
If we do not accept that part , the future will look a great deal better .
Mr President , I would first like to thank all fellow MEPs and rapporteurs .
The aim of all reforms must be to create a sustainable transport policy in Europe .
Liberalisation can sometimes be a means to achieving this , but never an end in itself .
The extremely poor situation in respect of maritime transport must indeed be a warning to us .
Freight traffic in Europe has become a problem due to the enormous increase in the number of lorries on our roads .
I myself regard early liberalisation of goods transport by rail as a sure fire way of quickly reducing the number of lorries on the road , provided that it is given sufficient support .
Indeed , we do not view liberalisation as an end in itself , and we are therefore not in favour of liberalising passenger transport .
Passenger transport by rail is a public service and must remain so .
Transport must also remain affordable for everyone , so it should not only be the profitable lines that are allowed to be leased or sold .
The negative consequences of liberalisation are already being felt by travellers .
International lines outside of the high-speed network are being cut back .
One example is the fast overnight connection between Brussels and Milan which , as my Italian colleagues know , has been scrapped as a result of competition from air travel , a mode of transport in which the environmental costs are not calculated into the ticket price .
That there is a problem is , however , demonstrated by the poor rail connection between Brussels and Strasbourg I got a taste of yesterday .
The European Commission has done too little research into the consequences of liberalisation for rail transport .
We think that an assessment is urgently needed before we go any further down the road towards liberalisation .
We cannot make decisions on accelerating the pace of liberalisation of rail transport until such time as we have a clear picture of the impact this liberalisation will have on working conditions , safety , the environment , the effective improvement of consumer choice and the growth of the sector .
With this in mind , we have therefore submitted an amendment to Mr Jarzembowski 's report .
The three other reports closely reflect the problems and issues of the sector .
Firstly that of safety in the Sterckx report .
Then coming up with practical ways of cooperating effectively in the Ainardi report .
Finally , a Railways Agency to support the entire harmonisation process and to get it on track in the Savary report .
The era of containers being transported from the North Sea port to Northern Italy on trains crawling along at 18 km per hour must be consigned to history as soon as possible .
The Sterckx , Savary and Ainardi reports place the emphasis on cooperation and consultation between different companies .
These companies could naturally have done this themselves , but they seem to only spring into action when competition is imminent .
Europe should naturally have organised this internal rail market much earlier .
This Railways Agency should have been in place thirteen years ago .
The free movement of goods was not organised in a sustainable way in the twentieth century .
The twenty-first century must bring the changes we so urgently need .
The establishment of the European Agency for the harmonisation of safety and for accelerating interoperability as part of the second railways package must contribute to the process of liberalising and modernising rail transport in Europe .
This process was set in motion with the introduction of the first railways package , but it has not been completed by a long chalk , despite the fact that the Transport White Paper places so much emphasis on rail being practically the most important means of transport in the future .
If rail really wants to play a role in solving the problem of congestion in Europe , however , it is of vital importance that we not only open up international and national goods markets but cross-border passenger traffic as well .
We must revitalise and liberalise the entire sector if we really want rail traffic to take over part of the constantly growing demand for transport .
The sector has suffered years of neglect in the hands of the various governments who controlled the railways - not the big international companies , Mr Meijer .
Furthermore , the sector was and still is a bastion of national interests whose main aim is to promote its own interests and not to become involved in cross-border interests .
If we view the railway sector in the context of the agreements in the Lisbon Declaration which call upon us to become the most competitive region in the world by 2010 , we have to achieve this , otherwise our hearts will be in our boots .
Everywhere there are different mains voltages , different railway gauges , big differences in signalling , different languages and safety requirements , locomotives that are not suitable for operating the other side of borders and that are twice as expensive because they have to overcome all these differences .
Furthermore , the rail freight sector only discovered the concept of profit about a year ago .
The only thing that was important was volume .
Now billions will have to be invested throughout Europe in order to get the infrastructure and rolling stock up to standard .
That can only really happen if there is a true sea change and the railway sector discovers the customer and the concepts of punctuality , flexibility and service orientation besides that of profit .
Interoperability and the harmonisation of safety regulations have often been an uphill battle up until now .
Every railway company is sticking to its own practices and systems .
It will therefore be important for the Railways Agency to set a good example , play a pioneering role and at the same time act in a supervisory capacity .
The Railways Agency 's expertise and clear responsibilities are therefore very important .
Another condition that must be met if the Agency is to operate efficiently is that it must remain independent and that it has independent experts chosen for their abilities and not as representatives of a particular organisation at its helm .
If we are to avoid reverting to traditional national differences , these experts from the industry must therefore not express the viewpoint of their previous employers .
It is therefore essential for the Agency to be able to operate completely independently and transparently .
The new predominance of historically big companies will result in few newcomers having access to the Agency .
The Railways Agency must also have enough powers to be able to execute its tasks properly .
I have submitted an amendment in this regard stating that the Agency should establish the preconditions for the uniform issue of safety certificates independently of the national railway companies within which the national safety bodies have to operate .
Naturally , train drivers must receive on-the-spot training to enable them to drive on routes in neighbouring countries , but competences with regard to safety certificates must be clear and unambiguous to all concerned .
In general , harmonisation of the safety regulations in Europe is very important for an efficient railway sector .
Bureaucratic obstacles must be eliminated as far as possible .
I am also pleased with the compromise on Article 3 that we were able to reach with the Group of the Party of European Socialists , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , concerning the participation of employers ' representatives from the sector in the working parties .
On this point I am still of the opinion that it is not desirable to permit worker involvement in purely technical matters .
When there are direct consequences for workers ' working conditions , health or safety , however , their voices will naturally be heard and indeed listened to , as the compromise specifies .
In conclusion , therefore , I hope that the Railways Agency will make a positive contribution to the harmonisation of safety and the process of interoperability in Europe , so that it can make an important contribution towards improving rail transport in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to congratulate the rapporteurs , who have done a magnificent job .
Although there are some differences of opinion on the detail , we are in very substantial agreement with the reports and will - at least I assume we will - be adopting them today , because , as Mrs Peijs has just said , it has been possible to reach some important compromises .
This package , building on earlier decisions , will actually take us an important step closer to establishing a European railway .
The restrictions imposed by the nation-states , and the fears that they still have , will - I hope - soon be consigned to the past .
I dealt personally with Mr Jarzembowski 's and Mrs Ainardi 's reports .
Mr Jarzembowski 's report - and once again Mr Jarzembowski has disappeared off somewhere ; he is a real European high-speed train and is never where he actually should be , but be that as it may - proposes extensive liberalisation .
Obviously for us Social Democrats - let me be quite open about it - this is a tricky business .
Today , for various reasons , a large majority of us will go along with these proposals : firstly , because they are part of an overall agreement , as part of which we have also , particularly in the Savary report , obtained a series of provisions guaranteeing workers ' rights and opportunities .
I have no fears in this regard , Mrs Peijs , but we certainly must focus on the working conditions and health and safety in the sector for the sake of those employed there .
Secondly , there are unfortunately a number of countries that are still very restrictive where market opening is concerned .
I therefore assume that a more constructive and reasonable compromise proposal will emerge from the conciliation procedure .
Thirdly , it is my view that we need to put pressure on the national railway undertakings , be they public or private .
Many of these railway undertakings have not read the signs of the times ; they have entered into cooperation with each other only to a very limited extent and only in some areas , for example high-speed trains .
The railway companies have either not recognised that nowadays transport services at least have to be European - which has of course long been the case for HGVs - or they have not done anything about it .
A certain amount of pressure to liberalise and move towards market opening is therefore certainly very important for the national railway companies .
Turning now to Mrs Ainardi 's report , this is also a very good piece of work .
We regret the fact that , particularly in this report , too little account has been taken of some aspects of social harmonisation , because there are understandably fears on the part of workers that this will lead to a kind of social dumping .
I believe that it is particularly important for the workers to be included in the process of reforming the railways .
The civil servants and others employed in the railway sector also need to know that the times of national , restricted , controlled railway undertakings are over , and that this is about creating a European railway .
Once again , I believe that the essential point here is that , hopefully , today 's decision will send out a signal to the railway undertakings , so that they will make it their own business to create a real European railway .
Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , in particular on their close cooperation , because the interrelated nature of the package requires the reports to be relatively interdependent .
I would also like to mention that the committee of which I am chairman has worked well on this matter , as always .
It is no coincidence that , during 2002 , the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism initiated 34 reports in the transport sector , seven of which focused precisely on the modernisation of the railways .
It is quite clear , however , that the committee is concerned by certain delays in the Council and has made this clear in more or less formal terms .
I , personally , have even written a letter to the Danish Presidency , and I will reiterate these same points to the Greek Transport Minister , Mr Verelis , who is coming to visit the committee and attend a hearing next week .
The first railway package is closely related to the second railway package and , just like the carriages of a train , they must move forward , or else there will be a real danger of a kind of rail traffic jam .
The second railway package is important , and I would like to say that our approach is not an ideological promotion of the railways , of which we are sometimes accused .
I believe that the case of freight transport is extremely significant : the use of the railways is continuing to decline , despite all the good intentions expressed .
When I consider specific cases which are particularly important to me such as the trans-Alpine routes , I find this totally unacceptable .
I regret to say that there is no genuine European rail network . We are building it with these directives .
It is strange that , with all their areas of sovereignty taken away from them , the only one remaining for the States in Europe is a kind of railway sovereignty , which we have got to break up and reshape in a European mould .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteurs .
Heavy words indeed : the railway industry drinking in the last chance saloon and ceasing to exist after a certain time .
Mr Jarzembowski was also talking about a balanced relationship .
We endorse that .
We also think that it is absolutely necessary to revitalise the railways , for environmental and other reasons .
Interoperability must be changed , safety must be improved , we must set up a Railways Agency , and so on .
Let us go back briefly to the core of the matter , however .
We actually disagree strongly with regard to the package that Mr Jarzembowski is talking about .
We have already had some experience with liberalisation in Europe - in the UK and in the Netherlands as well .
I would like to talk about the Dutch example briefly .
An article in this morning 's newspaper .
Mr Zalm , the Liberal front runner in the elections and a former Dutch minister , is now saying that it was a mistake to split up NS and ProRail .
In other words , Railway Directive 91 / 440 / EC , the original separation of infrastructure and operation , is seen as being wrong .
The Dutch Minister of Transport , Mr de Boer , also came to this conclusion recently and is asking for an inquiry for this very reason .
Back to square one .
In other words , we think that liberalisation is an excellent opportunity for goods transport .
We think , however , that we will have to take a good look at what this liberalisation of passenger transport is going to deliver , because it is not going well .
For this reason we are asking most emphatically for an evaluation proposal and we hope that you will support the amendment .
How it is possible that the socialists in the UK , who after all have had the same miserable experiences with liberalisation and the other aspects of privatisation of the railways , can still be in favour of Mr Jarzembowski 's proposals is completely beyond my comprehension .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a Liberal , I am very satisfied with the railways package and our four rapporteurs ' reports .
Particularly with the fact that Mr Jarzembowski has included passenger transport in his report and has outlined a plan for it .
The further liberalisation of Europe 's oldest mechanised infrastructure , the railways , is an essential stimulus for a sector that is quickly losing ground in the European goods traffic market .
I cannot emphasis often enough that liberalisation is somewhat different from independence or uncontrolled privatisation , as was tried in the UK .
It is of vital importance - including for the sector itself - that we have more providers on the European railways .
Only then can we achieve a healthy railway market through genuine competition .
Why not let the NS-cargo / DB-cargo combination compete directly with SNCF .
There is nothing wrong with that .
It must all be safe , so we , the legislators , must assume our responsibility for this .
Mrs Ainardi 's report is based on interoperability , acknowledging each other , the international recognition of regulations , the recognition of signals and the recognition of safety standards .
That is also why it is so important to pay attention to this .
That is why the European Railways Agency , proposed the Savary report , is so important .
From an organisational point of view , I would like the European Railways Agency to be coordinated with the European Maritime Safety Agency so that all these matters are organised independently , transparently , unambiguously and logically for all parties concerned .
Foresight is the essence of government .
In order to achieve efficiency , perhaps we can combine everything in the European safety agencies for the various modes of transport at some stage in the distant future and in this way integrate the sector fully with other modes .
After all , this is all about railway transport being integrated with society , integrated with roads and integrated with water in order to get products and goods from A to B more easily .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are today dealing at first reading with both the development strategy and the interoperability of the trans-European rail system , including its safety , and the creation of a European agency responsible for its monitoring and which I believe should also be responsible for its control .
In my opinion , and since I am in favour of the liberalisation of rail transport , I am not sure that it is right to liberalise the infrastructures , that is , the railway lines .
I believe it would be better , as is the case with motorways , to only liberalise the operation of the railways , leaving the rail infrastructures under public ownership .
I believe this would be the best formula for sustainable responsibility for the appropriate maintenance of them beyond the restrictions which would be imposed by the objectives of economic and financial viability inherent in any private initiative .
And , in any event , I believe there must be an early assessment of the effects of liberalisation both in terms of safety , social and environmental repercussions , the effect on the interests of clients and users and on public service as well as the development of intermodality , and also its effect on the companies involved within the transport market .
I would ask the Commission to inform us regularly and periodically on all these issues .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at times in this debate you get the impression that we have been building a European Union for only a short time and are addressing issues that actually ought to have been dealt with long ago .
It is inherent in the very concept of the internal market that freight and passenger transport should have an appeal that gains them acceptance .
The national railway companies ' actions in recent years have predominantly been characterised by the fact that they have continued to try to cordon off their markets , while at the same time coming to terms with the consistent and dramatic decline in their figures in the freight transport sector .
The only way of putting freight transport back on track at all is to ensure , firstly , that cross-border journeys can operate more smoothly in the future and , secondly , that the market is opened up and competition introduced , so that those who wish to offer attractive freight transport services have the opportunity to do so , and - so far at least -it has usually not been the national rail companies that have done this .
When I hear people argue that liberalisation would mean job cuts then I only have one thing to say in reply : if the current trend continues there will not be any jobs in the rail freight sector at all , a result of the railways ' conscious decision to neglect freight transport because it is not worth their while .
I can only say that those who are well intentioned towards the railways have to ensure that the rail systems are compatible across Europe , that the highest safety requirements are put in place and , in addition , they must ensure that the railways are customer-friendly , which means that they should be reliable , that they should have attractive services on offer and that they should stick to their timetables .
I can only hope that we and the Commissioner can push this through together in the Council .
Measures in other areas - the Single European Sky to name but one example , when we wanted to have Europe designate airspace blocks in the future , because the national Member States had been failing to do so for decades - were repeatedly blocked by the Council , because they thought that all of this could be resolved bilaterally .
I can only say that the Member States should have done it long ago , and now we are going to do it instead !
Mr President , all these reports on Community railways are part and parcel of the recent tidal wave of privatisation aimed at ensuring that not one public sector escapes the clutches of private capital , at the expense of quality , public safety and the cost of the services provided .
Accounting tricks and baseless arguments are being used to persuade us that , as with road transport , which contributes nothing to the infrastructure costs of the road network but is open to the private sector , we should allow the private sector to run down railway infrastructures and services which they have done nothing to create and which were and still are paid for by the taxpayer , in the name of free competition .
In the middle of a serious recession in the economy , in energy , in road , air and sea transport and in the environmental sector , big business has seen the potential in the railways for saving energy and cutting costs - and hence making a profit - and has turned its attention to rail transport and is trying to penetrate it " as an equal partner " , although in practice there is nothing " equal ' about it in relation to the nationalised railway companies .
In other words , the Commission proposals - and unfortunately these reports go along with them - care nothing for quality , the cost of transport or the safety of users , all of which have been blown out of the water by the philosophy of unbridled competition and the profitability of capital , leaving the way free for private investors to ransack the profitable rail transport sector and dump responsibility for exorbitant infrastructure building and maintenance costs and the unprofitable side of rail transport on the public sector .
As you will have gathered , we totally oppose proposals for any moderate , calculated liberalisation of the railways because it paves the way for full liberalisation with all the adverse consequences that will have on the travelling public .
Mr President , I had actually intended to say something completely different , but in the light of the last two speakers ' comments I will digress somewhat and take up another point .
We have heard things said that actually belong in the past - in a past that is , thankfully , long gone - a time when all that mattered was intervention and the class struggle , when people tried to create confrontation .
I believe that this was completely the wrong attitude .
History has condemned this approach and life punishes latecomers , as an extremely famous man once said , a man who had his roots in this system and then in the end also brought about its downfall because he knew it so well , I mean President Gorbachev .
We want better environmental protection , more goods to be transferred from road to rail , a better modal balance and thus better protection for consumers .
Better protection for consumers : let me give you an example of something that happened two days ago in my home region , in the cross-border Brenner Pass , where consignments of dangerous goods , which now have to be carried by road because there are no rail services that can handle them , caught fire , with very serious consequences for the environment and for the public .
We escaped an environmental disaster by the skin of our teeth .
This is our intention : we want to make transport safer , and here I am particularly grateful to my colleague , Mr Jarzembowski , who has been fighting for these initiatives to be taken for years .
We hope that these reports - and his in particular - will mean that we can take a substantial step in the right direction .
I am also grateful to the Vice-President of the Commission , Mrs de Palacio , who has a particularly good understanding of this issue and is endeavouring to achieve a modal balance .
We hope that we can continue further along this positive route .
Mr President , we of course support all measures designed to enhance the role of rail transport and to change the present situation , which favours road transport .
That is why we particularly support the reports by Sylviane Ainardi and Gilles Savary .
If we want to have a competitive European railway system , we must harmonise technical standards and remove bottlenecks in the international network , and at the same time create high safety standards .
Nevertheless , we will not achieve the interoperability needed by liberalising this sector .
In cases where this has happened , private operators have not responded , particularly as regards the high levels of investment required .
Nor has the Commission told us where it is going to find the finance needed to achieve this goal . It will not help at all to increase the flow of traffic by stimulating competition between the various operators if all the trains are forced to run on the same tracks , because that will simply lead to greater chaos and congestion .
Furthermore , we are against the total liberalisation of the freight and passenger transport sectors by 2008 .
We oppose this extreme position just as we oppose the Commission proposal to anticipate the opening up of the market in international freight transport , and we equally cannot accept the Member States being prevented from setting safety standards higher than those stipulated by the EU , simply so as not to create difficulties in opening up this market .
We are responsible to Europe 's citizens .
We must have the courage to fight for a public rail transport service which is of a high standard and safe , which will encourage people to use it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like once again to congratulate the four rapporteurs on their excellent work and say that , in general , the amendments they propose support - as I said at the beginning of my first speech - the Commission 's proposals .
Furthermore , in some cases , they propose going further and more quickly in the reform of the rail sector .
That is why the majority of the proposals are acceptable to the Commission , either in their current form or in principle .
I believe that they clearly improve on the Commission 's initial text : they provide it with detail , they improve it and they clarify some of the specific points .
I will provide Parliament 's Secretariat with a complete list indicating the Commission 's position on each of the amendments , but I would nevertheless like to make a few comments in relation to our discussions and some general assessments of the amendments .
Firstly , ladies and gentlemen , I am surprised that some of you are still raising the debate on whether or not the railways should be liberalised .
Ladies and gentlemen , to those of you who love the railways so much that they want nothing to be done , all I can say is that over the years we have seen what is taking place : the railways are disappearing .
If we do nothing - and I say this to those who are so worried that jobs will be lost with this supposed liberalisation - what will happen is that there will be no jobs , except for those which remain in the railway museums of the different countries of the European Union .
That is what we have to realise .
We are not talking about privatising the rail network .
That is an option which may be chosen by some countries , but I would like to point out to the honourable Member that for the only one that had adopted the fixed network , the fixed infrastructure , we have recently authorised a series of very significant State measures in order to renationalise that rail network .
The Commission is not adopting any action of this type .
We are proposing something different : the network is a natural monopoly , and therefore , the existence of non-public ownership would lead to many difficulties , and there should be a series of public controls of this natural monopoly .
We are saying that a natural monopoly , such as a European network , should above all be European , there should be no national concept , but a global European one , which requires common technological , administrative and safety rules .
Secondly , we argue that there should be competition between the various operators .
Ladies and gentlemen , some of you are concerned that there will be competition between the French operator - or the French operators , France will decide what to do - and the German , British or any other European Union operator .
The only alternative to this situation of competition is to create a single European operator , operating for the entire European rail network .
Do the honourable Members really believe that this can be done ?
That this is the way to make the railways more operative , more competitive and more dynamic , and to recover the market quotas and the sections of transport which correspond to them ?
I frankly believe not ; that is not the way forward .
The way forward is the one we are proposing : the conception and planning of the railways at European level - later I will discuss funding as well ; European planning of the railways and for the different operators currently in the countries of the European Union to be able to compete within this network .
And , if there are new operators - because the legislation in the different countries authorise this - that they fulfil suitable requirements to be able to operate throughout this rail network , and that they also compete .
We are talking about introducing rationality into the rail sector and turning it into a rail sector which is European and appropriate for the twenty-first century .
I understand , as Mr Caveri , chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , has said , that the Directorate-General for Transport has made them work hard on the railways .
As Commissioner responsible for transport , I would like to thank the chairman and the entire committee once again for their understanding , support and cooperation in all our work .
Mr President , I will refer briefly to the amendments tabled .
With regard to Mr Jarzembowski 's report , in relation to the opening up of the market , I would stress his support for the Commission 's proposal , with a view to completing the opening up of the market in the transport of goods by rail .
The amendments presented deal with coordination in the time between the entry into force of Directive 2001 / 12 / EC , on the first stage of the opening up to competition of goods transport by rail , which must be incorporated into the legislation of the Member States so that , from 15 March 2003 , we have a starting gun for the whole of the European Union , with the supplementary stages we propose and , specifically , the incorporation of all the networks of the Union countries into a European network .
In this regard , all these amendments are acceptable to the Commission .
With regard to the amendments which propose extending the opening up to competition of the passenger sector , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Jarzembowski , the Commission believes that , in order to produce positive effects , this opening up , which requires a differentiated pace , requires a more appropriate and stricter framework .
This opening up should therefore be considered not only from the point of view of the contracts signed by public administrations - something already regulated by the proposed regulations on public service obligations , which is still awaiting the decision of the Council , since Parliament gave its opinion on them some time ago - but also from the point of view of access rights and the protection of passenger rights .
Mr Jarzembowski , we cannot accept these amendments , because we are waiting to present a proposal this year specifically for passengers and which will deal in a coherent manner with the problem of opening up competition in the railways for the passenger sector .
I would like to thank Mr Jarzembowski for his support for the proposals the Commission will shortly present .
With regard to Mr Sterckx 's report on rail safety , we can accept the majority of the amendments , either in their current form or in principle , with some modifications of the text .
I am referring essentially to the amendments which strengthen the requirement for transparency in terms of safety and which advocate a more rapid and intensive convergence of the strictest possible safety rules .
I believe that that is the important point .
However , we cannot accept either Amendment No 18 nor Amendment No 48 , because they would be contrary to a clear distribution of responsibilities ; we also have difficulties in accepting Amendment No 34 , since we believe that it could considerably reduce the European scope of safety certificates .
On the other hand , I must say that we attach the greatest possible importance to the independence of investigating bodies in the event of accidents , and we cannot therefore accept any restriction of this independence .
We do not therefore accept Amendment No 56 .
I share Mrs Ainardi 's view of the problem of investments , because all of this is going to require considerable investments on the part of the Member States of the Union .
Each of the Member States has an interest in promoting this modernisation of the railways , but there is also a very obvious European interest in promoting the modernisation of the trans-European railway system .
This is something that we must bear in mind if we really want to achieve the objective and ambitions of the Lisbon European Council .
Therefore , I am going to make an appeal in this regard , with a view to the post-Berlin financial perspectives , that the budgets for rail transport infrastructures be increased , in a plan to create the trans-European rail network , which requires a special effort .
We accept the proposal of the orange box of recorders , which will be strengthened with the LRTMS .
Here also we can accept the majority of the amendments , but not all of them , since some of them are not in line with the principles .
With regard to the report by Mr Savary , who , like all the Members and myself , is one of the friends of the railways , the key element which completes the whole circle is precisely the agency .
I would like to thank Mr Savary for the improvements he contributes through his proposals .
Several amendments deal with the way the agency will have to work with all the countries involved , that is , companies , operators , manufacturers of materials , operators of infrastructures and also users and people working in the rail sector .
We support all these amendments , in particular Amendment No 14 , which we consider to be very positive .
We naturally also support various amendments relating to the institutional organisation of the agency which deal , for example , with the new financial regulation , which did not exist when the proposal was originally made .
However , there are other amendments which cause us difficulties , for example those which would effectively confer decision-making powers on the agency , when we believe that it must only have the capacity to make technical proposals .
Other amendments are superfluous in view of provisions in force or proposals planned for 2003 and we cannot therefore accept them .
I would like to conclude , Mr President , by once again thanking the four rapporteurs and the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism for the work they have done , and I would like to thank this Parliament for its support .
Following my conversations with the Greek Presidency , I am sure that under its mandate , and very possibly at the Council in March , we will have a common position from the Council , and I hope it will allow us , if not at first reading , at least at the second , to reach an agreement on this extremely important package .
The economic capacity and productivity of Europe 's economy is to an ever greater extent dependent on efficient interoperable transport which can rapidly move freight and passengers within Europe and onward to international transport links .
Nevertheless , we have failed to make significant progress on rail transport .
Decisions have chiefly been made at intergovernmental level , with each country trying to defend its own interests , and this has undermined the creation of a European railway market .
This situation is untenable , because we are reaching saturation point in road transport , which is imposing a very heavy burden on our economic and environmental systems . Political will and an appropriate level of funding are needed to tackle this problem .
Furthermore , the problems of rail transport in the peripheral countries , such as Portugal , need to be taken on board in providing solutions at European level if the EU is to function as a whole and to be economically efficient .
So the Council must follow the lead of the European Parliament by showing the required political will and by finding the finance needed to create an internal European market in rail transport .
The next item is the report ( A5-0388 / 2002 ) by Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the harmonisation of certain social legislation relating to road transport ( COM ( 2001 ) 573 - C5-0485 / 2001 - 2001 / 0241 ( COD ) )
Mr President , firstly , as Commissioner responsible for transport , I would like to express my gratitude for being able to present this proposal on the social field in the road transport sector which forms part of the Commission 's policy aimed at increasing road safety and the quality of road transport .
There are social consequences in relation to safety in the road transport sector , and I believe we must deal with them .
The proposal includes measures which will promote the efficient and uniform interpretation and application of the current rules , as stated in the White Paper , which will harmonise even further the competition conditions in the road transport sector .
This proposal repeals and replaces the Regulation of 1985 .
Its aim is to simplify , clarify and update a piece of legislation which was approved 17 years ago .
This modification favours effective application of the rules and in particular the introduction of digital speedometers .
In order to simplify these rules , we have had to reduce the degree of flexibility of the Regulation in force , complex rules on compensation for reduced rest periods have been eliminated and the duration of daily rest has been increased by one hour to 12 hours .
In order to update the rules , exemptions and exceptions have been reduced to the minimum and have been restricted to small and light vehicles , those used for short distances and those which offer a public service .
One of the main factors which has inspired this revision has been the increase over the last 17 years in the number of services offered by private companies .
In order to achieve this more effective application of the rules , the Commission wants to introduce certain new aspects into them , including the tightening of rules on the responsibility of companies and explicit provisions to facilitate the imposition of sanctions in a Member State on drivers who violate the Community rules in another State of the European Union .
Furthermore , an explicit provision is introduced so that all Member States adopt the seizure of vehicles as one of the penalties for failing to comply with the law .
Immobilising vehicles is a very effective way to penalise not only transport companies , but also transport agencies , which increasingly put pressure on drivers , demanding unreasonable and even entirely illegal driving times .
Finally , in order to promote the constant clarification of the rules , a fruitful exchange of experiences and practices in relation to respect for them and active participation by all the Member States in the application of the Regulation , the Commission proposes the creation of an advisory committee made up of national experts from each of the Member States of the Union .
This committee will work in collaboration with the existing European-level committee for dialogue with the sector .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to sum up , this is our proposal , the fundamental intention of which is to improve compliance with the rules currently in force , to clarify their content , to increase responsibility and therefore to improve road safety .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in which Parliament found itself when it was asked to draft this report was not a propitious one , because the Commission had drafted its proposal for this regulation without waiting for either the result of conciliation on the Working Time Directive or the Council decision on the digital tachograph .
Both documents are - as Mrs de Palacio said - obviously closely related , by virtue of their content , to this report .
I should like to thank Mr Andersson , who drafted the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We had a number of preliminary discussions together .
Originally an Enhanced Hughes Procedure was announced , but a few months later this was dispensed with and responsibility for the report was transferred to the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
My thanks also go to the Commission staff , Mr Darmis from the committee administration , many European and national institutions , which are affected by this regulation and have played an active part in the debate , and the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups .
I believe that it was this cooperation that made it possible for a number of important compromise amendments to be adopted in the committee .
The regulation on the table has to take into account and interlink three different aspects .
Firstly , improved road safety ; secondly , social protection of workers , and thirdly , fair conditions of competition on the European Union 's roads .
I believe that a compromise between the groups has been successfully reached and that these three premises have been successfully integrated , although a few Members are proposing to reject the regulation .
I would ask you not to comply with their wishes and instead to give the proposed draft the go-ahead .
What then are the most important points on which a majority of the committee has so far been able to agree ?
One , the regulation applies to all drivers of vehicles carrying goods or passengers by road , regardless of whether they are employed or self-employed .
Two , the regulation also applies to vehicles from third countries when they are in the territory of the European Union .
Three , the Commission is instructed to table this regulation for negotiation with the contracting parties to the AETR .
Four , the concept of the flexible week that has been newly introduced by the Commission has not been confirmed and instead we retain the calendar week as a basis because this is more practical and easier to monitor .
Five , the concept of ' driving time ' has been defined by the committee so as to create greater legal certainty .
Six - this is a very important point and I hope that it will be retained - all courier and express delivery services , which have contributed to a sharp increase in accidents in the transport sector , are included in the regulation .
Seven , the daily rest period has been increased from the proposed 11 hours to 12 hours , although some flexibility is possible as it can be divided into two portions , of nine plus three hours , in a limited number of cases .
Eight , the Member States are obliged to define a common range of sanctions to be applied in cases of infringement of the regulation , so as to harmonise the sanctions .
Nine , the number of proposed checks on compliance with the regulation has been doubled .
Ten , the transport undertakings are obliged to take the steps required to acquaint themselves with the total time worked , even where drivers are employed by several employers .
Eleven , the Member States have to take the necessary measures to ensure that relations between shippers , forwarding agents , main customers and subcontractors are regulated by the adoption of binding contracts which enable compliance with the regulation to be monitored .
Twelve , it was possible to delete some of the very numerous exemptions and also introduce some necessary new ones , such as , for example , for vintage vehicles and vehicles for humanitarian services .
Despite this considerable number of positive changes - and the ones I have mentioned are just a selection - there are also passages which I and a large proportion of my fellow Members are still not happy with .
That is why several amendments have also been tabled in plenary and I would encourage you to support them .
In particular they concern the permitted driving time of 56 hours per week , which is unquestionably too high , although there is also a limit of not more than 90 hours in two weeks .
We are proposing a maximum weekly driving time of 45 hours , which is still considerably more than the number of hours worked in almost any other branch of employment .
Secondly , I hope , like many of my fellow Members , that the number of exemptions in this regulation will be reduced still further .
I know that this regulation does not fulfil all of the wishes of those affected , but I am convinced that the new legislation will increase road safety , improve the social conditions of those concerned , and that it will enable companies to do their job of providing high-quality transport services .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank the rapporteur for his work , but also the other Members for the numerous coordination meetings .
With 300 amendments the work was not easy .
The main issue raised in this context was the necessity of a new regulation .
Opinions differed on the priorities to be addressed , and colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will be taking the floor on this matter again today .
In principle , however , the PPE-DE Group is in favour of amendment .
The aim was to strike a balance between road safety on the one hand and , on the other , flexibility in a profession where even today there are labour shortages right across Europe , perhaps because the conditions are unfavourable , but also because demand is very high .
This was a challenge for us .
There was unanimity - and I should like to underline this here - on at least two points , the first being on checks .
All Members agree that we can adopt the best directives in the world here , but if there are no effective checks on compliance in the Member States then we will not achieve anything .
Less than 1 % , as is the case in certain countries , is not enough .
The 2 % minimum that has been suggested here should certainly be respected .
In addition , a report on implementation should be presented to Parliament at regular intervals , so that we , and also the Member States , can react in good time .
It must not be the case , as the French say , that , ' Celui qui triche gagne le plus d 'argent ' , that is that those who do not comply with these directives make the most money .
That is precisely what we want to prevent : unfair competition at the expense of , amongst other things , safety .
Secondly , there was unanimity on the scope , namely that we should include third countries : we want to create a European transport area and anyone who uses this area must play by the same rules .
We know that for various reasons companies move their headquarters to third countries , not only for economic reasons , but for other reasons too .
That is why it is important over time for us to create this European transport area .
We wanted to build in flexibility .
Exemptions have been discussed and obviously I do not want to mention all of them .
We do however continue to attach importance to short-distance drivers and taxi drivers being excluded , although of course we also support exemptions in certain areas , such as for farmers , who do seasonal work , and for breakdown services .
The concept of safety should not mean that the regulation imposes restrictions on the people who are actually responsible for safety .
One area where we are still undecided is courier services .
Some think that they should be in , while others believe that the numerous accidents are not related to rest periods and driving times but are rather a question of speed .
We have also introduced flexibility to the breaks .
We did not just want weekends of between 24 and 45 hours , but also 36 hours .
We also want to take account of those countries that are not in central Europe , because tomorrow , with enlargement , we have to bear in mind that the centre is going to shift and that it is not only going to be rest periods and driving times that will determine whether a haulage business is efficient or not .
We do not call into question the 12-hour nightly rest period either , with the related flexibility of nine plus three hours .
This also applies to the daily rest periods and the short breaks .
We wanted a certain degree of flexibility here , to take account on the one hand of each driver 's work rhythm but on the other of the needs inherent in the job .
Safety was the other aspect that needed to be brought into the equation .
Rest periods , daily rest periods and weekend rest periods are issues of safety and it is not unknown for overtired drivers to be involved in accidents .
Nevertheless , we should not exaggerate this either .
Some statistics show the risk to be very high .
Overall we work on the basis of realistic statistics showing that this is the case for around 15 % of serious road traffic accidents .
This is not about singling out the roads yet again for wholesale condemnation .
The initiative being taken here by the Commission and Parliament will , I believe , improve safety .
As far as infringements are concerned , as we see it taking vehicles out of service is the best approach .
This is not at odds with the legislation in the various countries and only one thing is required , namely that the vehicle should be taken out of service until the failure is corrected .
In short , I would say that by adopting the stricter rules in this regulation , and by creating new conditions , we can have a positive economic impact on this sector .
This will , however , do nothing to change the fact that in the future road transport will continue to be one of the major players in transport as a whole .
I am referring here to the discussions that we had earlier .
This does not in any way mean that if we want to bring about a modal shift it can only be done by adopting legislation on road transport . Instead this must go hand in hand with clear initiatives in the other transport sectors .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , in the German press preview there was a headline that is very apt for this dossier .
It read : fresh goods need fresh drivers .
It is actually the case that we are usually more concerned with the economy and competition , and that all too often the issue of safety and the life and health of the public is given short shrift .
We recently experienced the Prestige disaster .
When there is an accident at sea or in the air the public in Europe is outraged , but the daily deaths on our roads are something that we have obviously become accustomed to .
We should not become accustomed to them , however , because there are - as the statistics show - two main causes of accidents on our roads .
The first is HGVs with overtired drivers , who are at the wheel for far too long , and the second , increasingly , is the express services , the so-called sprinter class , which represent the greatest potential for danger on our roads and motorways .
That is why it is absolutely crucial for us to include these express services , this sprinter class , in this regulation .
In the committee we arrived at a consensus on a series of sensible rules for driving times and rest periods that are realistic and geared to the needs of both drivers and companies .
I think it is sensible , if at all possible , for drivers to spend their weekly rest periods at home , where they live , with their families .
It is also sensible , if they are nearly at a ferry and can spend their rest time there , for the driving times and rest times to allow them to reach that ferry .
Obviously it is not sensible to spend a rest time in a travelling vehicle , and we have therefore stated this in the text .
As Mr Grosch has already said , we can adopt as many wonderful , detailed , even obsessively detailed , rules as we like , but if they cannot be enforced then they are just words .
For me , in any case , this is also one of the most important points .
At present we have an average inspection rate of barely 1 % and it is actually only possible to carry out real inspections , real checks , if both the roadside check on what the vehicle is doing and the check on the undertaking are done in tandem .
However , practice in the Member States of the Community is very variable and it is for this reason , Commissioner , that the transitional period , between our bidding farewell to the traditional tachograph and introducing the digital tachograph , has to be as short as possible , so that we can inspect all of the HGVs in the Community by means of a digital tachograph as soon as possible .
The fact that this allows a period of 28 days to be monitored in a roadside check will make a huge contribution to improving safety on Europe 's roads .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Helmut Markov , who has done a good job , was very willing to compromise and united us behind his proposals , and also the other Members who were shadow rapporteurs for this dossier .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Markov , for drawing up this report .
He has done a thorough job and , furthermore , listened to those of us who have a different opinion with regard to this issue .
Road safety is an important matter .
From the point of view of the transport sector it is also essential to improve the social status of drivers and the esteem they are held in .
The Commission proposal , however , was badly drafted .
In the committee debate we were able to improve the proposal , although , in the opinion of our group , the end result is still not acceptable .
The proposal would increase inflexibility and lead to practices that would be difficult to monitor and which would cause the sector to incur additional costs . Furthermore , natural breaks at work cannot be taken advantage of .
The new regulation will not improve road safety either .
Our group is proposing that we reject the Commission proposal and ask the Commission to carry out a thorough study of the need to change current rest periods , taking digital tachographs into account .
We have also put forward important proposals for improvements in case the rejection proposal is blocked .
The basic idea behind them is that the provisions on rest periods in the current regulation are adequate provided that they are complied with and monitored effectively .
More effective monitoring will lead to better results than if the provisions are merely made more stringent on paper .
Mr President , Mr Markov has produced a sterling piece of work .
His report examines rules that will simplify a very complicated area .
Driving is one of the hardest and most pressurised jobs there is .
The seat behind the wheel in buses and lorries is a back-breaking place of work .
The simple new rules proposed by Mr Markov would ease the burden of work .
It is to be applauded that Parliament can play a part in simplifying the rules .
Assaults are one of the major problems encountered by drivers when they take rest breaks on European motorways .
It is more urgent than ever to cooperate on preventing the increasing violence on our motorways .
Finally , I wish to draw attention to increased safety on motorways .
This is relevant not only to professional drivers but to all of us who drive on European roads .
All too often , we have seen accidents caused by tired drivers .
The simple new rules would mean that no one could be in any doubt as to when and for how long drivers were required to take rest breaks .
It would be easier for the police to monitor that the rules were being complied with .
I very much hope that the police would also increase the level of checks they made .
I must also say that I am very surprised that the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is giving more consideration to the cost of equipping lorries than to the deaths of 40 000 people each year on European highways .
What the ELDR Group is displaying here is penny-pinching at its worst .
They should be ashamed of themselves .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if we adopt the Markov report today then this new legislation will not only interest those directly involved in the transport sector but millions of people in Europe , because this is also about road safety .
Safety in road freight transport concerns everyone who lives in the EU , because - and the statistics are clear about this - overtiredness at the wheel kills !
A study by the European Safety Council shows that more than 50 % of drivers admit that they have fallen asleep at the wheel at least once in their driving careers so far .
What then is to be done ?
We Greens think that the working times in this sector , the driving times , need to be reduced .
We have tabled an amendment stating that they should be reduced to 80 hours every two weeks with a maximum of 45 to 48 hours in any one week .
What we have at the moment is 56 hours per week .
That is only the driving time .
On top of that there is loading and unloading .
There is no other job in industry that presents such a high risk for which we permit such long working hours .
In addition , systematic inspections need to be introduced .
As Mr Piecyk mentioned , when the regulation on the digital tachograph is implemented , we must exert pressure on all of the national governments to introduce checks on undertakings , the company card .
If you talk to police officers they will tell you that this company card is the only way of effecting systematic checks on undertakings .
Obviously we will have to ensure that this European legislation is respected in the competent overarching bodies , for example in the requirements for CEMT licences .
I have raised this with Mrs Isabelle Durant , who is currently chairing CEMT , so that this issue is put on the agenda of the CEMT ministerial meeting of 21 and 22 April .
Mr President , Commissioner , opinions on this harmonisation proposal differ sharply .
Shippers in particular say that the existing regulation is operating satisfactorily .
Changes would have far-reaching consequences for the sector .
On the other hand , plenty of reports are appearing which show that the provisions of the regulation are being completely disregarded .
On the basis of the first point of view , therefore , no changes are needed , although they are needed on the basis of the second .
I think that both interpretations are in some sense correct .
In the final analysis there is not so much intrinsically wrong with the regulation .
There is , however , something wrong with the way in which Member States interpret and apply the regulation .
Partly as a result of limited and inadequate opportunities for control , contraventions of the regulation are not uncommon , with all the consequences this has for road safety , competitive conditions and the viability of this sector .
In order to improve the situation , I believe that intervention in the existing regulation is inevitable .
Two starting points are crucial here .
Firstly , most of the current provisions can remain intact .
Only a few provisions have proved to be open to multiple interpretations .
A clear definition must be found for these elements .
I therefore support most of the amendments aimed at reinstating the original text .
I also support those amendments that clarify the existing ambiguities , like the separate rest periods .
Secondly , we must tighten the provisions in respect of control and international coordination .
Different interpretations of the regulation by national regulatory authorities obstruct the creation of a level playing field for competition in the European Union .
We therefore support the amendments that aim to achieve qualitative and quantitative improvement of the controls .
This also applies to amendments that are intended to achieve international harmonisation amongst regulatory authorities .
In short , the emphasis must lie on simple , enforceable provisions , adequate controls and identical assessment standards by regulatory authorities .
We believe that the report provides a good starting point for this .
My thanks to the rapporteur for his work .
Mr President , I would like to focus my contribution to this debate on the essence of what the proposal means to people in my constituency .
This report , and the original proposal behind it , would have grave implications for business and individuals alike .
Even though several important derogations were won in committee , the concept of the proposal remains impractical , untenable and unenforceable .
This is why , along with a number of colleagues , I have submitted an amendment which would have the Commission proposal rejected in its entirety .
Indeed it seems to me that recent times have seen the transport industry being hit hard by piece after piece of excessive legislation . The by-word seems to be : if it moves , regulate it .
I have to justify to my constituents the ethics of a report which originally sought to bind road rescue services and public utility vehicles - all absolutely essential to society - to strict new working hours .
These requirements about working time prevent professionals from doing their job efficiently by imposing strict terms on when breaks have to be taken .
Once again we see Europe hamstringing business rather than liberating it .
The introduction of a common range of penalties in particular is worrying .
This clearly gives licence to interfere in matters of national sovereignty and national autonomy .
Indeed the subsidiarity and extraterritoriality issues apparent in this report are clear examples of the report itself being over-extended .
British Conservatives by their very nature oppose such restrictive legislation being piled on business .
We believe that this particular piece of legislation is unnecessary , highly excessive and has little relevance to the needs of business and employees alike .
It takes no account of the need for flexibility in key areas of transport , pays scant regard to the consumer and seems contemptuous of the need for Europe 's industry to remain competitive , a cornerstone of the Lisbon Declaration .
I therefore have no hesitation in urging this House to support our key amendment to reject the proposal in its entirety .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the plenum we value your presence in the debates of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
The fundamental axis of this report is road safety .
As some honourable Members have said , lack of safety leads to 40 000 deaths and 1 750 000 injuries per year in the European Union .
And there is great consensus on the part of all the groups with regard to the need to achieve the objective of safety .
But here the differences begin , and we are producing proposals which will give the Council work , because the Council will have to take a position on many points on which in this House we are naturally not going to achieve unanimity .
Specifically , we are talking about one of the factors of safety .
It is true that there are technological factors , there are infrastructure factors , there are many agents involved in the question of safety or lack of safety , but I believe we must focus on the essential factor , the human factor , the driver in this case .
On the basis of Mr Markov 's proposals , and with his cooperation , the report has developed , leading to greater flexibility for the driver , because it is the driver who is aware of levels of tiredness at any given moment and it must be they who call the shots in terms of rests and the distribution of working time .
There is a gremlin which creeps into all these debates and that is that sometimes this flexibility can be used by the transport company to counter the driver 's capacity to decide .
If this were the case , the system of controls on companies would have to be extremely strict , since we are talking about risking lives , in particular that of the drivers themselves .
We are also talking about a very important European small or medium-sized enterprise , the transport enterprise , which we must promote and whose competitiveness we must defend .
And we are talking about a transport problem in a Europe which is not equal , a Europe which has peripheral areas for which transport has an importance which is different to that of central areas .
I believe that this report has important objectives , but we must continue to work on it until we reach a consensus .
Mr President , I too think it good that we obtain clearer rules and that the regulation be revised in such a way as to take account of the changes that have occurred in the transport sector over the last 15 years .
I think it important , however , that , in connection with regulating the safety of road transport , we obtain a clear definition of the rules relating to driving time and rest periods , viewed partly in relation to features supplementary to these rules , such as the rules governing drivers ' working time , as well as checks that the rules governing driving time and rest periods are being complied with .
My country 's geographical situation is such that it is particularly important for us that transport be efficient at the same time as being safe .
It is therefore important that the concept of driving time be defined as the period during which the vehicle 's wheels are turning and that there be no confusion with the rules governing drivers ' working time .
I want to warn against the proposals to change the present rules so as to extend rest periods because such changes could entail major expenditure without providing drivers with greater safety or better conditions .
That is because the quality of a rest is not necessarily directly proportional to its length , and it is also important that drivers themselves be able to organise their rest periods and choose where they are going to rest .
Everyone may agree that there are problems with the safety of transport on our highways , but that is not necessarily always because of unduly lax rules but , rather , because of inadequate checks and insufficient efforts to ensure that the rules are being complied with in practice .
That is something we must do something about .
I should like to add that I very much agree with my fellow MEP , Mr Blak , that we must also look at another problem for drivers .
It is important that they be safer when they take their breaks .
It is disgraceful that drivers should live in fear of assault and robbery .
The Council has accepted that countries must make efforts in this area , and I am looking forward to seeing some practical initiatives soon .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Regulation ( EC ) No 3820 / 85 , which is currently being replaced , deals with problems on roads , safety and all sorts of social problems .
We all know that we have had , and still are having , very great problems supervising and enforcing this .
All sorts of special cases such as the Willy Betz formula , the Kralowetz affair , etc . , and most particularly the regular occurrence of road accidents with all the consequences of these make it clear that we really have our work cut out .
I would like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Markov and Mr Andersson , for their constructive collaboration on this work .
It will be clear that we are very much in favour of bringing this proposal into line with the proposal about the organisation of working hours , about which we had such intensive arguments in this Parliament not so very long ago .
Of course , this also applies to the reinstatement of a wide range of definitions so that they are not open to multiple interpretations .
We do not need flexible weeks ; difficult definitions of driving times must be replaced ; opting-out clauses must be restricted ; and enforcement must be intensified .
I would , however , particularly like to focus attention on a couple of amendments which we are in favour of .
Firstly , Amendment No 90 on the reduction of the 90-hour driving time over two weeks to 80 hours .
We think that this is an important safety issue .
Secondly , the amendment concerning improving checks by linking the digital tachograph directive to this regulation .
Finally , we have a joint amendment from a number of parties about reducing the shortened daily rest periods of not less than 10 and not more than 12 hours , for which I request your attention .
Mr President , in this legislation I detect a worrying and sinister extension of the scope of Community power .
It seems to me that the Commission is no longer content just to set harmonised standards ; it is now moving firmly into setting standards and priorities for enforcement .
Within the narrow confines of this legislation , ensuring standards for adequate enforcement certainly has its own internal logic , but there is more to it than meets the eye .
Road transport enforcement is carried out by a variety of agencies , most of which have multiple responsibilities and duties .
In this instance , the main burden will fall on police forces whose duties also extend to dealing with a wide range of criminal matters outside the scope of this regulation and the scope of Community law .
With resources painfully limited , the decisions on how these resources should be employed should be local decisions , based on an assessment of the needs of the local communities and their different patterns .
In this context , where the officers who deal with transport matters also deal with crime , such as burglary and other accident prevention , Community requirements in this specific area will almost certainly lead to a distortion of priorities , dictated not by local needs but by a supranational authority which has neither knowledge nor understanding of local conditions .
As a result , national authorities , in their haste to conform with the requirements of the Commission in this area , will be neglecting other duties which are actually far more important .
It is not unrealistic , therefore , to suggest that burglars will be able to roam free because police management , under pressure from national authorities , is more concerned with satisfying Community requirements .
This is simply not acceptable .
I will therefore be voting against this regulation .
I would normally thank the Commission for a proposal it sends to Parliament , but this time I am not so grateful .
I have objections to the proposal concerning driving times and rest periods in road transport in the form in which it was originally sent to Parliament by the Commission .
The amendment by Mr Bradbourn , myself and a large number of fellow MEPs is therefore intended as a signal to the European Commission to stop using this old method of legislating .
It is time we became aware of the bureaucracy we are causing .
Making new regulations does not mean that they will be enforced any better than the old regulations , which were satisfactory but were not enforced either .
Many of the new regulations cannot be monitored at all .
Other regulations are only being amended on account of the technology used for monitoring , which had worked well for 17 years .
An example of legislation that cannot be monitored and is therefore poor is the new attempt to tell self-employed contractors how long they may work .
My colleague Mathieu Grosch has improved the proposal a great deal , and it will be thanks to him that there will in fact be a directive .
The question remains , however : what possessed the Commission to come up with such poor legislation in the first place ?
The last thing the sector needs is more new regulations .
What it does need is well -thought through , intelligent and harmonised monitoring that also creates a climate for honest competition , monitoring that will apply equally to the 15 , soon to be 25 , Member States .
I know that the European Commission supports attempts to create more extensive and more intelligent monitoring of freight traffic .
I also know , however , that cooperation often depends on personal input and sympathies and therefore still takes place on a relatively informal basis .
This difficult process must also be given more political support , and it is a pity that business must sacrifice flexibility for the sake of regulation , flexibility being the keyword in the sector .
The sector has always managed to make its way through the increasingly stringent requirements and the difficult market with great creativity , but when I look at the profit figures , I fear that even this creativity will miss the mark .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank you for your constructive comments on our proposal and say , in order to dispel any doubts , that this is not a social policy proposal .
That would be the responsibility of Mrs Diamantopoulou rather than me .
That is not my competence .
I am talking about road safety .
That is the objective of this proposal .
If the social aspect were the primary objective , we would have to consider other issues .
I am talking about safety on our roads in the transport sector and , of course , distortions of competition .
In view of the large number of amendments proposed , I will present a list in writing to the Secretariat of Parliament indicating the Commission 's specific position on each of them .
I would like to make a few general comments on the most important issues which have been raised here today , however .
Firstly , the adoption of the sectoral directive on types of work , which lays down a method for weekly calculation , makes it necessary to adapt our Regulation , above all the provisions relating to working and rest times .
The Commission therefore accepts the amendments - some with modifications to the wording - which clarify the text in this respect .
We also accept those amendments - some reworded - which call for improvements in the control and application of the regulations .
We will incorporate these suggestions into the proposal on road controls which we will present soon , bearing in mind that this is a different proposal - and this is my response to one of the speakers who referred earlier to this aspect .
We also accept the amendments which call for compatibility between the rules of the European Union and those of third countries and which call for the inclusion of smaller international transport vehicles in the legislation , especially those which provide courier services , as well as all those amendments which request a degree of flexibility in terms of permitting all existing practices which do not have a negative effect on the application of the Regulation .
Mr President , we cannot accept the arguments that this proposal is not necessary , however .
Seventeen years have passed since the original Regulation entered into force and both the nature of the market and European realities and technological developments , specifically the digital speedometer , have developed and changed considerably .
The changes therefore have to be incorporated .
The Commission will ensure a balance between flexibility and the control of application .
We cannot accept those amendments which ask for more controls and imply an excessive increase in administrative burdens .
And with regard to the exceptions and derogations , the Commission accepts those which are based on concrete realities , but not the generic ones which could be used to evade the rules .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Markov , for this wonderful work , since he has had to deal with a real sea of amendments , but I believe that in the end he has been able to propose a balanced report which the Commission generally agrees with .
Thank you , Commissioner de Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
In some parts of the European Union , such as the rural and island areas of Scotland , there is simply no alternative to road transport for the distribution of goods or passengers .
For that reason , excessively restricted working hours for lorry and coach drivers would add to the difficulties already faced by residents and businesses , bringing further increases in costs of essential goods and services .
I will therefore vote against amendments which seek to apply even greater reductions in driving time than contained in the Commission 's proposal .
If EU regulations are to be seen as relevant , due account must be taken of the realities facing rural and island communities .
I hope that the final proposal in relation to drivers ' working hours will recognise that some areas , such as the Highlands and Islands of Scotland , require a flexible approach to be taken and I hope that the Council and Commission will agree .
The next item is the vote .
Report ( A5-0432 / 2002 ) by Marianne Thyssen , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directives 78 / 660 / EEC , 83 / 349 / EEC and 91 / 674 / EEC on the annual and consolidated accounts of certain types of companies and insurance undertakings ( COM ( 2002 ) 259 / 2 - C5-0233 / 2002 - 2002 / 0112 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0439 / 2002 ) by Nicholas Clegg , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation concerning protection against subsidisation and unfair pricing practices in the supply of airline services from countries not members of the European Community ( COM ( 2002 ) 110 - C5-0133 / 2002 - 2002 / 0067 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0433 / 2002 ) by Marie-Arlette Carlotti , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Commission communication on the annual report on humanitarian aid 2000 ( COM ( 2001 ) 307 - C5-0397 / 2001 - 2001 / 2155 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0417 / 2002 ) by Georg Jarzembowski , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council directive 91 / 440 / EEC on the development of the Community 's railways ( COM ( 2002 ) 25 - C5-0038 / 2002 - 2002 / 0025 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0424 / 2002 ) by Dirk Sterckx , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on safety on the Community 's railways and amending Council Directive 95 / 18 / EC on the licensing of railway undertakings and Directive 2001 / 14 / EC on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure and safety certification ( COM ( 2002 ) 21 - C5-0039 / 2002 - 2002 / 0022 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0418 / 2002 ) by Sylviane Ainardi , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 96 / 48 / EC and Directive 2001 / 16 / EC on the interoperability of the trans-European rail system ( COM ( 2002 ) 22 - C5-0045 / 2002 - 2002 / 0023 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , I think we can make things easier for ourselves .
My group opposes the oral amendments .
I am sorry , but having discussed these reports in detail in the committee and voted on them as a package , it is simply out of the question to untie that package by making changes at this stage .
That is why my group opposes all oral amendments to the Ainardi report .
In order to follow the procedures correctly , if 32 Members object when we come to the vote there cannot be an oral amendment .
When we reach the relevant points in the vote , the House can indicate its preference .

Before the votes on the Amendments to Article 1 point 4 , Article 2 point 5 , recital 6 and recital 8 , the President established that more than 32 Members objected to the oral amendments .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0441 / 2002 ) by Gilles Savary , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on establishing a European Railway Agency ( COM ( 2002 ) 23 - C5-0046 / 2002 - 2002 / 0024 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0388 / 2002 ) by Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the harmonisation of certain social legislation relating to road transport ( COM ( 2001 ) 573 - C5-0485 / 2001 - 2001 / 0241 ( COD ) )
Before the vote on Amendment No 91 :
Mr President , I just wanted to point out that Amendments Nos 45 and 78 , both of which have been adopted , are contradictory .
We actually intended to request a separate vote yesterday , but that all fell through .
I should therefore like to inform the administration that both amendments need to be reformulated .
Mr President , I would like to question the order decided upon for the votes . In my opinion , Amendment No 9 is the amendment which is furthest from the text adopted in committee .
However , it is for the President to decide .
Mr President , Amendment No 9 is the furthest from the committee 's paragraph , but if the rapporteur is of a contrary opinion , I bow to his superior experience .
Given the level of entente , I shall also bow to that experience .
Mr President , I indicated beforehand that I wished to raise a point of order before the vote on Amendment No 24 .
I refer to Rule 139 ( 6 ) of the Rules of Procedure , which states that amendments have to be distributed and translated .
I have various language versions in front of me , none of which contains this particular amendment , Amendment No 24 .
In addition , a number of Members , from both the conservative and Social Democratic groups , were under the impression that this vote would not be taking place until tomorrow .
I would therefore firstly move that the vote should not take place .
Insofar as it is possible for me to assess the situation as one of the proposers of the original right to bring cases before the court , I do not think that a proper decision can be made if these amendments are put to the vote first and not Mr Duff 's amendment .
In any case , Members are free to exercise their independent judgment .
I refer here to Rule 2 of the Rules of Procedure .
Give us an opportunity actually to vote on the right to bring cases before the court , that is , on the original wording of Paragraph 8 .
Just to clarify matters for the House , Mrs Berès , you have requested that the author withdraw his amendment .
Mr President , I do not agree with the last observation by Mrs Berès .
It is not a question of having an amendment passed .
It is a question of reflecting , in relation to a text which is important in terms of the Convention , on something which is of great importance to this Parliament , which is the legitimacy , the double legitimacy , of the Union .
Mr Tsatsos and I , in our report on the Treaty of Amsterdam , speak of the double legitimacy of States and peoples .
The concept of the people seems to us to be an archaic one .
We want to talk of citizens , because we want to bring Europe closer to the citizens .
I am not therefore withdrawing my amendment and I would ask that it be put to the vote .
And I would also ask the Socialist Group to take on board that this is truly the modern way to act and not the old-fashioned one .
Air travel has become cheaper and cheaper over the last few decades .
In addition to the traditional national air carriers , a number of other airlines have entered the arena offering conspicuously cheap rates .
Some of these companies come from outside the EU .
What is now being proposed is aimed at these companies from outside the EU .
They are often based in countries in the developing world or countries in the former Soviet Union .
These are poor countries that think that they can make money as low-cost competitors in the European market .
For example , the Brazilian airline Varig flies people very cheaply between Amsterdam and Paris .
We need to act on this , not least because these companies make unnecessary amounts of noise and apply less stringent safety standards .
Barring these companies , however , is only part of the solution .
The low-cost airlines based inside the EU , like Ryanair , Easyjet , Virgin and Germanwings have been ignored .
The freedom from taxation enjoyed by the airlines , which gives them an unfair competitive advantage over international rail travel , likewise remains in place .
The proposals on which we are voting today are therefore a half-measure that inflicts the pain one-sidedly on other countries .
I am voting in favour of this proposal , but I think that it is one-sided and inadequate .
When will we see the essential other part that puts an end to the risks associated with the low-cost airlines ?
In principle , I regard the Commission 's proposal for a regulation as something to be welcomed .
Most of Parliament 's amendments complement it well , but I regard the following points as problematic in view of current Community rules and practices :
a new and higher standard through substituting ' significant material injury ' for ' material injury ' in the area of goods , resulting in uncertainty due to the new definition , as well as the potential weakening of our negotiating position on this point at the Doha follow-up negotiations , and discrimination in favour of the service sector to the detriment of the manufacturing sector ( Amendments Nos 9 , 25 , 26 , 38 ) ;
the lack of any scope for legal action afforded to ' allied enterprises ' , these being defined by the existence of an alliance agreement , which , in practice , because of the worldwide network of alliances , results in marked reduction in the scope for legal action ( Amendment No 39 ) ;
the need for Amendment No 60 to be clarified to ascertain whether it is to be read as meaning that a decision by the Commission shall be regarded as confirmed if no agreement on it can be reached in Council .
In any case , Amendment No 62 ( qualified majority in the Council ) sets a higher standard for the imposition of measures in the area of services than in that of goods .
When determining where the Community interest lies , there is a departure from the original assumption that the imposition of measures is in principle in the Community interest , unless the opposite is established to be the case , in the sense that measures are imposed only when their application is in the Community interest .
I hope that these points can be examined closely during the remainder of the proceedings .
I voted in favour of this report concerning the Commission communication on the annual report on humanitarian aid in 2000-2001 , because I agree with the rapporteur 's diagnosis of the situation and also with many of her proposals .
As the draftsman of the opinion of the AFET Committee says : ' the key objective of EU humanitarian action is to respond promptly and efficiently to the needs of the victims of humanitarian crises , in order to alleviate their suffering in a spirit of human solidarity .
It goes without saying that political considerations have no place in such an area ' .
I attach particular importance to the rapporteur 's warning that there has been a downward trend in the amount of emergency humanitarian aid , ' aid making it possible immediately to save lives ' .
I consider it vital , in order to counter this trend , and as has indeed already been proposed , to strengthen action under ECHO , and to develop awareness-raising campaigns for the citizens of the European Union , so as to bring these actions closer to the public , and of course to reverse the negative trend identified in the budget .
One of our priorities should be to improve coordination of humanitarian aid and of aid providers so as to avoid the kind of situation that recently occurred in Angola when aid was ' guaranteed ' but was very slow in coming through on the ground .
Our response mechanisms need to be made far more flexible .
Mr President , I am sleeping very well at the moment and I have had a lot of dreams .
In one of them , at the Palais de l 'Europe casino - which does not really exist but is there in my dreams - four players were sitting at the table : Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Sterckx , Mrs Ainardi and Mr Savary .
It was an animated , very convivial game .
Mr Jarzembowski , who was dressed as a guard , was talking to the other players and said : ' The railways must be developed ! '
He was illustrating his report , pleading zealously and astutely the cause of the development of the railways in Europe .
He spoke so eloquently that he convinced me to vote for his report .
I will tell you what the other players were saying when their turn comes .
With this rail package the European Commission is proposing a new version of Directive 91 / 440 , which seeks to increase the liberalisation of rail services , in particular for freight .
The amendments of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism broadened its scope to include the liberalisation of passenger services as well .
I will vote against both these measures .
We should ask why we are speeding up the liberalisation process when the 1991 directive has only just been revised .
We should ask why we are reconsidering an agreement , a balanced agreement , reached with some difficulty just over a year ago . The Member States have not even finished the transposition of the revised directive of 2001 .
This means that we are moving ahead with liberalisation , with no going back , before we have even assessed the effects of the beginning of the process .
It is simplistic to assert that the main reason why rail has become less competitive than road transport for freight is because the sector has not been liberalised .
We did not have to liberalise rail passenger services to achieve cooperation between national operators in the case of Thalys .
What works for passenger services could be applied to and developed for freight services .
The will must be there though , and European and national investment at the ready .
Let us go for rail rather than for lorries !
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
We are conscious that the Commission 's second railway package , and in particular the proposal for a directive on the development of the Community 's railways , which is the subject of the Jarzembowski report , touches on important long-standing issues in various Member States , including my own - Portugal .
Although it is not long since the previous package was adopted - agreement with the Council was only reached in 2001 - the Commission 's current proposal attempts to go somewhat further with measures designed to liberalise this sector , particularly in the field of freight transport , coupled with measures to strengthen safety standards governing this mode of transport .
We believe we should support the greater liberalisation proposed by the Commission , while rejecting the amendments establishing a specific timetable for the total opening of the market in rail passenger and freight transport .
That is why we were also unable to give our support to Amendment No 13 tabled by Mr Miranda , because this amendment reflects a rigid approach to the need to revitalise a mode of transport that is environmentally clean and which has a contribution to make in the area of freight transport to reducing congestion in European road transport , but which requires substantial financial investment that only opening up the market can make viable .
The proposals for a second railway package set in motion important initiatives towards strengthening Europe 's railway system .
Opening rail freight services within Member States , and accelerating the process of opening up the international ones , represent a significant step towards deregulating the railway sector .
The objectives set by the White Paper for European transport policy up to 2010 , as well as the constantly increasing volume of traffic on Europe 's roads , mean that absolute priority must be accorded to transferring goods traffic from road to rail .
Diverting the flow of European freight traffic can succeed in the long term only if railways are high-performing and competitive .
The planned harmonisation of the European railway network is therefore to be welcomed , provided that a maximum of safety in rail travel can be guaranteed .
In the same dream , Mr President , still at the Palais de l 'Europe casino , another player at the table was Mr Sterckx .
Now , Mr Sterckx was dressed as a cyclist .
Why was that ?
Who knows !
Probably the fact that the names Merckx and Sterckx rhyme had made me imagine him to be a cyclist , and a very fast cyclist at that , given that Eddy Merckx won all his races , as we all remember well .
Indeed , Mr Sterckx was talking to the others and illustrating his report , stressing the importance of high speed in the railways in Europe and , in particular , the need for high-speed trains to contain especially comfortable accommodation for pensioners .
Listening to this , I could only vote for Mr Sterckx ' excellent report the next morning , as , indeed , I have done .
I voted for this report because I too believe that if we are to make the Community 's railway system safer and raise the standard of international rail services , we need to encourage a progressive move towards a system of common safety standards in the Member States .
I am delighted to see what excellent safety indicators the European railway system has . This only goes to underscore the urgent need to increase the use of rail transport and to reduce the use of road transport , especially heavy goods vehicles , which has a poorer safety record .
The report before us describes a package for the liberalisation of railway services , which is intended to take place by 2008 . In this respect , however , it is important to learn from the British experience over recent years , which indicates that the public authorities need to carry on supervising and checking compliance with rail safety regulations , particularly as regards infrastructure maintenance .
I have also been looking at some of the suggestions emanating from the relevant committee as regards the introduction of a safety certificate for train operating companies and for those responsible for infrastructure management .
It also suggested appropriate training leading to a qualification for railway staff , together with access to all information on safety for all new rail companies , and the adoption of a single working language for all international transport , as in the world of aviation .
Mr President , Mrs Ainardi was also playing at the Palais de l 'Europe casino in my dream - a game of poker in this case - with the other rapporteurs on the European railways .
She was extremely elegant and beautiful and surrounded by many young admirers , but when it came to her turn to play , she always said , ' Pass ' .
When the other players asked her why , she replied : ' We must avoid breaks in our game , just as , at Europe 's borders , we must avoid breaks between railway networks .
See how much less time the game takes if there are no breaks .
Of course , therefore , I could not fail to vote for the Ainardi report .



Mr President , Mr Savary was also playing at the Palais de l 'Europe casino with Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Sterckx , and Mrs Ainardi , but he was wearing a fireman 's uniform in my dream and was saying to the others : ' I am wearing a fireman 's uniform for two reasons : firstly because , with my report , I am rushing to the aid of rail passengers , who must have safe railways , and secondly , because who is better qualified than I am to ensure safe railways ?
My name is Savary , as derived from the words ' safe ' and ' save ' .
I am in the best position to make the railways safe !
Moreover , I saw from his report that this is , indeed , the case , and I therefore decided to vote for Mr Savary 's report on the safety , specifically , of rail transport .
In order to guarantee the safety , quality and efficiency of transport on our continent - including both passenger transport and freight - we need to give absolute priority , once and for all , to transport and in particular to rail transport , not to mention short sea shipping and maritime cabotage .
I therefore think that the idea of setting up a European Railways Agency is a very important one ; this agency would work with the Commission to promote greater cooperation and coordination between the various stakeholders involved in rail policy and the operability of the railway system , whilst also making an ongoing contribution to the debate through its recommendations and opinions .
If proper publicity is given to its remit as regards consultation , monitoring and submitting proposals , this will result in ever greater awareness , on the part of both the Member States and the European public , of the enormous advantages of this mode of transport , especially as compared with the increasing problems and dangers associated with road transport .
Still on this subject , I would like to mention the White Paper European transport policy for 2010 : time to decide which refers in various places to the need to reverse the trend away from rail and towards road transport .
I therefore hope that this will represent a further step towards the objective of creating a genuine internal market in rail services which will above all make it possible to effectively reduce the volume of traffic on our roads , and especially the enormous volume of freight transported by heavy goods vehicles .
This , Mr President , is a revolutionary proposal , the proposal advanced by myself and the Pensioners ' Party , and I therefore hope that it will meet with great attention from all the many , esteemed Members of the European Parliament here today .
The Markov report organises , inter alia , the working hours and rest periods of drivers engaged in the carriage of goods and passengers by road .
Well then , my proposal is as follows .
Why do we not organise pension years in the same way as we regulate the daily working hours : ten years of work and then five years of pension , then another ten years of work and five years of pension , then another ten years of work and five of pension ?
In this way , I am sure we could start to enjoy our pensions between the ages of 25 and 30 , for example , from 35 to 40 and so on .
My figures might not be exact but I believe the concept is clear .
I propose that we decide to start to draw on our pensions and have a rest from work not when have grown old but at intervals throughout our working lives , as I have endeavoured to illustrate .
Mr President , when I read yesterday 's newspapers from Luxembourg , I was amazed at the fuss created by the Greens , who have made themselves out to be the prime movers behind the revision of the Regulation harmonising certain social security provisions in the area of road transport .
If our rapporteur had read these articles , he would surely also be astonished , as , out of the 269 amendments with which the committee had to get to grips , a mere 16 originated from the Greens , and - thank God - 14 of those were voted out .
It takes a certain kind of sheer nerve to muster the whole of Luxembourg 's press in order to give them to believe that this report would bear the stamp of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , whereas it in fact saw the light of day in consequence of an agreement between the rapporteur and the three largest groups in this House .
Today , I have voted against the amendment on driving times that the Greens have put before us , my reason being that it does not guarantee the necessary flexibility and would do the drivers a disservice .
A solution as inflexible as this one would in fact not permit those who have to drive at a great distance from their base to apportion their rest periods in such a way as to allow them to spend more time with their families and friends .
I welcome the opportunity given to us at first reading to make a sensible contribution to a regulation on social provision that is clearer , safer , and more controllable .
I hope that , from 2004 , the digital tachograph will prevent black sheep from finding new boltholes !
.
( FR ) First of all I would like to express my satisfaction with the report by Mr Markov supporting the Commission proposal of October 2001 for a new regulation on road transport .
This report includes in particular the improvements made by the new regulation to the current situation , with the dual objective of increasing road safety and improving working conditions for drivers .
Measures such as removing the possibility of dividing breaks , extending scope , increasing penalties for infringing the regulation , which are measures that appeared in the Commission proposal and are reiterated in the report , represent important milestones .
The Markov report reinforces the regulation further , for example , by opposing the creation of a flexible week through the introduction of a limit on working time , by setting a fixed driving time or encouraging the participation of the social partners .
I would particularly like to highlight the importance of the measure aimed at extending the scope of the regulation to all lorry drivers operating within European territory , whether or not they are EU nationals .
This measure might consequently considerably reduce social dumping while encouraging third countries to strengthen their national legislation to improve working conditions for their drivers .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Whilst this proposal was submitted in the name of safety and simplification , its contents provide for little more than further bureaucracy and regulation .
We are particularly concerned about the effect that these measures would have on minibuses operated by the voluntary and non-commercial sectors .
Whilst the British government has expressed an intention to apply for a national derogation within this area , it is our opinion that the interests of the voluntary sector are best protected by the existing exemptions .
Changes to rest requirements and driving times will severely reduce the ability of schools and coach companies to offer trips abroad at an economically viable rate .
These proposals impose further burdens on an industry that is already heavily regulated , yet the Commission fails to provide any cost-benefit analyses to justify its arguments .
The British Government has described many of these proposals as being either unnecessary or disproportionate to any benefit .
We are happy to support this line and trust that they will act accordingly when these measures are considered by the Council .
Decisions on safety are usually preceded by fatal accidents .
Other considerations are all given priority until regulation becomes unavoidable , and then the emphasis is on freedom for business , limiting costs and free competition .
Yet everyone knew beforehand that allowing professional drivers to drive too long would result in accidents .
Unfortunately that has never stopped people in this industry from being allowed to work for longer consecutive periods than in other industries where less harm can be caused .
Businesses want to avoid taking on a second driver and avoid waiting times at all costs , as these measures cost money .
What is more , drivers want to be protected against overworking and overtiredness , but they also want to get home quickly after a long trip .
Self-employed drivers even believe that they are exempt from the regulations , and businesses who want to exploit this have sold their lorries to their drivers .
If we give in to such counterforces , honest hauliers and the railways will be driven out of business .
Getting all lorries and courier services that drive within the EU , even those driven by self-employed drivers or those from outside the EU , to comply with the standard of not less than 12 hours ' rest a day and working not more than 9 hours a day and 90 hours over two weeks is therefore an important step in the right direction .
We were happy to vote for the Markov report .
At a time when efforts are being made both at European and national level to adopt measures to reduce the number of road accident victims - an area in which Portugal unfortunately tops the list - it would be very hard not to agree with a report which aims to improve the social and working conditions of drivers engaged in road transport .
The report we have now approved considers measures that are undeniably positive : removing the proposal for a flexible week ; imposing limits on driving time and working hours ; setting a minimum age for drivers engaged in the carriage of goods ; limiting possible derogations ; increasing the involvement of Europe 's social partners ; and encouraging the extension of these regulations to cover all drivers on the EU 's roads .
These measures deserve our approval , given that they will make a serious contribution to improving road safety .
However , we very much regret that a majority of Members of this House did not support the rapporteur 's proposal to reduce weekly driving time to 45 hours .
We nevertheless hope that the Commission and the Council will be sufficiently open-minded towards the amendments that have now been adopted .
Mr President , in 1990 , as Parliament 's rapporteur on what became the Maastricht report , I urged the establishment of what we now know as the ' Committee of the Regions ' .
I did so because local authorities in regions play a vital role in implementing European law .
Given that role , I felt it was right that they should have a say in the adoption of European law .
The Napolitano report takes that principle and moves it forward in the context of today 's Europe .
I welcome what Mr Napolitano has argued for in terms of the higher status of regions and local authorities in European decision-making .
But I also accept that he is right to do that in a non-prescriptive way that does not interfere with the internal constitutions of the Member States .
By making a case for the regions but leaving it to the individual Member States to decide how to implement his recommendations , he has struck the right balance .
For example , we have just heard an argument for regions to be involved in the Council of Ministers .
I support that argument , but each Member State must do that in the context of its own constitution .
Finally , the one weakness in the Napolitano report is that it has not given enough emphasis to the role of regions with legislative authority .
I hope that the Commission will look at that and find a way of engaging them more coherently in EU activities .
Mr President , like other speakers , I am glad that in relation to the Napolitano report we have moved forward on some important points .
It is recognised that , in appropriate constitutional circumstances , regions will have access to the Court of Justice .
It is recognised rather clearly and in good terms that the principle of subsidiarity is iterative and applies down the line , not just between the Union of the Member States , but to the regions and local authorities as well .
There are some points I regret .
I particularly regret that the opportunity was not taken to comment about the odd composition of the Committee of the Regions .
In future , for example , it seems probable that there will be five Members from Malta in the Committee of the Regions , as against 21 from Spain and 24 from the United Kingdom .
That means that there will likely be five times as many Maltese as Galicians in the Committee of the Regions , if any Galicians get there at all - or Catalans or Scots .
This is not a satisfactory situation .
The Committee of the Regions is supposed to counterbalance the Parliament .
The balance of populations and regions on the Committee of the Regions is not at all a reasonable one .
This report will not convince those in my party at home who think that being an independent Member State would be better than being a constitutional region , as things stand .
Mr President , last night , I dreamed about Mr Napolitano too .
Mr Napolitano , who is the rapporteur of this document on the role of the regional authorities , was the President of the WUR - the World Union of Regions - in my dream .
Already , since , in my dream , a single world government had been established made up of the regions , the individual States no longer existed and the regions had assumed such importance as to form , all together , a worldwide association , the WUR - the World Union of Regions - with Mr Napolitano as President .
I know that this is only a dream and that the dream is unlikely to come true , but since these regions had ceased to fight with each other , as , I regret to say , some States still do now , it is my hope and desire that , step by step , as per the Napolitano report , we will genuinely achieve the WUR , the World Union of Regions .
I therefore voted for the motion .
Mr President , I voted for the report , although I am quite aware that this is not a decisive document but just a recommendation and we do not know how it will be received .
I hope that the Commission and the Member States take into consideration many of the points adopted , although I must lament the fact that some fundamental parts have been rejected , such as those providing for the participation of regions with legislative powers in the European Union 's Council of Ministers .
I feel that this is an area in which , in any case , it is for the Member States to decide .
My political party has already supported amendments and legislative proposals to that effect in Italy , and I hope that the European regions will be able to have more influence , notwithstanding the fact that this matter must continue to be the competence , for the most part , of the individual States , without interference from the Union .
Mr President , I knew that Mr Méndez de Vigo was reactionary on issues of European diversity , but I did not know that he was so ignorant .
To call the concept of a people archaic not only runs counter to the fundamental principles of our civilisation , it is also contrary to many constitutions , such as that of the United States of America , which starts with the precise phrase ' We the people ' .
Mr Méndez de Vigo 's statement conflicts with the constitution of the United States , and also with the views of his boss , José Maria Aznar .
Mr President , we believe that the European Union is at present an historically unprecedented union of shared sovereignty , and the stateless nations , such as Galicia , want to make progress through their participation in these institutions , and are even working towards a kind of internal enlargement .
What we ask is why Malta and not Galicia ?
Why Cyprus and not Scotland ?
Stateless nations very often have a history , a political will and a demography that justify this participation .
Nevertheless , the Napolitano report was a step in the right direction , but it has to some extent been frustrated by the reactionary Jacobinism of people like Mr Aznar and Mr Méndez de Vigo , a Jacobinism that is now negated by the reality of the European Union itself .
- ( DA ) We shall vote in favour of compromise Amendment No 30 and Amendment No 21 if Amendment No 30 is not adopted .
We would point out , however , that the content of the amendments must not be included in a possible future European constitution but be included in a future treaty .
The June Movement does not , in fact , wish to see a European constitution that will take precedence over the national constitutions .
. ( ES ) This Parliament has just missed a great opportunity to act in accordance with its role as representative of the peoples of Europe as laid down in the Treaties .
Firstly , and this is the most serious thing , because by approving amendment by Mr Méndez de Vigo - whose ' care ' has been noted - we are depriving the European peoples of their capacity as holders of some of the Union 's legitimacy , which , in accordance with the philosophy of the Treaties , they are entitled to .
Secondly , because the final text lays down that the regions with legislative powers will not be able to bring cases before the Court of Justice on their own behalf , and that they must do so with the prior agreement of the State .
The Socialist amendment , proposing that the case should be presented through the intermediary of the State , was not much better .
Thirdly , nor are these regions explicitly guaranteed the right to participate in Councils of Ministers which deal with matters falling within their competence , leaving this capacity to arbitrate to the respective governments whose lack of political will in relation to this issue is , in the majority of cases , including Spain , notorious .
The Napolitano report , however , still contains some very positive aspects and I have therefore decided to vote in favour of it tomorrow .
We agree with regionalisation and with the idea of strengthening the role played by regional and local authorities within the constitutional framework and within sovereign decision-making processes in each Member State . For that reason , we support those aspects that the report emphasises in this respect .
For the same reason , we think it is important that there should be a forum at EU level , and indeed one already exists , the Committee of the Regions , for exchanging experience on the work of these authorities and to provide them with a means of presenting their views at EU level on matters relevant to them .
Nevertheless , although some positive amendments have been adopted , the Napolitano report is still inspired by the more or less explicit objective of trying to create direct links between the institutions of the European Union and regional and local authorities , thus bypassing the Member States ' sovereign decision-making powers . We cannot agree with this , because internal organisation is a matter for the Member States alone , especially when it comes to how decisions are made .
So , although we agree with reinforcing the role of the regions , we reject any federalist approach that aims to circumvent the sovereignty of the Member States of the European Union .
I would like to congratulate Giorgio Napolitano on his excellent and timely report on the role of regional and local authorities in the building of Europe , which I support . I particularly support the need for the Union to find new ways for regional and local authorities to participate in Community activities without neglecting the important role of the Committee of the Regions .
I also very much support the need to ensure that regional and local authorities are involved when Community policies and legislative acts are being conceived and drawn up , as it is most often those authorities that are responsible for implementing such policies and acts . Nevertheless , I believe that these links should be established at the level of individual Member States .
I very much support Mr Napolitano 's desire for consolidation of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , which concerns the outermost regions .
It is certainly necessary to take steps so as to allow us to take full advantage of the scope for action provided for in the current provisions governing the outermost regions , thus making it possible to put into practice a genuine Community policy for the outermost regions , a policy genuinely committed to overcoming the limitations imposed by their location .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs believes that the hierarchical and pyramid-like structure of the EU 's institutional system should be abandoned in favour of a system involving regional and local authorities more in Europe 's decision-making process .
One of the key questions addressed in this report is , quite rightly , the role of the Committee of the Regions . The report stresses the legitimacy and the vital role of this committee as an institutional partner for regional and local authorities within the framework of the Union .
Against this background , genuine changes to the Treaties are envisaged at precisely the point when the Convention is moving forward with its work , such as granting the Committee of the Regions the right to bring cases before the Court of Justice in the event of a breach of the principle of subsidiarity - a right also to be extended to those regional and local authorities that have legislative powers - in order to protect their rights , in many cases against their own Member States .
This , and other proposals such as the proposed addition to Article 6 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on European Union , would mean that the Member States , which are the sole members of the Union , would overnight be reduced to playing a secondary role in the building of Europe , quite apart from issues of constitutionality that would doubtless be raised in some Member States .
I was therefore forced to vote against the report , despite the fact that it included some positive proposals such as the defence of linguistic diversity and the promotion of the outermost regions .
I generally support the diagnosis contained in this report concerning the clearly diverse nature of regionalisation and of the very concept of a region , just as I support the view that regionalisation has ' to a large extent been the result of institutional and political developments specific to each of the countries concerned ' .
Although I agree in principle about the effective existence of different traditional and specific administrative approaches in each Member State , I part company from the report when , politically speaking , it tries to relegate the Member States to a subordinate role , encouraging interference in the Member States ' decision-making processes , promoting their legal and institutional fencing-in with powers being assumed by the European institutions and the regions , and advocating that the political legitimacy of the regions should be artificially equated with that of the Member States in the Treaties .
As I see it , the attempt made in this report to water down the functions and the importance of the Member States on the grounds that it brings the people closer to the Union 's institutions is tantamount to an at times covert new version of federalist opportunism . There seems to be an attempt to make us forget the inter-state approach that underpinned the creation of the Union , whilst neglecting the pivotal and vital role of the Member States as privileged vectors and actors in the process of building Europe .
I accordingly voted against the report .
However , one important positive point in this report is the recommendation that Article 299 of the EC Treaty , which relates to the outermost regions , should be consolidated .
Mr Gollnisch , for your information and that of the House , there will be a debate on 29 January 2003 , led by Mr Solana , on the question of Iraq regarding Mr Hans Blix 's report to the United Nations .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
The next item is the Council statement on the work programme of the Greek Presidency .
I should like , on behalf of the House , to acknowledge that Prime Minister Simitis took the time in December , before the formal launch of the presidency , to meet with the Conference of Presidents of Parliament .
I thank him and his ministerial and public service colleagues for that meeting .
We look forward to working closely and productively with the Greek Presidency .
It gives me great pleasure to call upon the Prime Minister to make his opening statement .
Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I am both honoured and delighted to be here today , in my role as President-in-Office of the European Council , to present the priorities of the Greek Presidency .
As chairman of various Councils in the past , I have been involved in proceedings with the European Parliament and have appreciated at first hand how useful and indispensable this dialogue is .
The Greek Presidency plans to cooperate with Parliament to the maximum possible extent at all levels .
It plans to cooperate not merely as a formality , but because cooperation is , I believe , a necessary and fundamental factor in achieving our joint objectives .
We shall grab every possible opportunity for fruitful cooperation between us .
Greece is one of the countries which believes that developing the European Union will help to strengthen the role and authority of the European Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is an historic phase in the ongoing development of Europe .
All of us , the Council , Parliament , the Commission and our citizens , are expected to help with this phase .
To support the move towards European integration , to a Europe of the 25 and / or more Member States , a Europe constructed and developed on the basis of our common values , the values which have informed our actions over the past fifty years .
A Europe which creates the potential for everyone to grow and prosper , which strengthens every country 's society , and which promotes cohesion and solidarity .
A Europe which , in a multipolar global system , works for peace , cooperation and justice .
Working in this direction is not our only responsibility .
It is important that we make these policies convincing , that we convince people that the Europe we are building is focused on caring for its nations and citizens and ensuring that everyone shares a common future in a community of values .
The presidency 's programme has not been planned solely to meet the challenge of the ongoing development of Europe ; it has also been planned to meet the challenge posed by today 's international economic climate , the global recession and all the sources of insecurity waiting to ambush our societies : the lack of competitiveness and stability in the economy , unemployment , social exclusion and so on and so forth .
We need to respond to this insecurity with decisive action , to hit at the heart of individual and collective insecurity and to create a more rational , a fairer and freer living environment which offers everyone more opportunity .
At the same time , we need to turn our attention to the international crises that create insecurity . International crises which originate in the fragile states on the fringes of the Union , international crises rooted in the Middle East , international crises caused by international terrorism .
What we need is a Europe which has a constant presence and speaks with one clear voice on the international stage .
Ladies and gentlemen , under the decisions taken in Seville , we were required to plan the Greek Presidency in collaboration with the next presidency , the Italian Presidency , so that an annual operational action programme could be formulated .
We did precisely that and I should like to comment on our five main sets of priorities .
It goes without saying that our first priority post Copenhagen is enlargement .
We need to continue with all the basic , procedural arrangements so that the accession treaties can be signed in Athens on 16 April .
Your role is paramount in these arrangements because the European Parliament has to assent to the accession of the new Member States .
At the same time , we shall continue negotiations with Bulgaria and Romania in application of the new pre-accession strategy for these two countries .
Our aim is to keep to the timetable for their accession in 2007 .
We shall be actively working on Turkey 's progress towards accession .
Greece believes that Turkey should take its place in Europe on the basis of the decisions already taken by the European Councils .
We must give Turkey the opportunity to carry out the reforms its country needs .
That is why the Copenhagen European Council decided to follow a strategy , a plan aimed at starting accession negotiations with Turkey .
The next two years will be crucial here .
Greece , both as the country holding the presidency and as a Member State , wants to help with this new process , which is why one of our objectives is to draft a new partnership agreement with Turkey .
We also aim to develop relations with the countries of the Western Balkans , so that they can join the process and accede to the European Union at a later date .
I should like to comment at this point on the question of Cyprus .
We want Cyprus to join the European Union as a united country .
We want it to overcome and resolve its political problem .
We want the two communities to share a common future and enjoy the benefits accession has to offer .
We felt right from the start that the Annan plan gave Cyprus a chance to resolve its political problem .
We have been working along these lines and we hope that a solution will be found by 28 February .
Whatever happens , Cyprus will accede to the Union , as agreed in Copenhagen , although the way will still be left clear for the Cyprus problem to be resolved and the acquis communautaire to be applied to the whole island .
Our second priority is to reform the European economy and promote social cohesion .
The spring summit in 2003 will be held in a political and economic climate beset with both problems and opportunities .
The introduction of the euro last year was an historic process .
We believe that , although progress has been made , the Lisbon strategy is now more topical than ever .
We need to implement the economic decisions taken over recent years which we have not done enough to promote .
This is a vital opportunity to update the European economic and social model .
Ladies and gentlemen , we shall be working on six issues .
First , macro-economic policy ; we want a reliable European economic policy , an intergovernmental economic policy in Europe .
Secondly , we want to create more and better jobs .
This will help to consolidate social solidarity and cohesion .
It is important that we review the European Employment Strategy and a debate on the subject will allow us to make more of the social pillar in the Lisbon strategy .
Our third aim within the Lisbon framework is to encourage entrepreneurship and support small enterprises .
The presidency sets great store by support for entrepreneurship , which is important to economic development , not to mention employment and regional development .
Our fourth aim is to build up the European economy of knowledge and innovation , because we cannot achieve the Lisbon objectives unless we develop knowledge and technology .
As you all know , a number of issues are still pending , such as the Community patent , and we intend to try and wrap them up .
The presidency will also be tackling other issues , such as developing research in cutting-edge technologies , including defence research .
Our fifth aim is to improve links within Europe , by which I mean full and operational liberalisation of the energy and transport markets , extending the trans-European energy and transport networks , promoting the single services market and unifying the financial markets .
Our sixth aim is to safeguard future prosperity through sustainability .
This mainly means reviewing the Union 's strategy on sustainable development in the light of the outcome of the world summit in Johannesburg .
We want to make more of the Union 's leading role in environmental protection .
So much , ladies and gentlemen , for our second set of priorities which relates to the Lisbon strategy .
Our third set of priorities covers the sensitive issue of immigration , illegal immigration , external borders and asylum .
We all know that immigration in one form or another has now taken on such proportions that we are forced to act .
And we need to act in two directions .
We need to ensure that the Union becomes a genuine area of freedom , justice and security for its citizens , free from any form of organised crime , xenophobia and racism . That it becomes a multicultural area of understanding for man 's problems , that we fight the causes of problems such as poverty , falling living standards and political suppression .
We hope here to adopt directives on the reunification of families of long-standing immigrants .
In the asylum sector , we want to push ahead with directives such as directives on refugees .
The second strand in our action on immigration will be to protect the Member States of the European Union from illegal immigration , share out the costs of protecting our common external borders more equitably , promote repatriation policies and speed up negotiations on readmission agreements .
Our fourth set of priorities concerns a matter which has already taken up a great deal of our time and energy . The future of Europe .
We believe that the enlargement of Europe should go hand in glove with greater European unification .
Our institutional system needs efficient , democratic functions and policies which reach our citizens .
The question is : what route will the Convention on the future of Europe take and how will this fit in with the work of the presidency ?
As you may remember , the Copenhagen European Council decided that the Convention should complete its work before the European Council in June and that , at the spring European Council , we should focus on the institutional aspects of the future of Europe .
So we hope to achieve three main objectives at these two Councils :
First , we want to carry out a review without taking any decisions , because that would prejudge the outcome of the Convention .
Secondly , we intend to hold a substantive debate on the outcome of this work at the June Council and set the starting and / or the finishing date for the work of the new Intergovernmental Conference , because some Member States have already expressed a wish for an interim period and we will need some time between when it starts and the June summit .
Thirdly , we want to lay down the remit for the Intergovernmental Conference ; in other words we need to be prepared at the end of June for subsequent procedures as and when they start .
Our fifth set of priorities concerns the Union 's international profile and strengthening its role on the international stage .
The European Union has proceeded in leaps and bounds with its common security and defence policy .
What we now need is to ensure that we have full operational readiness in the crisis management sector by developing our military and non-military capabilities .
We therefore intend to concentrate on achieving the general military objective and finalising permanent arrangements for collaboration between the ? U and ? ? ? ? .
We are keen to ensure that European operations in Bosnia Herzgovina and the FYROM , which will be the first field test of the European Union 's operational readiness , are properly prepared and executed .
Over and above this defence policy , we need to examine relations with the Union 's neighbours in order to ensure that no new divisions are created .
A summit meeting with Russia is scheduled to take place in St Petersburg in May , attended by the countries of the Western Balkans , the Ukraine , the Caucasus and the Mediterranean , and we shall be attaching great importance to Mediterranean cooperation .
We may have to deal with war with Iraq over coming months .
We hope not .
We want peace .
However , we are giving this issue our utmost attention , and rightly so ; it is one of our priorities .
We want to work and we shall work for peace and a peaceful resolution to any differences .
We trust efforts by the UN will have a positive outcome .
The will and the resolutions of the United Nations must prevail .
Iraq has to respect and apply Security Council resolutions .
The presidency wants to speak for Europe as a union of countries with a common , strong voice and opinions .
Safeguarding international stability , wiping out the threat of weapons of mass destruction and peace are common virtues ; they are what we are all striving towards and the countries of the European Union need a clear common policy along these lines .
( Applause )
We need to break our old habit of having different countries saying different things and seeking different objectives .
It is not easy but we must fight for it .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to finish by commenting briefly on two or three matters of particular interest to the European Parliament .
First , the status of MEPs .
A great deal of work has been done and we have spent a fair amount of time discussing this .
I think this issue is ripe for a final solution and we shall endeavour to reach a solution at the European Council in Thessaloniki .
Secondly , the interinstitutional agreement on improving European Union legislation , which has done a great deal to improve the quality of legislation .
We hope that there will be agreement here too during our presidency .
Thirdly , and lastly , we shall endeavour to complete the rules on European political parties , which are well overdue .
I have commented on a number of central issues , although there are a great many other important issues .
There is too little time to talk about the review of the CAP , the development of the European defence industry or measures on safety at sea , which many of us are working on .
We want the Greek Presidency to give extra momentum to the development of the Union .
We want to strengthen every aspect of the Union and convince our citizens that Europe is close to them , that it embraces them all in a society of values and that it offers everyone a common future .
Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , I look forward to the best possible collaboration with you .
The success of the presidency depends on it .
The success of the European Union depends on it .
So let us put our heads together and deal with the problems .
( Applause )
Mr President , Prime Minister of the Republic of Greece , ladies and gentlemen , we have just closed the chapter on that quite remarkable year , 2002 , which began with the launch of the euro and ended with the decision to carry out the largest enlargement in Europe 's history .
This coming year will in many respects be equally crucial .
In 2003 , we will have to prepare to implement enlargement and we will have to carry out the institutional reforms . Above all , we must provide the new Europe with much more solid economic and social foundations .
Prime Minister , in setting its priorities for the first six months of the year , the Greek Presidency has shown that it is keenly aware of the major challenges before us .
This was clear throughout your speech . There is absolutely no need for me to go over the main points again - we fully endorse them : the intense focus on immigration , patents , energy and the major obstacles to lasting peace in Europe - the Balkans question and the Mediterranean question .
I want to focus closely on these last two issues because the Balkans are a European Union issue - they are our responsibility and in our hearts - and , in the situation described by Prime Minister Simitis , whether the future holds peace or war depends on the Mediterranean .
I also endorse the far-reaching decision by the Greek Presidency to choose peace : I endorse it and I call for unified peacekeeping measures from the countries and the European institutions .
Before us is a unique opportunity , a huge presence of European countries in the Security Council , a European Presidency , and , most importantly , we have a public opinion which is deeply disturbed and concerned to see what war might involve and , in particular , what the consequences of war might be .
The European governments may have had their disagreements and different perspectives in recent months , but their citizens are closely united in the desire to avoid war as far as possible .
Of course , this does not mean that they do not have an equally strong desire to combat terrorism , to present a united front before this new threat .
However , war is considered to be the last resort and our peacekeeping measures must therefore be strong and unified .
We therefore feel that we are in complete harmony with the Greek Presidency and its programme for Europe , both as regards its intention to develop the work that needs to be done within the institutions on matters such as the Members ' Statute and the issue of rules on parties and as regards the two major themes which were at the heart of Prime Minister Simitis ' speech , enlargement and unification : we want a wider Europe but we also want a more unified Europe .
There can be no objection to that and there is no need for clarification .
I would now like to mention briefly the fact , following on from what Prime Minister Simitis said , that the Spring Report , the Commission 's contribution to the work of the Spring Council , was adopted by the institution today and will therefore play a major part in the work of the Greek Presidency .
We also adopted a number of related documents , most noteworthy being the report on the implementation of the broad economic policy guidelines and the general principles of a new European Employment Strategy .
I would like to thank the Greek Commissioner , Mrs Diamantopoulou , wholeheartedly , for she really has done some absolutely first rate work in this area .
I would now like to tell you a little more about the key points of the Spring Report , although the Commission is , as always , at Parliament 's disposal should it want to organise specific debates on these important issues .
The Spring Report is a general report which does not just outline our programme but enters into specific aspects of it .
The Lisbon strategy seeks to achieve far-reaching economic and social renewal by the end of the decade and will be the right course for an enlarged European Union too .
That means - and we must not forget it - that it does not lose any of its value with enlargement but actually becomes more important .
It is the best way of delivering what concerns our citizens most - greater prosperity , better jobs , greater social cohesion and a cleaner , sustainable environment - and it is the only way of making sure that these are achieved sustainably for future generations too .
The Spring European Council must drive forward this process in the face of the two-fold challenge of enlargement and , in particular - and this is the real problem - the continuing deterioration of economic conditions .
We must not be discouraged by these challenges . Quite the opposite : they must spur us on to greater endeavours , for the Lisbon agenda is the best way to integrate the new Member States and boost the economy .
The Lisbon process is already starting to bear fruit .
In many areas , reforms are already generating growth and jobs but , and I tell you this frankly , ladies and gentlemen , much of the European Union 's production potential continues to remain untapped .
The Lisbon objectives are still within our reach , but if we do not display much greater political will from this moment onwards there is no firm guarantee that we will succeed .
This time last year , I laid stress on the unsustainable delivery gap between agreement on policy and action to turn policy into legislation .
Thanks to the combined efforts of Parliament , the Commission and the Council , this gap has now been reduced .
However , a similar gap is now forming in the area of the transposition of Community directives and decisions into Member States ' law .
Thus , the problem of the practical implementation of these decisions is still partly to be resolved .
Moreover , many of the national policy reforms which are necessary for the achievement of the Lisbon objectives still remain to be implemented .
On the other hand , it is encouraging to see that there are Member States meeting and even exceeding many of the Lisbon objectives .
These countries are a benchmark of world-beating performance and prove that the right policy mix can bring development on all fronts : economic , social and environmental . Progress has not been uniform throughout Europe , however .
The unsatisfactory performance of some countries is holding back the overall development of the Union .
This is why coordination at Community level is vital to encourage all the Member States to work towards the objectives that are in their own interest as well as in the interest of all the other Members of the Union . They will all benefit from macroeconomic stability , growth , more jobs and social inclusion .
The Commission 's proposals for strengthening the coordination of budgetary policy and the proposals on the employment strategy point the way forward , and I welcome the fact that the Greek Presidency shares this commitment and is determined to play its part fully .
We will make a good team .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon strategy is an integrated strategy for sustainably boosting the European Union 's economy and meeting the major medium and long-term challenges before us .
This is why , today , in the context of our strategy , I want to highlight the importance of investment in knowledge and innovation .
We have made it our priority for this year .
In addition to a list of things to do , with which we are all familiar and of which everyone is quite aware , there are moments when some factors assume more importance .
I believe that , this year , knowledge , innovation , research and education are the genuine top priorities in a European Union which is lacking in human resources , which are falling in number , and which needs there to be an improvement in the quality of these resources .
I have to say that this observation is a result of an analysis of the policy - implemented , in some cases against their will , by some of the Member States as a result of the restrictions - to reduce , in accordance with budgetary requirements , in some cases even because of the limits we ourselves have imposed , research expenditure first of all .
If we look at the policy of many of the Member States , this has been the result , with a shift away from the 3 % we set out in the major objectives of the Lisbon process .
We must not make this mistake : we must help each other to avoid making this mistake .
I am speaking so emphatically , if you will , because remarkable things are happening in the world .
Asia 's capacity to absorb new technologies , the growing dynamism of the international markets , the market shares of many European countries which are eroded every year : all this means that the problem facing us is no longer theoretical but a question of our future survival , of the future balance of our economy , of preserving our wealth .
Thus , knowledge and innovation are the driving force of sustainable development .
Without investment and innovation , we will not achieve growth and we will not be able to maintain our present levels of prosperity .
Many things are necessary : computers in our schools , lifelong learning , skilled , flexible employment .
It is vital that we promote research into world-beating products and clean technologies , and we must help businesses turn knowledge into commercial opportunities .
In my opinion , it is at precisely this last step - converting discoveries into innovation and exploiting them commercially - that European businesses fall down .
Although the Union has made progress towards a knowledge-based economy and an analysis of the past three years is not discouraging , the fact remains that others are moving even faster and it still lags behind its main international competitors in terms of investment and performance .
We still have far fewer researchers than the United States or Japan . Levels of public expenditure on education and research and development vary too greatly throughout the Union .
Businesses need a dynamic environment that will stimulate this economic activity .
Today , in Europe , such conditions are not widespread enough .
Significantly and surprisingly - and I will give you just one statistic for this is not a theoretical discussion : we are here to take decisions - our largest companies are carrying out 40 % of their research activities outside the Union .
A startling figure .
This is critical , for it means that researchers and resources are staying outside the Union .
Clearly , we must invest in the future .
We must be better coordinated and set more ambitious national targets in the fields of education , research and innovation , and we must do more to share our best practices .
The accession of the candidate countries with their strong skills base will offer the Union enormous opportunities .
Great emphasis has been placed on the fact that , after enlargement , these countries - those which have actually entered , having been given the political green light - will make up 20 % of the population but only provide 5 or 6 % of income .
Yet this represents a 25 % increase in applied scientists and engineers . In many cases , they are working in specific sectors , but once part of the European circuit , they will genuinely be able to give us great impetus .
We must therefore make sure we are ready to absorb these human resources , to put them into circulation , to ensure that they become an active part of our economy .
In this connection , the Commission will be launching an action plan for research and development .
We must also as a matter of urgency address the matter of the legislative and administrative framework for the business world .
Before I conclude , I would like , if I may , to make another personal observation .
We can devise all the Lisbon processes we like , but if Europe does not become the centre of attraction for young talent , for the whole world , we will never achieve economic and scientific leadership .
The United States are succeeding by using human resources from all over the world .
Whereas our young people , who are going to the United States in ever-increasing numbers , stay there for the most part , I can tell you that the majority of Asians and Chinese - and there are currently tens of thousands of Chinese studying in the United States - go back home .
Well then , if we do not find a way of inducing our young people to return home , if we do not build some large , top-level schools of excellence which are the symbol , the attraction of the future , which convey the impression that we are working for the future , we will never attract the young people , the best brains from the other continents , and we will never succeed in getting our own young people to stay in our continent .
This is the crucial challenge , and this is why the Commission and I personally have called strongly for this matter to be taken up , as it must be , at the level of all the European countries , for if our young people are leaving Europe , if the situation is such that our businesses are setting up research laboratories outside Europe , particularly in the United States , I warn you that our horizons will become narrower and narrower , I warn you that , if we go on like this , all will be lost .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have clear responsibilities towards our present and future citizens and towards the whole world in this field .
We set ourselves the target of creating a competitive , knowledge-based society based on sustainable growth .
On our success will hang the future of the European social model too .
We do not believe we can achieve the goals Commissioner Diamantopoulou and I set ourselves so carefully , the goals behind all politics such as social equality and class promotion - we do not believe we can do it without a knowledge-based society .
It will also , therefore , determine our ability to honour the international commitments we made at Monterrey , Doha and Johannesburg and to implement policies which can secure peace and stability in the world .
Mr President , Prime Minister , time and time again , the European Union has confounded the most sceptical critics with bold , resolute initiatives .
We have achieved many goals and I know that we will continue to do so in the future , but I implore you to understand that this matter of centres of scientific excellence , of a research effort , of rules to attract laboratories , the centres of innovation , to Europe , of becoming once again the catalyst and centre of culture and science , as Europe has always been throughout the centuries , is vital for our future .
Quite frankly , the present generations have fewer opportunities , fewer options than most of us sitting here had .
I believe it is our duty to restore to them these options , these opportunities , for they are entitled to them and we need them too .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , our group , that of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , wishes the Greek Presidency every success ...
Interruption by Mr Cohn-Bendit : No , I said you were the bourgeois party ...
Look , whenever Mr Cohn-Bendit butts in , we lose time for debate .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats wish you every success , and you will find in us a very fair partner .
I want to make it clear that I say this with the agreement of our Greek friends , and Mr Trakatellis will speak immediately after me .
We think it is particularly splendid that the treaty with the countries that are to join the EU should be signed , on 16 April , in front of the Acropolis or in its immediate vicinity , that being a symbolic expression of the fact that it is at the site of democracy 's foundation , Athens , that we are giving the green light to the membership of the Central European countries that have achieved democracy after the horrors of the Communist era , and before that , the years under National Socialism .
Mr President , we are of one mind with you as far as a peaceful solution to Cyprus is concerned , and also as regards the pre-accession strategy for Bulgaria and Romania , and we have an urgent request to make of you in connection with the Balkans .
Whilst sharing your belief that these countries must have the prospect of joining the European Union , we must always affirm - and you yourself used the word ' later ' - the long-term nature of that prospect .
For the people of the European Union will first have to cope with the accession of ten countries , to which they will have to adjust , and we may not demand too much of them , nor must we give the impression that the Balkan countries are to be added to them overnight ; hence our constant reiteration that this is a long-term process .
We wish to strongly encourage you to seize the initiative in relation to the Mediterranean region and the Barcelona process .
I am horrified by the sight , repeated week after week , of boats sailing from Morocco in the hope of reaching the Spanish coast , capsizing under stormy conditions , and the people on them being killed .
I regard this as unacceptable , and we have to give the countries where these people live a chance of development - not only in the context of immigration policy , but as part of helping the countries of the Mediterranean to help themselves .
Governments themselves must also help , of course .
Any initiative by you in this area would meet with our full support .
Turning to the Convention , Mr Papandreou , as Foreign Minister , will of course be one of its members , and I am sure - and I hope - that we will , if he follows the examples set by others , see and hear much of him in Parliament .
Speaking on behalf of the PPE half of our group , I can say that we want a European constitution .
We want a European constitution , we want European democracy , we want Europe to have capacity to act , and we want it to be transparent .
And such a Europe must rest on the foundations of the Community Europe .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we are sure that you support that too .
We want the Convention to complete its work by the end of June and to be followed by a brief Intergovernmental Conference , so that the Italian Presidency will find us gaining a constitution for Europe .
Let me move on to the Lisbon process . There is much truth in what has been said about this , but , Mr President of the Commission , we agree that we will only get qualified scientists to stay in Europe if we actually manage to reform our tax systems in such a way that it is again worthwhile to make investments , in such a way that Europe is a place where achievement is worth the effort , if we are willing to reform our labour laws and make them more flexible , and if we are able to change our social security systems so that they are characterised by greater self-reliance , so that subsidiarity and solidarity are intertwined .
Such a Europe must become more competitive , and so working in it must again be made worth the effort .
We need to encourage people to take the initiative , and , above all else , we must not make the citizen promises that the European Union is unable to keep .
So let your coordinating efforts be directed towards tax cuts for businesses , reform of the labour market , and reform of our social security systems .
There are two important foreign policy issues , Mr President-in-Office of the Council ; Iraq is one of them .
We must see that weapons of mass destruction are a menace and that , when they threaten us or regions of the globe , those who have them at their disposal , must relinquish them , but what we do and have to do , we do within the framework of the United Nations .
We support your efforts towards a common European position on this issue , on the basis of action by the United Nations .
It is not acceptable for a European government to say , ' Leave us out ; no matter what the United Nations decide , we 're not taking part ' , or for another government to give the impression of saying , ' Whatever happens , we stand alongside the United States ' .
No , any European policy must be a responsible one , and I would encourage you , and us , to go about it as Europeans , and together .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you mentioned cooperation with Russia , and in May of this year you will be travelling to a meeting in St Petersburg .
Appalling things are currently happening in Chechnya .
The Russian Government 's unwillingness to extend the OSCE mandate in Chechnya violates the humanitarian principles that we share .
I urge you and beg you to raise these things not only when you are in St Petersburg , that beautiful city , which is Russia 's window on the world , but make it clear to the Russian Government even before you get there that we expect the OSCE mandate to be extended , that we expect this Parliament 's ad hoc delegation to Chechnya , which we have decided on , to actually be allowed to travel to that country .
Mr President , I welcome the way you have often encouraged us by referring to our values , but we will gain credibility only if we lay hold of these values not merely for ourselves in this wonderful European Union , which , taking everything into account , is democratic and in a good position both economically and in terms of human rights , but also for the people on our doorstep and throughout the world .
That is why we have to speak in a loud voice , and I would encourage you to do just that in St Petersburg .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , during this six-month period , the Council is going to deal with five historic challenges which the President-in-Office of the Council has mentioned .
Firstly , enlargement .
It is a fortunate coincidence that enlargement to ten is going to be signed in Athens , the cradle of democracy ; and in a country such as Greece , which will hold the next Olympic games .
Two inventions dating back 2 500 years which are foundation stones of the current Europe .
And the Olympics were the first organised system of peace .
All they need is access to the airport , but work is being done on that .
During this six months , we must finish the first phase of enlargement : the ten countries .
And you have also mentioned some other important challenges .
Firstly , a reunified Cyprus .
We entirely support any action you may take with a view to supporting the policy of Kofi Annan and we believe this is a very decisive step .
Furthermore , and you have mentioned this , for the first time , you have in your hands -and I welcome Greece 's intelligent and courageous policy in relation to Turkey - the opportunity to play an historic role in terms of bringing us closer to Turkey .
We are counting on your intelligence and flexibility .
Secondly , the Lisbon Strategy .
In this regard , we have seen that you insist on full employment , on technological development , on training and on social cohesion , which is an essential prerequisite for economic growth and not an obstacle .
You have also held the Presidency of the monetary union since the middle of last year .
In this regard , I would like to say that it is important that we increase our economic coordination .
I am not going to ask you to employ such an interventionist and brutal policy as the United States , but it is important and necessary that Europe can be an economic driving force and end this stagnation .
This is one of the Greek Presidency 's responsibilities .
I would also address the President of the Commission .
Mr Prodi , why do you not propose a world-wide Socrates in order to attract brains ?
This falls within the competence of the Commission and of course we in Parliament would support a proposal of this nature .
In the economic chapter , the Greek Presidency has dedicated a section to maritime security , and following the drama we are witnessing of globalised shipwrecks , which are desolating our coasts - the Prestige being just one more , not the only one - I believe that the Greek Presidency must play an important role .
You have more than half the Community 's gross tonnage and plenty of experience .
You have spoken of sustainable development and the protection of the environment .
All of this must be integrated into a European maritime area , which could be one of the Greek Presidency 's great pieces of work .
In terms of the policy on the third pillar , especially on immigration , the Greek Presidency is the first , since Tampere , to propose a proactive policy and not just a repressive one .
In this regard , you can rely on Parliament in terms of the proposals you are going to make and I believe that , in this field , the Greek Presidency is showing the right way .
With regard to the future of Europe , the Convention has passed its half-way point - as President Giscard d 'Estaing reminded us in an article which has appeared today in the press .
Under the Greek Presidency , we want the Convention to prepare a draft Constitution .
In this regard , both the work of our colleague , Mr Giorgos Katiforis , in completing the social dimension , and of Georgios Papandreu , as an addition to the Presidium of the Convention , are important .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you must defend the Community method , which has allowed us to come this far , and which can inspire and organise our future .
We would also ask you to carefully study the timetable for the inauguration of the European Parliament , so that we can carry out our investiture of the Commission correctly and in a manner which is agreed amongst all of us .
Finally , Mr President , with regard to external relations , I would like to say that a war with Iraq can be prevented , that the European Union must speak with one voice and that we await with interest the result of the meeting you are going to hold in Brussels with Hans Blix , the head of the inspectors .
You have a very important job : to coordinate four members of the Security Council , plus one candidate , and everything possible must be done so that , within the multilateral and civilised framework of the UN , we can make progress and prevent a war which is not only unnecessary , but also extremely dangerous , and so that we can impose the principles of international law .
In this regard , Mr President-in-Office , and I will end here , please also continue an active policy in the Middle East .
It is very important , everything is related , and you are our border with that region .
It is essential that we are able to re-launch the Middle East peace process .
On behalf of the Socialist Group , I would like to offer you our support and I thank you for mentioning the Statute for Members of Parliament and parties , which is a sign of Greek capacity and wisdom .
I wish you lots of luck .
Mr President , I have heard it said that there is nothing left for the Greek Presidency , other than providing the after-sales service for Copenhagen . Nothing could be further from the truth .
The Greek Presidency will have a key role in the birth of a reformed and enlarged European Union .
But to ensure a smooth birth a good midwife is essential and I am pleased to see that the Greek Presidency seems well prepared to play that role .
With regard to the reform of the Union , the Convention is due to report in Thessaloniki .
As every good midwife knows , it is important to keep pushy relatives out of the delivery room and while the discussions in the Elysée Palace tonight will be important , they must not dictate the outcome of that Convention .
It is also important to ensure that the baby is not strangled at birth by Member States fearful of an ambitious constitutional Treaty .
I would therefore take issue with the President-in-Office and say we should not have a lengthy interim period .
We need a short IGC , which should be a tidying-up exercise to ratify quickly the outcome of the Convention quickly .
2003 will be the year when politicians must sell enlargement to the voters .
Nine out of ten of the new countries will have referenda between March and September this year .
We need to put far more effort into making the case for a ' yes ' vote in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe than we have put recently into convincing citizens in our current Union that Europe is a ' good thing ' .
Liberal Democrats in this House and beyond are committed to campaigning in the new countries to make sure that we get a ' yes ' vote and we call on others to join us .
We hope in particular that the Greek Presidency can use its privileged relationship with many on the island of Cyprus to ensure that a united island joins our Union .
Time is short , but recent developments , both on the island and in Ankara , have created a window of opportunity and I hope that you , Mr President-in-Office , will work with all parties to craft a compromise .
I welcome the generous aspirations that you have expressed today in that regard .
If the European Union is to succeed , however , for its current citizens and its new ones , it will need reform .
As we approach the third anniversary of the ten-year Lisbon strategy , it has to be said that progress to date on productivity , growth , employment , investment , research and development has been disappointing .
The continued economic slow-down is making structural reform more , not less , urgent and governments should not be deflected from the goals they set themselves .
It will be important for the presidency to reaffirm commitment to a reformed Stability Pact , to focus on the underlying deficit , to give the Commission the power to issue early warnings to countries in danger .
It will also need to stick to the timetable for the Financial Services Action Plan , which has already shown dangerous slippage , and to secure approval of the takeover bids directive .
If you want someone to help you along this path , why not give the European Parliament more of a role in the follow-up to the decisions of the Spring Councils , in holding the Council accountable for the decisions that are taken ?
That is something we would do very well .
Europe is of course though far more than a common market and your presidency recognises this .
The Amsterdam and Nice Treaties have created a Community of values .
I welcome the emphasis in your presidency 's statement on the values of a generous , outward-looking and civilised society .
You speak in your document of a planned legal immigration policy .
Exposed as you are on Europe 's southern and eastern flanks , you see the importance of understanding a little more and condemning a little less .
The fact is that , as long as we keep out their produce and deprive them of the hope of economic development , we will take the people of the developing countries to the south and the east .
We need many of them to deal with the problems of an ageing population here , or the brain drain problems the Commission President referred to .
Let us work to close the back door to illegal immigration more effectively by offering legal opportunities to those wishing to settle here and integrating them properly in our society .
I had a great deal to say about Iraq and the Middle East peace process as well , but my time is running short .
I would , however , say that the Greeks are well acquainted with what we in the rest of Europe understand by the word ' marathon ' .
You take the baton from the last runner , Denmark , and try and cover as much ground as possible as quickly as possible , before handing it over to the next presidency .
We wish you good speed in the marathon that you are running on our behalf .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , it is to you , Mr President of the Council , that I wish to express my group 's emphatic support for your initiative towards resolving the hostilities with Iraq by diplomatic means .
There must be no war with Iraq .
The public do not want one , and this is where the EU - as many Members of this House have said , and this is something I want to endorse - must put all its political weight into the balance , and it must be united in doing so .
Statements , such as that made by the German ambassador to the UN , to the effect that no second resolution by the Security Council would be needed to give legitimacy to an attack on Iraq by the USA , are counter-productive .
Fortunately , the Greek Presidency of the Council is taking the opposite line .
You have our entire support in your efforts to prevent war , in the teeth of the Bush administration 's declared intentions .
That employment , economic , and social policies rank high on the Greek agenda is another thing that earns our high regard , but , especially in view of the spring summit , what matters is what we do about them .
The social pillar does indeed need to be strengthened to a perceptible degree , the EU must give its attention to the public 's concerns and needs , and , above all else , press on with effective measures to counter mass unemployment and social exclusion within its borders .
Most of all , the Member States must be willing to counteract the looming economic crisis in Europe .
It is willingness to reform the Stability Pact that we regard as the litmus test in this regard .
Be bold enough to do it !
Let public investment at last be removed from the Stability Pact 's calculation basis , preventing a socially irresponsible policy of cutting back until there is nothing left from making a difficult economic situation even worse , or even - as President Prodi has just warned us - leaving education utterly unable to compete .
In conclusion , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I wish to endorse your objective of speeding up the Convention 's reforming work .
This is another area where the public interest demands that tangible progress be made , especially towards creating social Europe .
My plea to you , and to your foreign minister as a new member of the Convention , is that you should insist on definite results in this issue in particular .
Thank you Mr President .
The Greek Government is assuming the presidency of the European Union at a time of great international uncertainty .
UN inspectors in Iraq are due to report back to the United Nations Security Council at the end of the month with their findings as to whether or not Iraq is in possession of weapons of mass destruction .
No one can judge what will be in this report , but the military build-up of American and British troops in the Middle East is certainly an ominous sign that conflict in Iraq is a very real possibility .
I welcome the recent comments of Prime Minister Simitis , when he stated that the United Nations is the forum that must be used to address the issues raised in the UN inspectors ' report on Iraq .
It is very important that the United Nations is the organisation that deals with international security issues .
International global security is best dealt with multilaterally under the auspices of the UN , not unilaterally , and I welcome the objective for Prime Minister Simitis to secure a common European Union position on Iraq when the UN inspectors ' report is published .
This is certainly a very ambitious political objective but I fully support it and I am sure the majority of Members of this House do as well .
The European economy is not performing very well at present and the Greek Presidency is correct to accelerate the Lisbon Process .
We need to make European businesses more competitive ; more support mechanisms must be put in place to assist small- and medium-sized enterprises .
The Greek Presidency is also making illegal immigration in Europe a priority .
When it comes to protecting the borders of the European Union , a common approach is needed at EU level .
Certainly we are going to have to reform under the EU Convention how we legislate for issues such as immigration , asylum , refugees , displaced persons and European visas .
As has been mentioned , the Convention will now be reporting to European governments during the Greek Presidency of the Union .
Members of the Convention plan to have the draft new European Union Treaty ready for the Greek meeting in June in Thessaloniki and liaising with members of the Convention and preparing this new Treaty are certainly going to be very important for the Greek Presidency .
As a result of the decisions taken at the Copenhagen Summit last December , accession treaties for the new Member States joining the Union are to be signed on 16 April .
These treaties are being prepared and referenda will then be held in the applicant states .
It is very clear that there are wide-ranging and diverse issues that will have to be addressed by the Greek Presidency of the European Union .
The spectre of a conflict in Iraq hangs over us all like the sword of Damocles and that is something that we all need to have in mind .
In conclusion , I wish the Greek Presidency every success and would like to say , on behalf of my political group , that we will be more than willing to cooperate with them fully in the interests of the European Union as a whole .
Mr President , kalispera , the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities would also like to welcome the Greek Presidency .
Greece was the cradle of democracy .
That means you have a special duty to give the EU a democratic overhaul .
This is our advice . Open up all meetings in which you debate laws .
Make all the minutes from meetings available .
Give the European Parliament and the national parliaments access to all papers from the Council 's working parties .
Prepare complete registers of correspondence in the Council .
Introduce public access to documents according to the principle of best practice among the countries .
Place all agendas and minutes from the Council 's working parties on the Presidency 's web site .
Give the Ombudsman a new statute , giving him or her access to everything for monitoring purposes .
Give the Court of Auditors the access required for monitoring both the Commission and the organisations that use EU funds .
Retain the rotating Presidency so that each country has six months in which to pull out all the stops .
Keep the EU and the military separate and prepare reforms of agriculture , the structural funds and the budget so that we are ready to receive the new countries .
Also , let Greek hospitality be accompanied by efficient organisation so that we can follow the work on your as yet unfinished web site and are able in six months to say what a jolly good Presidency Greece 's was .
The next few years , and certainly the next few decades , will be of great significance to all European people , but primarily to the European Union .
The Greek Presidency must therefore not simply be allowed to be the umpteenth routine presidency .
After all , Greece is , more than any other country in Europe , best placed both from a political and historical point of view to use the presidency to readdress the issue of the absurdity of Turkey 's candidature .
I will say it again now : Turkey is not a European country , it does not belong to our European community of peoples , either geographically or historically or as far as its socio-economic situation and culture are concerned .
It goes without saying that we must maintain the very best relations with our Turkish neighbours , and that we can maintain the best possible trading and other relations where applicable .
To give this country a prospect of acceding to the European Union is , however , complete madness .
It will throw the door wide open to a massive tidal wave of immigration , and will in particular fundamentally change the nature of the European Union itself , a union that with the best will in the world will not be able to call itself European any more .
The Greek Presidency is being given an historic opportunity here .
Take the initiative , for example , or suggest holding a referendum on Turkey 's candidature in all our European countries .
Why should the electorates of democracies not have their say on something that is so crucial to our very existence ?
If you do not , my party in Flanders will turn the European elections in 2004 into a referendum on Turkey 's accession .
It is striking that the German Christian-Democrats are also more or less announcing the same thing .
If the Greek Presidency fails to take this opportunity - which will probably be the case - you will be taking on a very great responsibility , and the Turkish question may become a divisive element that could bring the house of Europe crashing down around our ears .
Mr President , I would like to welcome both the President of the Council and the President of the Commission here this afternoon .
I want to talk specifically about jobs , competitiveness and the internal market .
I have a particular interest in that as the Parliament 's rapporteur for the internal market strategy : if all goes well my report will be voted on in February and will be presented to you as a basis for action in the Economic Summit .
Both of the Presidents have a crucial responsibility to the global economy over the next six months .
Colleagues around the chamber have been quoted , and indeed Mr Simitis was quoted in the Financial Times yesterday , as saying that ' we are in a global recession ' .
I hope he was wrongly quoted , because as far as I know , we are not .
Growth is slowing down , but stimulating and restoring that growth will be crucial to the responsibilities of both Presidents over the next six months with that Economic Summit at the centrepiece .
I am concerned that neither of your statements , Presidents , mentioned the fact that the foundation of economic growth in the European Union has to be the completion of the internal market , in spite of the fact that this is the tenth anniversary .
We have had major reports from the Commission showing the benefits of the internal market and we also know that the principal engine for job creation in markets of the future is going to be jobs in the service economy .
The biggest project that is coming forward to all of you is the completion of the internal market for services , and the barriers to companies setting up across the European Union are amply demonstrated by the work the Commission has done .
I want to ask you , President of the Council , to put on your agenda a determined effort by all Member State governments to clear out the difficulties of establishing businesses across the European Union .
You do not need to wait for the Commission to take that initiative to create jobs and move the European economy forward , we look to you to do it .
Mr President , my thanks go to Greece for an excellent presentation and for highlighting some delicate matters .
Recently , actually since the autumn , it has been mainly the issues of enlargement and the Convention that have been the focus of attention at EU level .
In its presentation Greece mentioned some well-chosen issues it intends to address over the next six months .
Unfortunately , however , we cannot cure all the ills of the world even though we might want to .
We should also be as good as our word with regard to improving European competitiveness , something that was endorsed at Lisbon .
Things have , however , gone the opposite way .
The United States of America has rushed off even further into the distance .
There is barely any eye contact anymore .
If there is , the Americans come whistling past one lap of the circuit ahead of us whatever the event , to use a sports image .
In view of this I would ask Greece what it really intends to do during its presidency to put its own house in order also , to fulfil the Lisbon objectives ?
Does it intend to make the economic reforms insisted on by the Commission , and which Mr Prodi also mentioned here at the start , and , if so , working to what sort of timetable ?
If Greece , Italy , Portugal , Spain and Germany keep to their commitments we can really talk about a Lisbon strategy and improvements in our competitiveness , but if that should not be the case , we might as well wipe our backsides with the Lisbon Declaration and say goodbye to European competitiveness .
Mr President , resolution 1441 firstly calls for effective weapons inspections in Iraq , and secondly for the discussion of the weapons inspector 's report in the Security Council at the end of January , and only thereafter for any new steps to be taken .
These steps must be based on a new UN resolution and must concentrate on eliminating any problems encountered .
That is the view in the European countries where the vast majority of our people , as Mr Prodi said , is against a war in Iraq , and rightly so .
Our people correctly fear that there are divisions in the international coalition against terrorism , that peace negotiations will be disrupted , that the sorely needed democratisation of the Middle East will be wrecked , followed by substantial repercussions for our economies , not least in the poorest countries that do not have their own crude oil .
At this historic moment our Group of the Party of European Socialists is asking the Greek Presidency to clearly state that this is also the position of the European Union .
We are now asking for leadership from Europe , so that Europe speaks with one voice .
We must do our utmost to prevent war in Iraq and at the same time engage in serious peace negotiations in the Middle East .
The two-state solution must really be carried through now .
Europe must not hesitate to deploy all its diplomatic and economic resources to achieve this .
We pride ourselves on our capacity for conflict prevention and humanitarian aid , and rightly so .
We operate with a broad security concept , and rightly so , and realise that prevention is much better .
Time after time , Europe has emphasised the importance of the multilateral approach via the Security Council .
Confronted with incessant statements about a war that is all but unavoidable , it is of great importance that the Council and the Commission side with Parliament .
Maximum pressure should , of course , be brought to bear on Saddam via the Security Council , but we must also make every effort to prevent war .
We call on President Bush to take the desire of our peoples for peace seriously and not to sow dissent in the international coalition against terrorism , and therefore to fight together for a peaceful and a more stable world .
Mr President , the ambitious but nonetheless realistic programme of the Greek Presidency , which aims to breathe new life into basic policy areas of the European Union is , unfortunately , already overshadowed by the threat of war with Iraq , a war which has galvanised international public opinion which , as the President of the Commission pointed out , is not divided .
Nor , would I say , is it divided in the United States where , as we know , two-thirds of the people oppose this war .
We are talking about a war which is both pointless and destructive , as members from all sides of this House have pointed out .
However , the main brunt of any military attack will be borne by the Iraqi people themselves , who have been suffering under the economic embargo for years now .
A military conflict will completely wipe out any hope of combating poverty , hunger , child malnutrition and the lack of medical care ; these are the problems which the millions of people who are victims of an autocratic regime and a harsh western policy have to live with .
The twelve-year embargo has itself operated as a weapon of mass destruction ; it has cost the lives of one million people , half of whom were children .
Anyone in any doubt need only visit the hospitals in Iraq , where children are dying of malnutrition and a lack of rudimentary medical care .
I have seen them with my own eyes .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have a saying in Greece ; you see who the good captains are in a storm and the European Union is fortunate to have at its helm a very able captain and an equally efficient crew , who have clearly demonstrated their courage , combined with caution , efficient management of national and European affairs and an inspired foreign policy which has made Greece a pole of stability in the problematic Balkan area , a pole that promotes dialogue and the resolution of differences by peaceful means .
I am positive that the Greek Presidency will meet the challenges and play its historic part .
Mr President , I should like to welcome the Greek prime minister and wish him every success .
We all know that Greece is a relatively small country .
No one expects any miracles .
But they do expect the right approach .
This is not the first Greek Presidency ; there have been two previous presidencies , both of which left themselves open to a great deal of criticism .
However , the previous presidencies held by the same party , PASOK , when Andreas Papandreou was prime minister , did leave us one useful legacy : a fighting stance , which often went against the grain , on the question of peace .
I trust that this positive trend , which is demonstrated both by our country as a whole and its ruling party , will continue today , especially on the question of Iraq .
As the chairman of the Greens quite rightly said , you cannot hide behind the Security Council .
With four members in the Security Council , the European Union should be fighting to block a war .
I listened very closely to the prime minister 's speech and I should like to comment on three points which worry me .
First , the fact that the prime minister said that this is a joint annual programme of the Greek and Italian presidencies .
In my opinion , Mr Simitis is - and needs to be - one thing , and Mr Berlusconi is another , and I fail to see how they will find any common ground on social issues , on democratic issues , on the issue of relations with the USA or on media issues .
A second point which worries me is that agricultural policy - and I am thinking here of small family-run holdings , especially in the south , being squeezed by reforms and by what is happening in the World Trade Organisation - warranted no more than one line at the end of the prime minister 's speech .
I expect him to refer to this at greater length in his next speech .
And the third point has to do with social issues .
Mr Prime Minister , I am waiting for Greece to apply Directive 70 / 1999 on fixed-term work .
It should have started applying this directive on 10 July 2002 but has yet to do so .
Please do not put Mrs Diamantopoulou in the unenviable position of having to institute proceedings against Greece before the European Court .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , you , Mr President of the Council , concluded your remarks with a brief discussion of European defence policy .
You observed that the agreement between NATO and the European Union has now come into being , thus leaving the way open for the next European defence policy measures , which we can expect to be taken in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
This is an eventuality to which particular attention must be drawn , as the European Union will then , for the first time , be taking on responsibilities in defence in a visible way .
This leads me to put two questions , the first of which has to do with how this defence policy is to develop in future .
Do you share the view that the constitutional treaty currently under negotiation should include an article stipulating a mutual defence commitment , comparable to the corresponding article in the treaty on the Western European Union ?
That would be an expression of confidence when we take joint action .
Secondly , you also , very briefly , addressed the area of armaments policy , alluding to the way in which the countries of the European Union spend EUR 150 billion on defence , whereas we are always being told that the excessive duplication resulting from this means that efficiency is minimal .
Do you share the view that a common market in defence needs to be created ?
What definite steps will the Greeks take during their presidency of the Council ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , much has been said about policy relating to Iraq , to most of which I do not need to add anything , but I would like , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to address two remarks to you .
There appears to be broad agreement in this House that Resolution 1441 does not automatically result in military action , but rather that , in the light of the weapons inspectors ' reports , any further action must be subject to a resolution by the Security Council .
It is important that the presidency should also say this on behalf of the EU , and so I ask you to take the initiative by stating this here and now .
That you should do so is made all the more important by the powerful impression that the United States of America takes a different view , and we do indeed need to state what our differences with them are .
They do indeed believe - and how else is the deployment of 100 000 troops in the region to be explained ? - that Resolution 1441 does not exclude the possibility of immediate military strike action , but there is also the implicit danger that international law , to which nations are subject , and by which alone world peace can be guaranteed on a long-term basis , will be jeopardised by unilateral power-seeking on the part of one UN member state .
This is where the European Union has to state its position in clear terms , the primary reason for this being that international law cannot be enforced in an arbitrary and opportunistic way .
In the case of North Korea , against which there is a mass of evidence that it is desirous or capable of producing weapons of mass destruction - and its actions suggest that this is the case - negotiations are in progress , and yet it is Saddam Hussein who is threatened , despite the presence of a host of inspectors in his country , who have found nothing .
I might add that this threat is not justified under the UN Charter .
Bringing this difference between us into the open is one of the primary tasks of the European Union and of its Greek Presidency , and I know that you are determined to do this .
You can count on the support of the Group of the Party of European Socialists in this House !
Mr President , in wishing the Greek Presidency well , I appeal to it to make every effort to address the grave problem of falling farm incomes .
I make this appeal as someone who has spent his whole life in agriculture and rural development in one way or another .
We have here in Europe a unique model of family farming which , with falling incomes , is now under serious threat .
In the context of the mid-term review proposals due to be adopted this week and the forthcoming world trade talks , I appeal to the Greek Presidency to work towards continued commitment at EU level for the European agricultural model and to guarantee a decent livelihood for our farmers .
The reluctance of young people to take up farming as a career is evidence of the problem within agriculture .
Unless we address the very serious problem of the declining age profile in European agriculture , in the not too distant future Parliament will be sitting in an emergency session to address what has turned out to be a very serious problem .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , taking the helm of the European Union for six months is a major challenge for any country , and that is true , Mr Simitis , of your Greek Presidency as well .
The five priorities that you have enumerated and set yourself are , politically speaking , not merely a matter of logic but also of necessity .
The list does not sound particularly sensational , but , as you will already have gathered from the speeches here in the European Parliament , a number of these topics carry within themselves the seeds of potential tensions , both within the European Union and beyond its borders .
The smouldering Iraq crisis , along with America 's continuing deployment of troops in this region and the divergent views on this emanating from London , Berlin and Paris , demand sensitive handling .
What I would ask the Greek Presidency in this regard is what measures they contemplate taking in order to perhaps get the EU to have a single line on this issue .
My second question has to do with enlargement , and , in particular , with your strategy in relation to Turkey .
In Copenhagen , Turkey was given a specific date , and the prospect of the commencement of accession negotiations , subject to its fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria by that deadline .
This is a considerable obstacle to surmount , and it is at present far from clear that Turkey will be able to meet these conditions .
Quite apart from that , I believe that it is wrong to be always offering Turkey only an either / or choice and not the option of a privileged special relationship , a perhaps far more rewarding prospect , and one that has already been addressed in a report by Mr Brok .
The question I have in this context relates to Greek strategy towards Turkey .
There is a third point , and this is something to which I would like to give favourable mention .
Your declaration of belief , in the chapter on energy policy , in the establishment of common rules on nuclear safety is something that I very much welcome .
Do you think this has a real chance of being more widely accepted in the Council ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , it is only right that much should have been said about Iraq , which is very much a live issue .
I would nonetheless like to touch upon a topic that is not a live issue - at any rate , not at the moment - by which I mean the situation in the Balkans .
You have announced a sort of Integration Summit in Saloniki , with the intention of opening up for the Balkan countries the road that leads to the European Union , and I regard that as highly meritorious , although we must not be deluded .
Even today , there are manifestations of crisis , and there has been a recent recurrence of gunfights in Sandzak .
We know that neither the situation in Yugoslavia - now Serbia and Montenegro - nor that in Kosovo have really been resolved to the satisfaction of all parties .
This leads me to see it as important that the Greek Presidency , and of course the EU as a whole , should send out signals to the Balkan countries to the effect that a way is open for them to join the European Union , a difficult and lengthy way though it may be .
We must be guided by the need for adaptation of the mechanisms for encouragement and support .
There is a great difference between what we are currently giving to these poorest of poor countries and what we gave to the countries that are about to join us , so these instruments need to be adapted .
The next , post-2004 , Commission will have to give consideration to how to allocate responsibilities for the Balkans within itself .
If , though , unmistakeable signals go out from Saloniki , even the Commission will be able to adapt itself as necessary .
There is also a need for annual progress reports .
These countries need to know when they are moving closer to the European Union , when stagnation is setting in , and when , indeed , their progress is being set back .
All the forces in these regions need to know that the chance of moving closer to the European Union is there , but that we will monitor , very closely and country by country , whether real use has been made of these opportunities .
Mr President of the Council , I believe that , one day in the distant future , Saloniki may well mean for this region what Copenhagen - by which I mean the 1993 Copenhagen Council - meant for the present candidate countries .
Let the signal you send out be a bold one , one that is readily understood , and one that also awakens a sense of responsibility in these countries .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , I too would like to speak today about enlargement , about the Convention , about Iraq and about the economic situation , but I do not have time .
I certainly support what the chairman of my group has said .
Before coming here , I asked the Greek Presidency if it would give priority to the issue of international maritime traffic in dangerous goods .
I subsequently noted that the President-in-Office of the Council did in fact refer to this question .
Maritime traffic is an important issue for Greece and it is to be expected that the Greek Prime Minister should give it priority .
However , Mr President-in-Office , international maritime traffic has at present unfortunately fallen from grace and is associated with the situation in Galicia , the location of one of Europe 's and the world 's biggest disasters over the last 30 years .
These names are all too familiar : ' Andos Patria ' , ' Telepolicomander ' , ' Orquiola ' , ' Cason ' and ' Prestige ' .
Mr President-in-Office , like those I have quoted many of the names are Greek and most of the shipowners were or are Greek .
There seems to be no solution and no end to the ' Prestige ' disaster : our coastline and sea have been contaminated and the wreck of the ' Prestige ' on the seabed still represents a continuing threat .
The actions of the Spanish Government , of Mr Aznar 's Partido Popular , have been disastrous , and the same applies to the Galician Government , while the European Union has stood on the sidelines , judging at the Copenhagen Council that five million euros would be enough to solve this problem - which is a problem for Europe as well as for Galicia and for other countries .
The sea is now ruled by illegal and lawless mafias . Yet faced with this problem , the public , volunteers , seamen and fishermen have had to do the job of the government and of the European Union and solve this problem with their own hands , because the ' black tide ' is still landing on the shores of Galicia , of the Iberian Peninsula and even of France .
The Copenhagen European Council laid bare a serious political conflict : the Member States turned their back on the public , on the fishermen and on the volunteers who had acted so admirably .
The Member States have neither implemented the ' Erika ' legislation nor set up the compensation fund .
This is very far removed from the attitude of the United States , where with the Oil Pollution Act they are preventing accidents and even setting up a responsibility fund of four billion euros .
What does the Greek Presidency intend to do along these lines ?
I believe it should distinguish itself by taking action in this area .
Mr President , may I welcome the prime minister of Greece as President-in-Office of the European Council and sincerely wish him every success , because his success will be beneficial both to Europe and to Greece .
He rightly stated that one of the basic objectives of the presidency is to promote the Lisbon strategy ; Mr Prodi also had a great deal to say about this and very important it was too .
However , I read in the international press today that the Commission is about to submit a report which concludes that Europe is losing its battle to acquire a more competitive economy in the world by 2010 .
On the contrary , growth is very weak and the political will is lacking .
This Commission report also states , if the Figaro is to be believed , that it expects a twin-track Europe to emerge , with Sweden and Denmark fast-forwarding on one track and Greece , Italy and France in slow motion on the other .
What I want to ask is : first , is there a common policy for promoting the Lisbon strategy or is it a question of each country either doing what it likes or , at the very least , failing to apply any such common policy ?
And secondly : do you intend to apply policies that will help achieve the Lisbon objectives in all the Member States of the European Union , especially Greece ?
Mr President , the Greek Presidency has come along at a crucial time for our planet , and not just because we are on the brink of at least one armed conflict .
It is a crucial time because the only superpower , the United States , is doing all it can to turn its tremendous power into a global hegemony and , naturally , this is provoking a reaction .
When we emerge from these vicissitudes , the entire world - and the European Union in particular - will be a different place , regardless of the outcome of the crisis .
What is certain is that the post-war world order and its institutions will be the victims of the conflict and a different world will emerge from it .
The European Union needs to have a view and an opinion about this new world .
However , I get the impression that the prevailing mood in the institutions of the European Union is one of complacency , as if what is happening has nothing to do with us .
I get the impression that many of us believe that we are living in a vacuum , in another world , immune from what is already happening and what is yet to come .
In times such as these , a European Union presidency has to be able to rework the values which we say we stand for into a vision of the world to come , and to persuade the people of Europe that these values are worth fighting for .
Only with this priority will a presidency be successful and worthy of the times we live in .
Sittings come and go .
So do programmes .
However , the times we live in call for a return to the values of the people of Europe , as is only proper when we are fighting for peace .
Mr President , Mr Prime Minister , Mr President of the Commission , I have listened very carefully to the priorities you set out .
I wish there were six instead of five , but I think that the sixth will be added in due course .
I refer to the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy .
The final proposals are due before the end of January .
The European Union is already taking on ten new members .
The rural population of the European Union will rise by 165 % and rural land by 43 % .
Cultivable land will increase by 55 % .
And yet the budget up to 2013 , in the best case scenario - with minimum inflation - will remain the same .
I should like to ask you what your presidency 's objectives are , Mr Prime Minister , and what you intend to do for the millions of European farmers , in both the current European Union and the enlarged European Union .
As far as Lisbon is concerned , two of the ten years have passed and little has been achieved , far less than the 20 % which should have been achieved by now .
What is certain is that , instead of closing , the competitiveness differential between our economy and the American economy , which is our main competitor , is now even wider .
I was both interested and delighted to see that entrepreneurship and small enterprises are one of your priorities .
An excellent move .
Today you announced this in an ambitious voice .
We shall be here in about five months ' time , totting up the accounts to see what has been done .
I should like to know , Mr Prime Minister and President-in-Office , what you intend to do to achieve these ambitious objectives , which you have failed to achieve at home .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen , while welcoming the fact that Greece has taken over the presidency , I should like to point out that it has done so at an historic moment in the development of the unique phenomenon which we refer to as European integration and which , among other things , has replaced the post-war division of our continent .
As regards the priorities of the Greek Presidency , as time is so short , I shall confine myself to the following brief points and comments :
On enlargement : the main decisions may have been taken during the previous presidency , but the final stages have yet to be completed , culminating in the signature of the accession treaties in Athens .
Preparations still have to be made so that the new Member States can adjust smoothly to European developments , which is why enlargement has rightly been given priority and will require close attention if we are to avoid irregularities and delays in the accession process .
I noted that you intend to continue the enhanced pre-accession strategy with Bulgaria and Romania , Mr President-in-Office , and rightly so .
But we must not forget the southern Balkans , where rapprochement with the European Union started up some time ago under the stability and association process .
This rapprochement needs to be encouraged here too , so that we can consolidate our relations , which we are not doing when it comes to the security and stability of the new , enlarged Europe .
On the Lisbon strategy , I should like to focus on sustainable development .
The need to promote a sustainable development strategy within the framework of European integration is even more urgent today , what with the pressure of enlargement and increasing globalisation .
The plan for implementing the sustainable development strategy drawn up by the European Commission is already filling the vacuum between what we say and what we do , by way of legislation , to protect the environment and public health and encourage the application and mainstreaming of the environmental dimension in all our policies .
That is why I think it is so important for us to adopt a step-by-step procedure for monitoring policy in practice at the spring European Council .
The difficulties in getting the Kyoto protocol signed make it even more imperative that we step up dialogue and collaboration with the USA , Japan and developing countries .
Obviously , the European Union cannot deal with this as an internal problem .
So it needs to shoulder its responsibilities at international level , which means pioneering efforts to achieve sustainable development through technology and science .
This is where I should like to focus your attention , Mr President-in-Office , because Europe has clearly started slipping behind recently , especially in biotechnology , in comparison with the United States and Japan .
As far as defence and immigration policy are concerned , I agree .
As you know , we have been calling for an immigration policy in the European Union for years , without any concrete results .
We expect an integrated policy to be developed and an integrated policy on illegal immigration to be developed .
Although illegal immigrants themselves are often living in abject circumstances , they also cause huge problems in the societies and to the people living in the Member States of the European Union .
Measures therefore need to be taken to improve the management of our external borders and to combat illegal immigration networks and trafficking in human beings by promoting measures under the third pillar .
I was most interested to hear you talk of readmission agreements with all our partners , especially those under serious pressure , and would ask you , please , to push ahead on this issue .
I think the Thessaloniki Council needs to push on with the reform of the Treaties of the European Union .
Finally , in foreign relations , I think that you need to encourage Euro-Mediterranean cooperation , basically under a long-term Euro-Mediterranean policy . Italy is to follow Greece , giving two countries with excellent knowledge of these problems the chance to draw up an efficient Euro-Mediterranean policy .
Cooperation is not enough .
We need a long-term policy .
I wish you every success .
I trust that in six months ' time we shall meet here , with you reporting that you have done what you said here today , and with us ready to exercise constructive , honest criticism in good faith .
May I wish you every success .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , honourable Members , it is a fact that Greece is taking over the helm of the European Union at a crucial turning point for the European Union , both at home and abroad .
We are on the brink of the biggest enlargement in the history of the Union , an enlargement which puts an end to a division which has lasted fifty years .
We are about to draft a European constitution and strengthen our institutions , in order to guarantee the continuing cohesion of Europe , even after the ten new countries have joined , and ensure that it continues to operate as a political union so that it can achieve its objective , which is greater and greater unification of the nations of Europe .
The Convention has called for more Europe on numerous occasions and the Greek Presidency will put the finishing touches to this structure in Thessaloniki in June .
Europe is also in the middle of a very serious downturn in the economy .
The global economy is in recession , but that is nothing new .
The economic depression in Europe has lasted at least ten years .
Europe has resisted an inspired strategy , the Lisbon strategy . And now this strategy is also in danger of being washed away by the recession .
I think that Greece , a country whose economy has recovered thanks to a programme of reform carried out on its own initiative , and a country which has achieved rates of growth putting it at the forefront of the European Union and has used this process to bring about a positive revolution in the agricultural sector , and a country which now has a first-world rather than a third-world economy , thanks also , of course , to the common agricultural policy , is now well prepared to breathe new life into the Lisbon process , which it badly needs if it is to survive .
In addition , Greece , as a country on the borders of Europe , has always linked trade between east and west and it can do the same now ; it understands better than anyone else that the economies of eastern Europe have the potential to become a driving force behind the economy of the Fifteen .
These creative prospects cannot be reversed .
We are not going to cancel enlargement and we are not going to stop drafting a European constitution .
Their beneficial results , however , may be delayed if we have to deal with war with Iraq .
I agree with my honourable friend Mr Poettering that nuclear weapons cannot be left in irresponsible hands .
But nor can they be left in responsible hands , Mr Poettering .
There are no hands responsible enough for these terrifying , apocalyptic weapons we have armed ourselves with .
We do not know what is going to happen in Iraq . But we do know that the President-in-Office of the Council is the only European leader who has had the unfortunate privilege of dealing with the danger of his country 's becoming involved in a catastrophic war .
He managed to avert that war .
I trust the experience he gained will help him do as much for the war which is threatening the entire planet as we speak .
Mr President , I am grateful to have the opportunity to respond at the end of the debate .
Members have raised very interesting points .
I hope that the President-in-Office of the Council will have taken careful note and will be keen to take on board as many of them as he can .
Until recently relations between Parliament and the Council were not extensive , but a combination of an increase in the powers of this House and the prospect of an increase in the number of Member States has had the effect of bringing our two institutions much closer together .
On behalf of the Liberal Group I welcome this closer working relationship between Parliament and the Council .
We see it very publicly , particularly in the Convention , and also in the number of very successful negotiations through the codecision process .
I welcome the approach taken , first by the Danish Presidency and now continued by the Greek Presidency , to much closer working relations with this House , shown in the President-in-Office 's concern that a statute for Members should form part of the successful reform of the European Union institutions .
We look forward to working closely with you .
Mr President , unfortunately , circumstances prevent me from being in celebratory mood .
The Greek Government has indeed taken over the presidency at a time of acute economic crisis , with growing prospects of a new , even more murderous attack by the imperialist powers on the Iraqi people .
Their pretext is that Iraq has a smoking gun , although they have yet to find it ; and yet these self-same hypocrites make , use and sell every type of weapon of mass destruction there is .
The Greek Government was party to the wars against Yugoslavia and Afghanistan and has said that it will join the impending war against Iraq , even if it is hiding behind its fig leaf by saying that war needs to be preceded by a UN Security Council resolution .
The Greek Presidency will promote the interventionist European defence and security policy by immediately deploying the European army , first in Bosnia and the FYROM and then anywhere else it is needed .
It will step up the attack on employment , insurance and pension rights .
It will wipe out even more small and medium-sized farms during the mid-term review of the CAP .
It will promote mechanisms for deporting immigrants and strict asylum laws .
Using terrorism as a pretext , it will promote the transposition of anti-grass roots European legislation into national law and the abolition of democratic rights and freedoms .
The signature of the Treaty enlarging the European Union under the Greek Presidency will mark the start of even more hardships for its people and will , we fear , result in the Euro-partition of Cyprus .
May I reassure anyone who may be worried by the socialist label sported by the Greek Government that , as we have heard today , the Greek Presidency intends to keep big business happy .
That is why the people of Europe who , unlike big business , have nothing good to expect from the Greek Presidency , should not be complacent .
The only way out is for them to join forces and step up their fight against this policy .
In Greece , demonstrations are almost a daily occurrence .
They will culminate with demonstrations in June , which we invite the workers of Europe to attend .
As far as the Communist Party of Greece is concerned , it will be right on the front line of this fight .
Mr President , I wanted to pick up on a couple of the points raised by Mr Prodi and by the Greek Presidency .
Firstly , on the research and development policy of the European Union , Mr Prodi talked about the need to develop and invest in clean technologies .
Obviously our group agrees with this .
We need to develop environmentally friendly technologies , partly because of the employment opportunities they create and the training needs that exist , but also because of their positive social repercussions .
I note that the Greek Presidency has identified cutting-edge technologies , in biotechnology and defence , as research priorities .
That begs a few questions about how we are deciding what we wish to invest in , with whom we are wishing to compete , and for what purpose .
I am interested in understanding how this links to the current treaty requirement in Article 6 to integrate the environment into policies and practices of the European Union .
Mr Trakatellis made some very important points on this .
We are pleased that in future we are going to be monitoring policies in terms of a social sustainable development emphasis .
Given that the Spring summit is supposed to be about sustainability , I am also interested to know what proposals there will be from Council about how it is going to change its own structures to deal with this much more integrated approach .
Our group is also interested to note that the Greek Presidency 's priorities include the tasks relating to services of general interest , because we are going to be looking at the preparations for Cancun and the offers from the EU in that connection .
Mr President , allow me to start by thanking all the members of the European Parliament .
Their interventions will help the presidency enormously in outlining its policy and taking decisive action .
This has been a most useful debate .
Mr President , after Prime Minister Simitis ' exhaustive reply , I wish only to add a brief comment and response in order not to prolong your suffering .
The first question concerns the proposal to create a worldwide Socrates programme .
I believe that this is the way to go .
We have already created an Erasmus World based on the same criteria , save that the financing is such as to restrict us to minor projects .
Let this be clear : if Europe does not undertake a major common research programme to bring back the drained brains from abroad , to make the most of our young people , to create a breeding ground for scientific and cultural knowledge , then we are lost .
You all know that I never exaggerate . I can assure you : we are lost .
We , with our costs , with our social structure , with our diversities - if we do not take a great leap forward we will be lost .
I will give you just one example , by way of a practical illustration . At present , it costs three times as much to transport a container from China to Amsterdam as it does to transport a container from Amsterdam to China .
Such are the market forces on both sides . I can give you another figure .
In the past month , there have been 8 million new subscribers to mobile telephone networks in China - in one month .
Do we really think we can tackle this world with our research sector in such a fragmented state , without entering the technology race , without being at the forefront of innovation ?
We are deluding ourselves .
My response to the second question is this . We have been accused of not mentioning the benefits of the internal markets .
No : these are the basis of all the measures we will take this year .
I would merely point out that so great is the importance of the internal market that , if we were to analyse the sectors which have been affected by inflation in recent months , entering the great , heated debate on the euro , we would find that , where the internal market has been implemented , there has not been any inflation and where there have been delays in implementing the internal market there has been inflation .
Suffice it to say that our future depends on the competition the internal market can bring .
That concludes the item .
Mr President , I realise that this is rather out of the ordinary , but might I not be permitted to take over Mr Lage 's question ?
I would be happy to do so .
I wanted to put a supplementary question in any case .
Mr President , the Commission is committed to addressing the dramatic humanitarian crisis in Angola effectively and without delay and to supporting the peace process .
The Commission is constantly monitoring the situation in Angola , as we have done for many years , in order to get a clear picture of humanitarian needs .
I will be going to Angola - and also to Zambia - to assess the situation myself later this month , so I shall gain an overview of the humanitarian situation and the development of the peace process in Angola .
On that occasion I will be signing the EC-Angola cooperation strategy for 2002-2007 , including the plan of action .
The Commission 's action in Angola is twofold : emergency humanitarian aid and a longer-term strategy based on cooperation .
This is funded by ECHO and by EDF funds .
As far as the humanitarian aid is concerned , the Commission , through ECHO , has already generated a considerable amount of funding to address the needs and will maintain its presence and commitment in the country throughout this year .
Last year Angola was among the top ten recipients of ECHO funding , receiving a total of EUR 14 million .
This year , an initial decision has been taken to provide EUR 8 million funding , due to be adopted soon .
Malnutrition is one of the main targets for our support in the humanitarian area , particularly in forgotten regions where no other donors are present in the country .
As far as the longer-term strategy is concerned , in May 2002 , a month after the signature of the peace agreement , a plan of action to support the peace process was presented by the Commission and approved by the General Affairs Council on 13 May .
The plan of action identified a financial package , originally EUR 124 million , from unspent EDF funds and budget lines aimed at addressing the most pressing concerns at this stage , including emergency relief , food aid and food security , reintegration and resettlement of refugees and displaced persons and de-mining operations .
The implementation of this is now under way and to our great satisfaction we can start doing things in a country where for many years we have , owing to the circumstances , only been able to do humanitarian work .
On that basis , and as part of this plan of action , the Commission has made EUR 30 million available for emergency support for the peace process by reallocating funds from earlier European Development Funds to support short-term work on the peace process .
These funds are targeted at medical assistance , the distribution of seeds and tools , food aid and the resettlement of former UNITA soldiers and their families .
De-mining is also important .
We tried to do all this as quickly as possible last year .
The decision on all this will be implemented through different UN agencies , EuronAid and FAO for the food security component and different NGOs for the de-mining operations .
Proposals for EUR 16 million have been signed and the remaining proposals are awaiting approval by the Angolan national authorities .
They are expected to be finalised within the next few weeks .
Although humanitarian support will continue to be provided , the Commission considers that pressure must be kept up on the Angolan Government to urge it to assume more direct responsibility for its own vulnerable populations .
We are therefore calling upon the government of Angola to make more efforts in addressing the critical humanitarian needs of the population .
We welcome the Angolan Government 's intention to organise an international conference for the reconstruction of the country , and trust that the views of all groups in society will be reflected in the reconstruction plan to be presented .
The Commission has offered to assist in the organisation of the conference , which is tentatively scheduled to take place in March or April 2003 in Brussels , kindly hosted by the Belgian Government .
These are times of great change and challenge for Angola after many years of conflict .
The emphasis now will be on progress , economic growth , stability and governance .
That will change the whole mood of politics in the country and I am looking forward to the dialogue we shall be participating in next week .
Commissioner , thank you for your very balanced reply to my question . I am pleased with the action taken by the Commission and by the European Union in Angola , and I note that the Commission is stepping up the action it is taking to assist development in and provide humanitarian aid to Angola .
I totally agree that the best solution for Angola is to take advantage of this country 's enormous potential .
Angola has been generously endowed with resources by nature , but unfortunately it has also been the victim of acts of madness by mankind for decade upon decade .
It is now possible to use these rich and immense natural resources to benefit the people of this country , which , although it covers an enormous geographical area , has a population of just 13 or 14 million people .
So we are faced with a difficult paradox : a land rich in resources with a population living on the verge of misery , hunger and death .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , I think that the Commission should continue along the lines you have just informed us about .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to add something to what has just been said .
Only a matter of a few decades ago , Angola was one of Africa 's principal agricultural exporters , and this of course means that it is appalling that we now have to supply it with food aid - a situation brought about by both war and socialist mismanagement of the economy .
There are three questions I would like to put to you .
Firstly , what actual agricultural programmes is the Commission implementing ?
That , in my view , is the most important thing , that the country can again be self-supporting and export agricultural produce .
Secondly , what is the state of the infrastructure that is needed to distribute the food ?
And thirdly , what is happening about educational and training programmes ?
These are , I believe , the three most important issues that are at stake here .
It is difficult to say what is most important .
In cases like this almost everything is important .
I would say to Mr Posselt that consolidating peace , to give people the confidence that it is irreversible , is most important right now .
But certainly it is essential to open up the interior of the country and make roads safe from landmines so that economic life and the resettlement of people can take place .
This is extremely high on the agenda .
For many years any support , even food supplies and basic commodities , has had to be flown in to the small towns in most of the country : these towns were more or less isolated because of UNITA which surrounded them .
For humanitarian reasons , for political reasons and for economic reasons , opening up and creating a normal flow is absolutely essential .
There is an increasing number of accidents due to landmines because things are starting to move now .
It is therefore enormously urgent to accelerate that effort .
As regards agriculture , as defined in the country strategy paper , we will be focusing on agricultural development .
This is essential both for the survival of the people and because of the enormous potential that Mr Posselt rightly pointed to .
Angola is more than diamonds and oil .
It is also a country that has great potential for a much more diversified economy .
As the author is not present , Question No 16 lapses .
I would apologise to the Commissioner on behalf of this Parliament .
Question No 17 by John Walls Cushnahan ( H-0872 / 02 ) :
Subject : Recent maritime disasters
In light of the series of maritime disasters that have occurred in European waters in November and December 2002 , namely the Prestige disaster which continues to produce yet more oil slicks which are devastating the coastline and marine life of Galicia , compounded with the recent collision between the freighter the Tricolor and the Kariba , and the second collision between the wreck of the Tricolor and the freighter the Nicola , will the Commission recognise that there is a clear need for a coordinated EU response ?
Furthermore , given the severe consequences of such maritime accidents , what is the Commission 's view of the submission that I made to the Convention on the Future of Europe in June 2002 ( reference Conv 150 / 02 ) , calling for the creation of an EU Coastguard ?

Mr President , on 3 December , the Commission approved a communication on the measures to be taken as a result of the accident involving the oil tanker Prestige .
This document contains detailed proposals for a series of measures and , in particular , speeds up the application of the legislation approved by Parliament and the Council following the Erika disaster , the so-called Erika I and II packages .
The Transport Council of 6 December supported the majority of the initiatives proposed by the Commission .
Therefore , on 20 December , the College approved a proposal for a regulation , which has just been sent to the Council and to Parliament , prohibiting the transport of heavy oils by single-hull oil tankers destined for or originating from European Union ports and speeding up the replacement of this type of oil tanker by double-hull oil tankers .
The European Union has not waited for the recent events to happen to implement an agreed maritime safety policy .
There was already a wide range of measures for guaranteeing better protection in this field .
The Commission takes good note of Parliament 's contribution to the work of the Convention with regard to the creation of a European coastguard body as an effective means of fighting the danger of pollution and maintaining maritime safety .
The recurrence of accidents such as the Erika or the Prestige , not to mention other lesser ones such as the Vicky just a few days ago , demonstrates that the whole of Europe would gain from a European coastguard body , particularly in view of the fact that some of the 25 future States of the Union have absolutely no type of protection or body of this nature .
In any event , the main task of the European Maritime Safety Agency , which is soon to be created , is to technically coordinate the application of Community rules , and the Commission will study which measures must be adopted in the future , in view of the experiences of the Agency .
Commissioner , thank you for your response .
The Prestige disaster highlights not only the gaps in the implementation of EU legislation which you referred to in your answer , designed to prevent the recurrence of such incidents , but also the lack of an adequate EU response mechanism .
In relation to the Prestige , responsibility and liability were disputed .
This delayed action and the absence of a coordinated EU response aggravated the environmental impact .
If this incident , with the consequences it had for the shared environment and European fishing industries , had occurred in EU waters , and if an EU coastguard had existed , the response time would have been reduced , a refuge port would have been designated and the damage could have been minimised .
On top of this , we have had the subsequent incidents involving the Tricolor , the Kariba and the Nicola .
All these indicate the need not just for legislation but for the resources to do the job .
Would the Commission consider setting up a study ?
We can learn how the United States tackles this problem , in relation not only to prevention - it saves some USD 6 billion per year by preventing incidents like this - but to its response when incidents do happen .
They have successful experience in this field , and we have a lot to learn from them .
Since the Commission is the body which initiates legislation , I urge you , Commissioner , to consider acting on the findings of any such inquiry you may care to set up .
Mr Cushnahan , I can only agree with you in that , amongst other things , I cannot accept that citizens have fewer rights in Europe than in the United States .
This is what I said very clearly when I made the proposals in the Erika I and Erika II packages .
If the Council had agreed to the proposal for single-hull vessels transporting oil to leave Community waters , the Prestige disaster would not have taken place , because it would have had to leave Community waters several months beforehand .
I do fully agree that there are things we can learn from the United States .
I do not understand why the United States can have a timetable according to which there will be no single-hull vessels transporting oil in its ports by 2010 and we cannot adopt a similar measure .
In the end , as the honourable Members know , a less ambitious timetable was approved .
What I have proposed to this Parliament and to the Council of Ministers is that we return to the Commission 's initial proposal and speed up the departure of single-hull ships transporting oil . And furthermore , to take the maximum security measures , specifically , that the transport of heavy oil , of heavy fuel oil , of bituminous products and of tars , in other words , of the most polluting products , should be carried out by safer ships , meaning those with double hulls .
Copenhagen speaks of specific measures .
The Commission is studying how to apply those specific measures following the Prestige ; they include the possibility of promoting the construction and maintenance of two or three large skimmers , large suction machines , so that , if an oil slick happens - unfortunately there is no such thing as zero risk , although it should be reduced to the minimum - there may be vessels of the greatest possible power , superior to the vessels currently in existence on European coasts , which furthermore can operate and act at sea at times of storms and difficulties .
We must coordinate the European response .
The Agency , which would be responsible for these vessels and for the deployment at different strategic points on European coasts , must also implement a series of plans for responding to maritime accidents of this type .
This will be one of your tasks : to create a pre-established method for cooperation between different Member States of the Union , which could work better , since it largely depends on bilateral agreements rather than on a perfectly coordinated European-type action .
With regard to responsibility , as the honourable Member knows , we are working on it and I hope that over the next few weeks we can present , within the Commission and rapidly approved , a proposal to provide a criminal definition of serious negligence in all the Member States of the Union in the event of this type of accident .
Commissioner , it seems to me from reading the documents drafted by the Commission , which have your imprimatur on them , and from listening to what you have said , or at least what you have said from time to time in the past , that there is a real political conflict between your position , that is the Commission 's position , and the Council 's position as presented at Copenhagen .
I do indeed have the document of 3 December , which I read with great interest .
However , as I see it , the Transport and Environment Councils held in the same month and the Copenhagen European Council did not respond in any practical way to the Commission 's request for urgent action .
You called for the commitments given in the ' Erika ' legislation to be implemented , Mrs de Palacio , and you called for an approach that went beyond those commitments , but the European Council turned its back on the victims of the disaster who at that very moment were scooping up oil with their own hands .
The Council seemed to hold the Commission 's views in contempt , and it is enough to say that it proposed only five million euros for Galicia and all the countries affected , whereas the United States is currently calling for four billion euros for the ' Exxon Valdez ' accident .
With this in mind , Commissioner , I would like to ask you why the Commission has not brought forward a legislative act like the United States ' Oil Pollution Act , which provides a real basis for combating this problem .
Furthermore , will Galicia be considered as a location for a European Maritime Safety Agency ?
Mr Nogueira , firstly , in relation to your last comments , I do not see that conflict between the positions of the Commission and of the Council .
At the Transport Council on 6 December , conclusions were unanimously approved which stated that the States are committed at national level , until we have a Community proposal , to adopting measures aimed at excluding from their ports any ships transporting bituminous products ( heavy fuel oil , heavy oil , tars ) which do not have a double hull .
And the country which I know best , just like the honourable Member , has already taken a measure which entered into force on 1 January this year , and certain other countries have adopted it as well .
Secondly , as well as this proposal , they have committed themselves to adopting , before June , an accelerated timetable for the departure of single-hull ships transporting oil from European ports .
Thirdly , they have committed themselves to speeding up the implementation of all the measures adopted in the Erika I and Erika II packages and therefore not to wait until July of this year or February 2004 to do so .
In particular , I am awaiting a response to the delicate issue of the famous ports of refuge ; in principle , the Member States of the Union have the time limit of February 2004 , but I hope they will communicate it to us before that - some countries are beginning to work on this - and I hope that they will do so before the summer .
I would therefore insist that I believe there is considerable agreement .
The Prestige tragedy has been a real wake-up call for all the Member States of the Union .
I would like to have the powers of the federal government of the United States , but the European Union is not a federation and the Commission is not therefore the federal government of a United States of Europe ; I would not mind if it were , and if I were a Minister in that federal government , but that is not the case .
Despite this , we have proposed a series of measures which are very similar to the American proposal , except on the timetable - which , I insist , we are going to raise again so that it may be speeded up - and on the amount of compensation , which is on the table with the Ministers and must be discussed , and if it is not adopted by the International Maritime Organisation , the Ministers have committed themselves to proposing it at European level .
Finally , I would like to say to the honourable Member that I have nothing against the Maritime Safety Agency , but rather I am entirely in favour of it , but it is not I who decides .
This will be decided by the European Council at the appropriate time .
I should like to thank Mr Cushnahan for raising this issue in the House today .
My supplementary question to the Commissioner is : given recent maritime disasters off the Spanish coast , and indeed in the English Channel , does she agree with me that it is only a matter of time before a passenger ferry and a rogue oil tanker collide , with devastating environmental and indeed human consequences ?
Is it not time to ban all flag-of-convenience ships once and for all , not just from EU ports but from EU waters as well ?

Mr President , the honourable Member has a very good knowledge of maritime safety issues ; you have been a rapporteur and furthermore you have had considerable successes , such as the inclusion of black boxes , which was largely achieved thanks to your work , effort and persistence .
You are also well aware of the problem associated with maritime traffic .
I believe we must do work on this ; in relation to the problem of the Channel , we have seen that there are aspects on which progress can be made .
With regard to flags of convenience , the honourable Members are aware that , within the International Maritime Organisation , work is being done to improve this situation .
In any event , there are two types of flag of convenience : those which exist for purely economic or tax reasons and those which , furthermore , demonstrate very little responsibility when it comes to control and the quality of the ships which fly them .
We must distinguish between these two situations .
The way to act is not to make a generic declaration ; which would be the easiest thing to do , but , when it comes down to it , would be difficult to put into practice .
We have to make their lives difficult in our ports so that they stop coming .
In this regard , port inspections , with the selective criteria we have proposed and which have been approved thanks to the support of this Parliament , and which the Council also approved , clearly mean that , as soon as a ship flying that flag reaches a European Union port , it will be thoroughly inspected .
It will therefore have to be up to scratch .
This type of action and control , particularly in relation to those countries and flags which present most risk , is the way to act in the immediate term .
However , the honourable Member is right , because it is not just a question of flags of convenience , but also the problem of the responsibility of classification societies , who have a conflict of interests , because they justify and certify the quality of a ship on behalf of the State issuing the flag but at the same time work for the owner of the ship in order to issue certain types of certificates .
We must analyse these chains and deal with the issues in depth , and we must also deal with responsibility in the event of serious negligence .
We will begin the second part of this Question Time with a question which should be replied to by Mr Vitorino but which , as we have already said , will be replied to by Mrs de Palacio .
Part II
Questions to Commissioner de Palacio
Question No 18 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0874 / 02 ) :
Subject : Accusations of torture in Greece
A recent Council of Europe report ( Committee for the Prevention of Torture ) points out that during investigations ELAS , the Port Police and the Customs Authorities concealed the existence of temporary detention areas for foreigners , while completely unacceptable conditions were found to exist at jails in Kozani and Heraklion .
Given that the above Committee has received ' a significant number ' of accusations from detainees about ill-treatment by police and port authorities , usually during interrogation , that it states in its conclusions that Greece significantly downplays the extent of the problem of the ill-treatment of prisoners by the police authorities and that the EU is based , inter alia , on the principle of respect for human rights , what measures does the Commission intend to take to put an end to the flagrant violation of human rights ?
Questions to Commissioner Liikanen
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission would point out that the issues raised by the honourable Member are linked , in particular , to respect for human dignity and the prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading punishments or treatment , principles which are common to all the Member States of the Union .
These principles are laid down in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union and are confirmed in Articles 1 and 4 of the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Respect for these principles by the States is guaranteed by the infringement procedure laid down in Article 226 of the European Community Treaty and by the political procedures laid down in Article 7 of the Union Treaty .
In accordance with the former , the Commission can bring a case before the Court of Justice if the alleged act falls within the scope of Community law .
In the case of the latter , the Commission or a third of the Member States of the Union can raise the issue before the Council , meeting at the level of Heads of State or Government , in the event of a serious or persistent violation of the principles laid down in Article 6 .
The majority of cases relating to the issues raised by the honourable Member relate to asylum , immigration and the protection of the rights of third-country nationals .
These issues are included in the scope of the Community 's competences .
Furthermore , the Community began to legislate on this issue in accordance with Articles 61 and 63 of the European Community Treaty .
The Commission would point out however that the report by the Council of Europe which the honourable Member refers to was followed by a detailed response by the Greek authorities , which in the current situation is providing a series of responses to the concerns expressed by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture .
In any event , the Commission will closely monitor the development of the dialogue between the Council of Europe and the Greek authorities .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I really do hope that you will keep an eye on this .
It is a very , very serious matter .
It raises questions of transparency and questions of control because , as you can see , the committee of the Council of Europe has been given false information .
I hope that neither you nor the European Commission will be given false information .
I should like to put the following supplementary question to you : quite apart from anything else , when it comes in these cases to the right to visit foreign nationals , especially immigrants , wherever they are being held , and it is often in unofficial detention centres , can we guarantee or can we call on or persuade the Greek authorities to make visiting rights normal practice , at least for non-governmental organisations ?
Then at least we could resolve the problems which have already been raised as a result of these accusations , accusations which make me personally cringe with shame , both on my own account and as a Greek citizen .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , apart from the fact that - as I have said - it seems that there is a clear dialogue between the Greek authorities and the European Council , I would like to say that the Council of Ministers of the European Union reached a political agreement in December 2002 to bring forward a directive on the minimum rules for the reception of asylum seekers in the Member States of the European Union , on the basis of a Commission proposal of May 2001 .
Formal adoption is yet to take place because of the parliamentary reservations of one State of the Union .
However , this directive - which was also supported by the Greek Government - intends to grant asylum seekers material facilities , which include accommodation , food and clothing , as well as a daily allowance which guarantees an adequate standard of living and subsistence for the asylum seekers .
The States will also have to inform asylum seekers of the advantages they may benefit from , give them access to the labour market in certain circumstances , and ensure that they receive the necessary medical care .
Furthermore , they will ensure that the conditions for reception are subject to appropriate monitoring and control .
Finally , they will have to ensure the prevention of violence in places intended to house asylum seekers , at borders and in residential centres .
All these measures will be applied in favour of asylum seekers authorised to remain in the territory in that capacity , even if they are obliged to remain in a particular place .
Ladies and gentlemen , Greece has accepted this agreement and - although the Commission will monitor this issue - we know that the dialogue between the Greek authorities and the European Council about these complaints that the honourable Member has mentioned is continuing .

Mr President , all I can say to the honourable Member is that I have taken good note and that I will communicate the suggestion you have just made to my colleague , Mr Vitorino .
Mr President , I would like to refer to my question which is now number 52 on the question paper , which I tabled within due time specifically addressed to Mr. Liikanen , on the subject of regulatory impact assessment .
This is a subject which I know he is very capable to deal with , since I have participated in a number of seminars organised by his services .
When I arrived in Strasbourg this week , I discovered that this question was not down for a reply by Mr Liikanen , and Parliament 's services told me that it had been reclassified by the Commission - I understand , by President Prodi 's services - as a general question , and that therefore it would not be covered .
I have two points to make to the President .
Firstly , I have discussed this with Mr. Liikanen and , if we have time to reach it this afternoon , he is certainly prepared to address the subject , if not necessarily the full scope of the question .
The broader issue is , could we ask the Parliament 's services - and I am not blaming them in any way because this is a Commission issue - to ensure that if a Member 's question is reclassified in this way , and is not down for an answer by the Commissioner to whom it is redirected , we are told about that , so that it can be reformulated if necessary and the Commissioner to whom it is addressed can answer it .
It does seem to me , Mr President , from the point of view of this Parliament , that it is perfectly possible for the Commission services in effect to deflect a question away from a Commissioner unilaterally , without the Member concerned having any knowledge of it .
Perhaps you could address that , and take it up with the services , so that in future we may be given more knowledge about these instances .
Can I ask you , if we have time , to allow Mr Liikanen to answer my question ?
In general terms , I must say to Mr Harbour that we have provided ourselves with Rules of Procedure - approved a few weeks ago - and that these Rules regulate practically everything .
Competence for and allocation of the order or classification of these questions falls to the Commission , which naturally can make mistakes , just as Parliament can .
In the classification today , as you have explained quite rightly , this question is not allocated to Mr Liikanen .

I have no opposition to Mr Liikanen replying , but I must say one thing : that this is not just an issue between Mr Liikanen , you and myself , but that there are other Members whose questions are in the order , who wish to ask their questions and we have very little time .
In other words , introducing one question means giving up another , and this sets a very difficult precedent .
You , as a Briton , know better than anybody else how important precedents are .
In principle , your question will be replied to in writing .
It will only be possible if some of the twenty minutes remains and Mr Liikanen is prepared to answer it .
Only in this case .
In any event , Mr Liikanen can give his opinion .
Since you have referred to the opinion of Mr Liikanen , I will give him the floor so that he can give his opinion on this point or order .
Mr President , in the Commission of course the impact assessment has a global approach at the moment , because we try to assess business , environmental and social aspects at the same time .
I am very honoured that the President of the Commission has taken full responsibility for that , but I might have some questions which are closely related to Mr Harbour 's question .
I can then reply in that context .
If it comes within the twenty minutes , without setting a precedent - and I have heard Mr Liikanen - I will allow a brief reply .
Otherwise , it will not be possible and you will receive a reply in writing .
As the author is not present , Question No 19 lapses .
Question No 20 by Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou ( H-0876 / 02 ) :
Subject : Greece and SMEs
At the Barcelona European Council Member States were asked to speed up the implementation of the European Charter for SMEs and the Commission was asked to draw up a Green Paper on the entrepreneurial spirit and SMEs .
Has the Commission drawn up such a document and , if so , what are the main new strategies for promoting the entrepreneurial activities of SMEs ?
Has it already evaluated the participation of SMEs in existing Community support programmes for SMEs ?
In particular in respect of Greece , is any information available on the number of SMEs , by category of activity and size of undertaking , which have so far benefited from Community funding ( beyond the EUR 1000 subsidy from the Greek Ministry of Development 's ' Diktiotheite ' ( Link Up ) Programme and on the results of this funding ?
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner .
The only specific information you have given me is that the Green Paper is being prepared and will contribute to the joint effort being made by the European institutions and the Member States to increase entrepreneurship , kick-start the European economy and , as a result , create new jobs .
I , for my part , need more specific details and I think it would be worth your spending some time on them because , as we have seen from our lengthy discussion of the Lisbon strategy earlier today , following the presentation of the Greek Presidency 's priorities , it will not be easy to achieve the targets we have set and the best way of giving the European economy the competitiveness it needs and creating jobs is to develop small and medium-sized enterprises .
I shall wait and see what information I obtain in response to my questions from the report you will be publishing next week , and I reserve the right to re-table my question and ask for specific answers to specific questions .
Question No 21 by Paul Rübig ( H-0879 / 02 ) :
Subject : Status of third-party certifiers in the EU
The European Commission is currently working on a new approach to the CE marking system and the future strategy for that system .
From the point of view of European SMUs , it is particularly important that European third-party certifiers should continue to be able to place their own marks on all products .
Particularly in the light of global competition , and in the interests of consumer protection , those marks should be easily recognisable by every member of the public , given that non-European certifiers can at any time check a product and , as third-party certifiers , have their own names and logos placed on that product .
How does the European Commission intend to incorporate these considerations regarding the strengthening of the position of European certification undertakings into its new approach to the CE marking system ?
The objectives of the forthcoming communication on the new approach , enhancing the implementation and new approach are : firstly , to analyse the overall situation in the field of new approach directives which cover a wide range of products ; secondly , to detect possible weaknesses ; and thirdly , to outline remedial measures to improve the application of the new approach directives .
CE conformity is one of the main points that have been identified as requiring strengthening .
This marking , required by most new approach directives , is addressed to market surveillance authorities of the Member States and symbolises the conformity of the product with the applicable Community requirements imposed on the manufacturer .
The communication will also address the issue of the relationship between the CE marking and voluntary markings .
The Commission has conducted an on-line survey of new approach stakeholders .
As far as the CE marking was concerned , the Commission has taken on board the opinions of the majority of those who replied , the main thinking being that the additional voluntary markings are not in contradiction with the CE marking , as long as they do not cause confusion or overlap in meaning or purpose with it .
They also often provide added value for consumers , users , public authorities and all those being addressed .
Third party certifiers are in some sectors already involved in the conformity assessment procedures leading to the CE marking .
It is also quite often stipulated that the identification number of the item should appear next to the CE marking .
Third party certification , in areas of conformity assessment where no harmonised directives apply , is permitted and even welcomed , since it indicates to the people to whom it is addressed that certain qualities of the product have been tested and certified by the body in question .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to express my gratitude to the Commissioner , believing as I do that third-party certification will be a particularly important consideration for us in the future .
The CE conformity marking does indeed confirm that the product complies with all rules within the European Union and is legal here .
The only thing is that the public do not , in fact , want just this legal status quo ; they want certification by a third - and of course neutral - party to give better products a higher market profile , so that what we end up with , for all practical purposes , is a quality pyramid .
The CE marking would be its lowest level , with a standard mark being required to indicate significant improvements in quality , practical usefulness , or safety features in comparison with the normal CE marking .
I believe that such upward gradation of quality would be of great importance to consumers and the public .
I thank Mr Rübig for his interest on this issue of conformity assessment .
Conformity assessment new approach directives are not usually included among the major policy issues which reach the front page .
When we talk about SMEs or any entrepreneurs , whether small or large enterprises , these are key issues to enable a company to act in the internal market and globally .
On the other hand , they also enable the proper weight to be given to the interests of the consumer .
I hope Parliament will create a system to deal properly with the communication which is coming in fairly soon .
Of course , I am not going to set any bad precedents , and therefore , within the Questions to Mr Liikanen , if it is considered that the question can be partially replied to - not Question No 53 , but Question No 20b - I do not have any opposition , but if Mr Liikanen believes that the question is much more general and the Commission 's allocation of the question to Mr Prodi is correct , this question will be replied to in writing .




First of all , I should like to refer to the reply that the President will give today .
For the first time the Commission has made a proposal that has undergone this broadened impact assessment , concerning employment policy guidelines .
It is very important for our internal work that we stick to this impact assessment system .
I hope that Parliament will take advantage of this too .
When dealing with legislation Parliament will be able properly to assess the Commission proposal .
The next challenge is how Parliament and the Council will assess the changes they might make to the Commission proposal .
That is the issue for Parliament , the Council and the Commission in forthcoming discussions .
Referring to the President 's reply , we will have opportunities to discuss the matter further .
Mr Rübig , in any event you will receive a reply in writing as Question No 52 .
Questions to Commissioner Patten
Question No 22 by Bart Staes ( H-0832 / 02 ) :
Subject : CFSP : Future prospects for Kosova
Recent contacts with political leaders in Kosova have made it clear to me that the young Kosovan institutions face enormous handicaps in seeking to pursue a real and effective policy , not least on the socio-economic front .
I can dispense with a description of the dire economic situation in Kosova , well known as it is .
Kosova needs urgently to be enabled to pursue an imaginative policy in order to attract investment .
The big problem is that the Kosovan authorities are prevented by the statute in force from pursuing any such policy .
Kosova is , in particular , not at present in a position to conclude any international trade agreements or to contract loans with international financial institutions .
Kosova needs a clearly autonomous statute .
I therefore ask the Commission what future prospects it can hold out to the Kosovars of that happening .
Specifically , can Kosovan institutions count on very wide-ranging autonomy in the future ?
Let me emphasise that Kosovo 's institutional set-up , including the distribution of responsibilities , has been defined by the United Nations Security Council and must be respected by all sides , including the provisional institutions of self-government in Kosovo .
Kosovo 's current economic situation is clearly a product of past political and economic neglect and oppression before 1999 .
This demanded major economic efforts from the United Nations interim administration , and especially its European Union pillar , in the last three years .
A war-torn region has been economically stabilised , basic infrastructure has been repaired , the euro has been introduced and the legal framework for a market economy is being laid .
A new customs service is collecting much-needed revenues for the Kosovo budget .
We are still heavily engaged on the ground to further support Kosovo 's recovery , for instance , the consolidation of the rule of law , which is vital to attract foreign direct investment .
There is still a long way to go but we should not forget from which level we started .
Furthermore , the Commission has succeeded in letting Kosovo benefit from the various instruments of the European Union 's stabilisation and association process , even without a decision on its future status , to ensure that it does not fall behind in the region .
UNMIK is also currently consulting with various international financial organisations on how to give Kosovo access to their funds in the absence of a decision on its final status .
In the framework of the stability pact , UNMIK is exploring ways of embedding Kosovo in the process of regional trade liberalisation and has already signed the Memorandum of Understanding on the regional electricity market in south-east Europe .
In short , we have gone a very long way to find creative ways to improve Kosovo 's economic situation and we will continue to do so .
Our efforts and those of the United Nations qualify the imaginative policy that the honourable Member mentioned in his question , even though Kosovo 's unresolved status poses additional challenges to both the international and local authorities .
This should not prevent us from pursuing a sound economic policy and structural reforms , which are feasible and necessary to ensure economic growth and welfare for the people of Kosovo .
I hope that the technical breakdown is not a reflection of the situation in Kosovo , for we all know that there are power cuts there sometimes as the electricity supply is not yet fully operational .
I would like to thank Commissioner Patten wholeheartedly for his answer .
It was a very elaborate answer which took account of reality .
My question was actually prompted by talks with representatives of the Kosovar community , representatives of both Mr Haradinaj 's party and the LDK of Ibrahim Rugova , both of whom point out whenever we meet them that Kosovo has no status as yet , which makes their work much more difficult .
They are asking us to make serious efforts to enable them to contact international financial institutions despite their current status .
We know that much has happened .
The war took place almost three and a half years ago .
Is it not possible for us , the European Union , which has the necessary leverage in the international institutions , to make efforts to help Kosovo gain access to institutions like the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund in the context of the United Nations ?
This is a question from the people on the spot .
First of all I am glad that technology eventually brought us the honourable Member 's supplementary question .
I have two points .
First of all I very much agree with the argument of the head of the UN mission in Kosovo , Mr Steiner , that the real task for Kosovo over the coming year is to put standards before status .
What we want to see is Kosovo putting in place the sort of policies and the sort of implementing agencies which will allow it , with the other countries in the region , to move ever closer to the European Union .
Secondly , the honourable Member is correct in saying that a problem that we face in Kosovo is that as it becomes more economically self-sustaining , as it moves away from heavy dependency on grants , it will naturally be looking to international financial institutions and others for loans .
The status issue has raised some problems in that respect .
We are discussing that issue with the IFIs , in particular with the European Investment Bank , and I very much hope that we will be able to resolve it in a way which enables Kosovo , as one would expect of any economy in those circumstances , to move from grant-dependency to the ability to borrow money and to service those loans .
Question No 23 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0866 / 02 ) :
Subject : Status of Kosovo
Would the Commission be prepared to have various options drawn up for the future status of Kosovo and to submit them to the Council and Parliament for further discussion , or does it see any other practicable ways of finally tackling this problem ?
Kosovo 's status is currently defined under UN Security Council Resolution 1244 of 10 June 1999 .
Any decision on its final status will therefore have to be taken by the Security Council .
The international community has not set a clear point in time at which this issue will be debated .
Consequently it is not up to the Commission to draw up scenarios for Kosovo 's future status .
The European Union fully supports the policy of standards before status pursued by the UN Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to which I have just referred , endorsed by the UN Security Council at its meeting of 24 April last year .
UNMIC has set clear benchmarks concerning democratic and market economic reforms , human and minority rights , which are all necessary to prepare Kosovo for future challenges .
These basic standards must be met before a discussion on status can begin .
Kosovo is an integral part of the region for which we have devised the stabilisation and association process to bring it closer to European Union structures .
We have made sure that Kosovo 's unresolved status does not prevent it from benefiting from the stabilisation and association process .
Commissioner , I too am aware that Kosovo 's present status is laid down in the UN Resolution , but the simple fact is that we also have to consider the future , and that is where I can envisage a problem , in that no major investor will put money into Kosovo if he does not know what sort of long-term future the place has to look forward to .
If people cannot see what prospects there are for the country , they will carry on trying to emigrate , rather than investing their energies in Kosovo itself .
Hence this question : is there any sort of dialogue between the European Union and the representatives of Kosovo , in which these issues are at least considered ?
After all , the present position cannot remain as it is for decades at a stretch , and we cannot go sliding , without any sort of forward planning , into a future that will be with us very soon .
The Member is right to show the importance of attracting inward investment to Kosovo , but I think that any would-be investor would have a lot of other concerns higher on their agenda than the constitutional status of Kosovo - concerns about the rule of law , about the law and order situation , about organised crime and about the policy infrastructure within which he or she was being encouraged to invest .
That is why , as I said earlier , I support the arguments which have been put forward by the special representative of the Secretary-General , Mr Steiner , that the task at this stage for Kosovo is to focus on standards rather than to consume the political process with debates about status .
Clearly we have discussed those political issues with Kosovar representatives .
I am very pleased that in the three years and more that I have been visiting Kosovo we have seen not only a transformation of the economic and social situation on the ground but the establishment of the provisional administration : the political structure to reflect the wishes of the people of Kosovo themselves .
I think that is a step forward , but I very much hope , in the debate which local politicians have , that they will recognise that whatever the nature of their aspirations on the status issue , the first thing they have to get right is the basics of economic and social life in Kosovo .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think that you are right to refer to the arguments of the honourable Member who is talking about standards before status .
That is an ' either / or ' approach .
Should we not , however , be aiming for a ' both / and ' approach ?
Should we not be working on standards - and I share your opinion entirely - and the status of Kosovo at the same time ?
I think that a ' both / and ' approach is a better one , one which offers the Kosovar people more hope and more opportunities .
I just wanted to point that out .
It is not unreasonable to say that one should take a step at a time , without of course suggesting for one moment that the discussion on status is irrelevant to Kosovo and to Kosovo 's future .
I would not suggest that , but I think it would be better for Kosovo at the moment if efforts were to be focused on the question of standards .
This does not mean that we are going to be able to put off indefinitely a discussion on the terms of the UN Security Council resolution .
' First things first ' is not a bad piece of advice to give to the people of Kosovo at the moment .
Question No 24 by Torben Lund ( H-0836 / 02 ) :
Subject : Israeli military operations and lost EU funding
The EU has financed many projects in the state of Palestine , in particular to help develop democracy and secure human rights .
Will the Commission say which projects the EU is financing in the state of Palestine and indicate the extent of the damage caused by Israeli military operations to EU-funded projects ?
Will the Commission also say what the consequences of Israeli military operations in the state of Palestine are in terms of Israel 's chances of obtaining support from the EU and in regard to relations between the EU and Israel in general ?
Following a request from the Council , the Commission compiled in January last year a list of projects funded by the European Union and Member States which had either been destroyed or damaged by Israeli military forces .
The list of destroyed projects has recently been updated by the Commission office in Jerusalem , in coordination with the EU Member State representative offices in Jerusalem and Ramallah .
The estimated total , as of 14 December last year , stands at approximately EUR 24 million .
This assessment is limited to the costs of physical infrastructure , excluding indirect losses such as project delays or suspensions .
These estimated damages were presented to the General Affairs Council of 28 January last year ; the GAC in turn asked the Government of Israel to put an end to this practice and reserved the right to claim reparation in the appropriate fora .
The issue was also more recently discussed at the EU-Israel Association Council meeting of 21 October 2002 .
The position of the European Union in the international community is that the wanton destruction of basic infrastructure and facilities is counter-productive .
It sets back efforts to improve the economic , social and humanitarian development in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip .
Poverty levels are now at over 60 % and unemployment is at around 50 % .
This situation of economic collapse , and a deepening humanitarian crisis , destroys hope and destroys any prospect of stability and security for both Israel and the Palestinians .
Israel , due to its relatively high average income per inhabitant , is not eligible to benefit from bilateral European Union funding under MEDA programmes .
So the Israeli Government or Israeli public entities do not receive funding from the European Union aid budget .
Some organisations from civil society in Israel and the Palestinian territories may apply for projects designed to support the peace process .
These projects should , in our view , be pursued in any circumstances .
Some organisations have advocated - and this has been debated in Parliament - commercial sanctions against Israel .
I am bound to say that in my strong judgment the suspension of the association agreement , which provides the basis not only for the European Union 's trade relations with Israel but also for its political dialogue , would do nothing at all to increase the understanding of the Israeli authorities in relation to the current widely held concerns of the European Union and of many European Union citizens .
A summary table of financial aid given by the European Union to the Palestinian Authority from 1994 to 2002 , as well as the updated table with the estimate of losses , are being sent directly to the honourable Member .
Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner Patten for a very precise and very satisfactory answer .
We no doubt all view the present situation in the Middle East as one of unimaginative tit-for-tat exchanges , and I personally think that the military action on the part of Israel is such as to make it almost impossible to imagine the Palestinian people 's being able to unite around a well-functioning society .
In answer to the only supplementary question , I should like to be told whether the military action currently being taken by Israel in the Gaza Strip and on the West Bank affects the EU 's policy of aid to the Palestinian people .
Has it any influence , or is the EU trying to maintain the aid it is at present able to give to the development of Palestinian society ?
I also think that this is all illustrated very graphically by the fact that it has not even been possible to hold democratic elections in the Palestinian area because of the situation inflicted by Israel upon the Palestinian people .
I should like to make two points .
Firstly , all of us condemn terrorist acts .
All of us condemn suicide bombing .
Many of us doubt whether the right way of rooting out the infrastructure of terrorism in the Palestinian territories is by destroying the infrastructure of public facilities and the Palestinian authority .
I am not sure what damaging and almost destroying the Central Bureau of Statistics in the Palestinian territories has to do with rooting out terrorism . I am not sure what destroying the Land Registry has to do with rooting out terrorism .
Very often it looks to bystanders as though every manifestation of institutional life in the Palestinian territories has been targeted , whether public or private , whether the authorities ' administrative structure or civil society .
I happen to believe that is a profoundly mistaken policy , particularly if one is trying to hold out to Palestinians a political prospect and a path to peace and future security .
As to the question of our assistance in Palestine , we continue to provide to the Palestinian authority - and this is a policy that began because of the block put on the payment of tax revenues by Israel to the Palestinian authority - very carefully controlled and monitored assistance , for instance to pay for doctors and nurses and for the ordinary infrastructure .
We have been one of the main supporters of the Palestinian authority and have been the subject of some very unfair criticism for that .
However , keeping a Palestinian authority in being is an important part of holding out the prospect of a peace process .
We continue to provide substantial quantities of other sorts of assistance , such as humanitarian assistance .
Before Christmas we announced that we would provide EUR 30 million for those municipalities in Palestine that had been hardest hit by hostilities .
We are providing a loan fund of EUR 10 million for small- and medium-sized enterprises .
I can send details of all the assistance that we have given in the Palestinian authorities .
I am only sorry that it has not been more successful in creating the economic and social foundations that are so relevant to a peaceful political future .
Mr President , I would be interested to know if the Commission has considered the accusations from the Israeli point of view .
Following the destruction of Palestinian infrastructure , these accusations were made precisely when that same infrastructure had some connection with terrorist activities directed against Israel and against Israeli civilians , without regard to whether they were Jewish or of Arab descent . I would be interested to know what conclusions this has led the Commission to draw .
As I suggested in response to the previous supplementary question , it may be that the destruction of some projects and some infrastructure has been an unfortunate by-product of legitimate , counter-terrorism activities , which are proportionate to the violence that they are seeking to contain .
This may be true in some circumstances , but what has seemed surprising to us is the way in which one Palestinian institution after another has been destroyed or badly damaged as though some people believe that the aim of the exercise should be to undermine the ability of Palestinians to actually create an administrative structure for a future Palestinian state .
I will take two examples that I referred to earlier .
How can destruction of the Land Registry contribute to the defeat of terrorism ?
How can doing a huge amount of damage to the Central Bureau of Statistics in the Palestinian territory be other than an example of needless destruction ?
It is not very sensible when most of the material contained in the Central Bureau of Statistics can be found freely on the internet .
It is difficult to see how those activities can be justified .
This is a point I have made before ; it is a point that the Council of Ministers has also made , and it is a point which the Israeli authorities should address rather more intelligently and sympathetically than they have so far .
Question No 25 by Olivier Dupuis ( H-0843 / 02 ) :
Subject : Voice of Europe
In its answer to Question H-0234 / 02
The Commission fully shares the motives and objectives of the honourable Member , in particular in strengthening the pressure for a better respect for human rights by improving the availability of information .
Our differences are on two points : firstly the eligibility of this specific proposal in terms of the current funding policies and criteria , and secondly the cost of the proposal both in investment and running costs .
Projects of this nature are foreseen neither in the communication of May 2001 on the European Union 's role in promoting human rights and democratisation in third countries , nor in the 2002-2004 programming document for the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights .
The programming document which governs the selection of projects sets out eligible themes for support , including freedom of expression for the independent media , which were then refined in the context of programming identification missions to 29 focus countries of the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights .
These refined themes , which effectively excluded the possibility of a project with a regional character , formed the basis of an international call for proposals launched in July 2002 with a deadline of 5 November .
It is nevertheless likely that , with future calls proposals , the criteria concerning the selection of projects under the general theme of strengthening democratisation , good governance and the rule of law will be modified to allow projects of a regional nature .
In this context it would be possible for an applicant to present a project concerning a ' Voice of Europe ' .
However , this brings me to the problem of cost .
Any application would be admitted only provided it satisfied the general conditions of eligibility applicable under the published guidelines , including the condition that the grant is to fund specific project activities rather than general operating costs .
Whichever comparison is drawn , the cost of establishing a radio station would be high and it would probably require permanent annual core funding for which this budget line is an inappropriate instrument .
Achieving the same objectives by the use of the Internet might be a more appropriate way forward .
I should like first of all to emphasise my personal interest in this subject .
I am absolutely convinced that providing reliable information about world affairs in countries that are suffering from tyrannies , or where freedom of speech and freedom of the media is attenuated , is exceptionally important .
Referring to the country I know best , the work done by the BBC World Service has , over the years , been of enormous significance in the promotion of pluralism around the world .
I understand , however , the point made by the Member .
Radio Free Asia has a budget of about EUR 30 million per year .
If we were to take that as the model , we would be talking about committing 30 per cent of the budget for Chapter B7-7 .
I suspect that the House would regard that as rather a large chunk of the available funds .
The Member asked whether establishing a broadcasting medium would be a good use of the funds if we were to have a larger budget and more money to spend on human rights .
I suspect that , if this were so , I would have to argue with the Court of Auditors and with Parliament .
The policy on democracy and human rights that we now faithfully follow precisely reflects reports by Parliament and the Court of Auditors .
It was warmly endorsed for its strategic thrust by both the Council and by the Parliament .
The Member concerned has powerful powers of persuasion .
His silver tongue might be able to convince Parliament to support this proposition and to change its view on strategic thrust .
He may , however , have more difficulty in persuading the Court of Auditors that we should support the core funding that would undoubtedly be necessary in order to establish such a broadcasting medium .
I believe it is more sensible to look at other options , including use of the Internet , while wholly concurring with what the Member said about the importance of trying to broadcast the truth to countries where , alas , the truth is obfuscated by darkness and tyranny .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , while dealing with the 2003 Budget , the Committee on Budgets discussed Euro-News - the television channel that concentrates its coverage on European affairs - and did so in very great depth .
Do you believe that Euro-News might be a means of disseminating European values and discussions throughout the world ?
EuroNews has promoted European values and ensured that more people around the world are able to follow what is happening in Europe , but whether the organisation is EuroNews or any other , when you start discussing a public subsidy , in my experience legislators and others ask searching questions about value for money and about alternatives for achieving the same objective .
Nobody should be immune from that sort of scrutiny where taxpayers ' money is involved .
When I look back , I might well wish that European broadcasters had done more at an earlier stage to provide greater competition with CNN .
In the field of television news that would have been sensible , but nobody should underestimate the costs and nobody should argue today that it would be easy for Europe to rival the main American international broadcaster .
As the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 26 to 58 will be replied to in writing
The next item is the report ( A5-0431 / 2002 ) by Mr Andria , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament entitled ' Clearing and settlement in the European Union . Main policy issues and future challenges ' [ COM ( 2002 ) 257 - C5-0325 / 2002 - 2002 / 2169 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in financial markets , where the liquidity of the market is closely related to the confidence operators have in the reliability of securities payment and settlement systems , the inefficient operation of the latter can represent a source of risk for the markets themselves .
Reliable payment and settlement systems require a clear legal framework , rules and procedures to govern securities holding , transfers , lending and related payments , as well as the imposition of constraints on these securities .
Clearing and settlement , essential components of all securities transactions , are therefore fundamental to the smooth functioning of integrated financial markets .
In any case we should note that , despite the increased demand for foreign securities , not only does the EU 's infrastructure for clearing and settlement for cross-border transactions remain fragmented to a high degree , but there is also an excessive and certainly not controlled incidence of costs at cross-border level .
In any case , in order to attain specific objectives , it is necessary to know what the operational situation in the sector is , in order to make the appropriate adjustments .
There are two main reference markets : the United States and Europe .
The USA has opted for the Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation , which incorporates both clearing and settlement systems and is overseen by a single managerial body , whose proven efficiency has led to substantial cost reductions .
The European model with as many as 20 CSDs is fragmentary , benefiting from the fact that competition is only limited to securing new areas of influence .
There has never been a price war , as market liquidity is controlled by a single active player .
From an analysis of the existing framework and from the thorough research undertaken by the Giovannini Group , it is clear that there are a range of technical , legal and taxation barriers at the root of the high costs and inefficiency .
Removal of the technical barriers has to be our prime objective and can be considered easily attainable .
Standardising information technology languages and paper-based documentation does not , in fact , require a particular operational effort .
There would certainly be greater difficulties in harmonising legal and taxation rules .
We should aim to achieve the ambitious objective of creating a single securities code , which would constitute a real guarantee for operators ; but it would certainly be difficult for Member States to reach agreement on this issue , for delicate and sensitive reasons linked to the differences between legislation governing property rights , company law and insolvency law .
Therefore , the creation of this code must be considered a long-term objective .
In the short term , an information statement should be drawn up which would provide market participants with a guide to the differences between the laws in the Member States .
With regard to taxation barriers , the difficulties do not stem only from the differences between systems but also from strong resistance to change and harmonisation by some Member States .
Starting with the need to reform the post-trading environment , with the aim of eliminating confusion between infrastructures and functions and destroying existing natural monopolistic positions , there must be an arrangement for core settlement services managed for legal purposes as a user-owned service governed by the rules of non-profit status .
This option would guarantee market integrity , ease of access to the service by users and effective supervision with regard to operational risks .
There could not be any distortions of competition , because this guarantee stems from the fact that the services user participates in managing the body .
Innovation and technical progress could also be attained since the arrangement in paragraph 11 of the report specifies that non-profit status comes after allowing for necessary investment needs .
Separation of core services and value-added services is considered vital .
The latter could , in any case , be performed by central depositaries but with separate structures , including from a logistical point of view , by means of shared or supervised companies .
The clearing and settlement service encompasses guarantee , margining , clearing , settlement and regulation activities .
A quick read through reveals that these are all public utility services .
The added-value services offered by banks or structures separate from depositaries are securities lending , collateral management , cash management , corporate actions , income management and taxation services : all purely commercial activities .
In conclusion , it is also vital to have strong cooperation between the States in order to ensure adequate supervision .
The Commission welcomes the European Parliament 's timely and constructive response to its communication on clearing and settlement .
In particular I should like to thank the rapporteur for his important report .
The Commission will assess Parliament 's response to its communication very carefully and will take into account the views expressed in that report .
The Commission shares the view expressed in the resolution that efficient clearing and settlement is vital for the proper and safe functioning of the European financial markets .
In fact , as is often said with reason , clearing and settlement is the plumbing system of the securities markets , without which nothing works .
The challenge that lies ahead for the Community institutions is to ensure - in cooperation with market participants , national regulatory authorities and national legislators - the elimination of all existing barriers to integration and lack of competition , which would make cross-border post-trade arrangements in the European Union inefficient .
That is essential for our common goal to build an integrated EU capital market by 2005 .
The Commission feels that we should encourage market-led approaches and solutions wherever possible .
However , it is also true that major public policy concerns are at stake , such as the efficiency of the systems , costs , petition issues - namely open and non-discriminatory access and exclusivity agreements - interoperability of systems , and prudential and systemic safety .
All these concerns need to be taken into account , and the rapporteur referred to a number of them .
Now that the initial consultation period has been completed , we at the Commission are in the process of digesting the responses to that consultation document and of defining our approach to clearing and settlement arrangements .
The Commission now intends to issue a new communication which will set out clear policy orientations , something which , until now , we have not been able to do .
That document will serve as a basis for a second round of consultation , possibly in the first half of this year .
I look forward to having a further discussion with Parliament , hopefully with the same rapporteur , on that subject .
As in all future steps that we might want to take , we intend to proceed in close cooperation with the rapporteur , with Parliament and , in particular , with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Mr President , like Mr Bolkestein I would like to thank Mr Andria for his hard work on this most important of subjects .
I agree with the Commissioner and the rapporteur that it is very important to remove technical and other barriers to cross-border clearing and settlement in Europe .
The Commission and the European Union can play a constructive role in facilitating cross-border clearing and settlement as a vital part of creating a single market in financial services .
There are certain points upon which PPE-DE Group opinion is divided , in particular point 11 .
It is not necessary to separate so-called core and value-added services , contrary to the view of the rapporteur .
It is vital to price these different services transparently , so that when people are purchasing they know exactly which service they are buying and which they are not .
It is also necessary to ensure that suitable risk management schemes are in place so that if there is a problem with one service there is no contagion between the so-called core services and value-added services .
A law which said that a financial institution could only create or provide a certain core service and was not allowed to diversify into others would be too big an intervention in the market .
I myself and many in the group therefore support a small amendment to Mr Andria 's report on that point .
I have reservations about the proposal that we should move to a directive at this point .
We might well need to look at a directive in the future but it may be premature to decide now whether a directive is necessary .
There may be many other ways in which the European Union and the European Commission can facilitate cross-border clearing and settlement , without necessarily having to resort to a hard law solution .

Finally , the only other point of substance where I have a slightly different view from Mr Andria is the suggestion that we should prescribe that clearing and settlement systems are based on a ' not for profit ' principle .
I appreciate that Mr Andria has moved on this and has compromised and added the facility for allowing the services to make proper investments , but we should not prescribe a non-profit status and compel the markets to adopt this model .
There are great merits in opting for user-owned systems .
These are very good ways to ensure that the clearing and settlement service provides an excellent service to its users , but I am not really sure that we should prescribe on that issue .
We certainly should not write in at this stage the requirement that these services must be managed on a ' not for profit ' basis .
It is important to allow firms to innovate and to invest , and a certain amount of profit generation is necessary to allow that investment .
I welcome much of Mr Andria 's report , with those three minor reservations .
In particular we should not prejudge the market at this stage .
We should allow and encourage the market to produce its own solutions , to produce market-led solutions , although I can see that there are merits in encouraging user-owned systems , because looking around the European Union we can see a number of systems which are working well on a user-owned basis .
It has recently become clear in Europe and in the USA how sensitively financial markets react to various developments .
Stability in the financial markets is continuously under fire , with all the repercussions that this has on consumer confidence in the economy .
Stability in the financial markets can be aided by effective management based on clear regulation .
Mr Andria 's report on promoting the efficient settlement of securities therefore requires our full attention .
Given the complexity of the way securities are organised , there is no simple solution .
I would , however , like to emphasise that a solution must be transparent and controllable .
That is in the interests of confidence in the financial markets .
An inquiry into competition aspects as described in paragraph 15 can contribute to creating a transparent securities market .
I believe that we can look back on the way in which this Parliament worked to eliminate obstacles to cross-border payments last year .
At that time too , all the organisations , rules and interests formed a complex whole .
Yet it turned out to be possible to eliminate virtually insurmountable obstacles .
It is therefore high time we made sure that where there is an internal securities market , the numerous settlement costs do not obstruct cross-border transactions in this market .
Mr President , Commissioner , clearing and settlement are an essential element in all securities market transactions .
The Commission communication on clearing and settlement in the European Union analyses the sources of inefficiency in cross-border clearing and settlement arrangements .
This inefficiency is largely due to technical requirements , market practice and the fragmentation resulting from national differences and legal barriers .
It is also very important that the supervisory authorities adhere to a common approach and harmonised rules .
Firstly , the technical barriers should be broken down and there should be a move towards interoperability of systems .
Understandably , it is often the situation obtaining in the big Member States that serves as a basis for drafting single market directives and this sometimes seems to lead to the ' one size fits all ' principle being applied .
The solution chosen in drafting an EU securities code would not necessarily represent Europe 's single financial markets but the application of a national solution on a European scale .
This principle is very poorly suited to the stock markets , which will still be characterised by their own national features well into the future .
As I see it this is partly the situation dealt with by Generoso Andria in the report we are discussing today .
Items 11 and 12 explore the most desirable way of organising securities trading settlement services and the relationship between the central securities depositories and the custodian banks .
The message in these points , put in just a few words , is that core functions in settlement should be properly determined , and the central securities depositories and the settlement institutions should practise these with a view to making a profit and under the supervision of users , whereas those offering services must be kept separate from the others .
Unfortunately I cannot agree with Mr Andria 's proposed solution on these two points .
There are considerably more differences between Member States in arrangements for securities trading clearing and settlement and custodian services than in securities trading on the stock exchange .
For example , in Germany securities are still kept in a physical form in vaults , whereas in Finland all securities have been converted into electronic recorded items , or book-entry securities .
Owing to national laws relating to limited companies , the status of the German shareholder differs essentially from that of the Finnish shareholder in company transactions , for example .
There is also a fundamental difference in the structure of central securities depositories in continental Europe on the one hand and the Nordic countries on the other , in that information on the investor in the Nordic central securities depositories is entered directly into the system and also , except in Denmark , directly into the issuer 's register of shareholders .
In the systems in continental Europe custody is nominee registered , and the investor has no direct contact with the issuer .
The Commission has furthermore become conscious of these differences and is approaching the matter of clearing and settlement cautiously and from a functional point of view , which is a very good thing .
If a directive should be issued on this matter , the Commission 's approach , which takes account of these differences in the markets , should be adhered to .
In my country , Finland , for example , Finnish issuers have , in their everyday activities , had a high opinion of value-added services based on registers of shareholders .
The giant Nokia , for example , considers them to be very important .
Items 11 and 12 in Mr Andria 's report correspond very much with the views of banks in certain countries in relation to clearing and settlement structures , and in that respect they reflect partially outdated thinking .
Together with my colleague , Astrid Lulling , I have drafted two amendments , which are aimed at preserving the efficacy of the national markets and would make possible the existence of all structural systems and alternatives .
There is a saying in English : ' If it ain 't broken , don 't fix it . '
The rapporteur , Mr Andria , is trying to repair a situation here that works fine .
This being the case I would like to stress the importance of accepting these two amendments , and I also hope that my group will support them .
Mr President , my compliments to Mr Andria for this report on the Commission communication to Parliament and the Council dealing with policy issues and the future challenges of clearing and settlement in the European Union , the process through which transfer of ownership takes place in a securities market .
This communication builds on the Giovannini report of November 2001 , which identified many sources of inefficiency in cross-border clearing and settlement arrangements within the European Union .
It is essential to manage the potentially high risks of clearing and settlement systems effectively , to ensure the stability of the financial system .
With the increased demand for foreign securities since the introduction of the euro , our infrastructure for clearing and settlement of cross-border transactions remains fragmented , resulting in much higher costs than with national transactions .
In this report we are presented with proposals to remove the barriers and distortions in the European Union post-trading environment , to create a level playing field between institutions , a common regulatory view and the development of rights of access and choice .
Pan-European infrastructures are essential to an integrated financial market , with market participants , regulators and competition authorities all playing a role .
We know the European Union has already accepted natural monopolies in certain service areas such as gas , electricity and air traffic control to ensure fair access to all users in the single market .
Now the same principle must be applied to post-trading infrastructure .
But - and I enter a very strong caveat here - it is very important for the effect of consolidation on competition and financial stability to safeguard prices in what will , de facto , be a less competitive arena .
In concentrating the services in one or two main players we must be sure that we do not risk security in the event of institutional collapse .
Proper safeguards will be needed .
The American model is obviously an attractive template .
It is very efficient in its delivery of cost-effective clearing and settlement .
But such radical departure from our present systems of up to 20 central security depositories and very different legal frameworks would probably make it very difficult to achieve .
While a lot more work is needed prior to any legislative initiative from the Commission - and I welcome Commissioner Bolkestein 's offer of a second round of consultation - the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has laid out its stall , proposing separate core settlement services as a user-owned or public service , governed by the rules of non-profit status .
It wants a specific directive on clearing , on the one hand , and settlement on the other , laying down common rules on authorisations , supervision and a common framework amongst others .
An early step will no doubt be the revision of the investment services directive which provides for the possibility of choice of systems for post-trading activity .
There is certainly a long and fraught road ahead , with different banking cultures and legal systems , but there can be no doubt about the bottom line : without provision for efficient cross-border clearing and settlement , the full benefit of an internal market for financial services cannot be realised .
Mr President , I cannot but wonder at the way in which several Members here present have been giving us the benefit of their views on this highly complex subject-matter without ever having taken part in the discussions on it , but I do want to say that , whether in agriculture or in politics , you must know that there is no point in putting the cart before the horse .
I find it regrettable that our rapporteur has largely disregarded this self-evident truth .
As regards clearing and settlement , we have reached the stage of consultation on the basis of a Commission communication , a stage at which it is premature to say the least to instruct the Commission , in precise terms , to submit a proposal for a directive , and to tell them what should be in it .
We are all in agreement with the Commission that it is right to make the cross-border clearing and settlement systems more efficient and to cut their costs .
It does not inevitably follow , though , that we need a European legislative instrument in order to do this .
What is first required is that the technical barriers within the EU be dismantled .
It is at least premature to predict today what form this might take , having had a not very satisfactory discussion in committee , when we could have done with more time in order to dispel various evident misconceptions .
We would , in my view , have done better to wait for the second Giovanni report , which is due to be with us in mid-February , rather than now attempting to commit this Parliament to a line that I regard - putting it bluntly - as nonsensical .
In this area , though , nonsense is a public menace .
My hair stands on end at the sight of the proposal that core settlement services should be handled by a service subject to the rules applicable to non-profit organisations .
Such a proposal simply ignores the fact that a single legal system is capable of being applied only if laws on securities and taxation have already been standardised .
I have been told by practitioners and specialists in these fields that there is at present no system capable of bringing together even only two jurisdictions , which means that such a system could not be made to work throughout the EU .
I am also astonished at the sweeping proposal for a non-profit system of this sort , even though it is far from being proven that such a model would be preferable to a system run on a profit-making basis .
There are enough examples to demonstrate the fact that the achievement of profit and reductions in cost are not mutually exclusive .
Indeed , if I understand him right , the Commissioner has , in this House , declared himself to be in favour of a market-based approach .
There are today many sectors in which a policy of moderate deregulation is being pursued and in which the market is being opened up .
To do the very opposite in a sector like clearing and settlement , which is so important to the nascent internal market in financial services , and to attempt to establish a public monopoly , is quite simply absurd and demonstrates a lack of awareness of the world 's realities .
Healthy competition - which already exists - has always benefited the consumer .
Contrary to what the rapporteur would have us believe , that is not fragmentation ; that is competition .
As adopted in committee , the report also envisages the provision of core settlement services by one structure , and of ' value added services ' by another , separate structure .
This would result in the enforced breaking-up of a variety of enterprises and is contrary to the approach favoured not only by most market operators , but also by the European Central Bank .
Any operator in the market should be able to provide all these services , and any future European legislation should focus on the service itself and not on the body providing it .
In view of these considerations , Mrs Kauppi and I have tabled amendments , and I hope that Members will support them .
It is my especial hope - having heard the rapporteur 's praises sung by the Socialist / Communist element in this House - that Mr Andria will take time to think things through again .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Andria , ladies and gentlemen , I knew why I had been moved down the list of speakers when I realised that I would have something to say in response to Mrs Lulling .
Both in my personal capacity and as our group 's co-ordinator , I repudiate any and every personal attack upon the rapporteur .
It is a matter of political good form that opposing views are to be accepted as such and that one engages with them without simply dismissing them as nonsense .
The report presented by Mr Andria has been passed , by a clear majority , by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
It is not his report alone , but a report to plenary by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and Members who have failed to win their case in committee are entitled to use the tabling of amendments as a means of keeping discussion going and making differences of opinion clear . This is all the more the case - and , in my view , right and proper - when we are engaged in an intermediate consultation , that is to say in the midst of the opinion-forming process .
Many interventions , as well as what has been said here today , show us that opinions have not yet taken their final form - it is not that the report is not good enough , but that the subject-matter is too important .
The creation of an integrated financial market is not alone in still facing too many obstacles , hindrances and barriers , and the costs involved are still excessive .
Historically speaking , we know that the settlement systems within the European Union have developed along different lines .
This means that integration is something to be advocated if we really want an integrated financial market , but I would not venture to say today whether vertical or horizontal integration is to be preferred , in other words , whether the amalgamation of different settlement systems is in itself something to be favoured or repudiated , or , indeed , whether it is inimical to competition .
Yes , we have excessive costs .
Reference has been made to reports that make it clear that barriers are among the causes of this .
A study carried out jointly by the German stock exchange and Clearstream has clearly shown that overall transaction costs resulting from barriers amount to some EUR 4.3 billion .
We all want a level playing field .
We all want improved access , and many of us believe that the structures of power mean that regulatory intervention is contrary to functional approaches to regulation .
Criticism of the report has focussed on two aspects ; one being the idea of a government body for ' core ' settlement services , and hence of restricting the services of international central securities depositories to ' core ' settlement services , and the other the idea of non-profit status , many being of the opinion that this would preclude competition .
There is , moreover , the desire that all these services should be able to be performed by both banks and central securities depositories .
Hence the amendments , and we hope that the debate has also demonstrated to the Commission the need for the various standpoints to be reconsidered .
We await a proposal for a directive , which will make it possible to move this debate on to a more concrete phase .
Thank you very much , Mr Karas .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0452 / 2002 ) by Mr Mantovani , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions on the future of health care and care for the elderly : guaranteeing accessibility , quality and financial viability [ COM ( 2001 ) 723 - C5-0163 / 2002 - 2002 / 2071 ( COS ) ] .
- ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this evening we are addressing a subject of considerable importance for all European citizens .
We are discussing health and the elderly , and I would say that the health systems of all the European Union Member States are experiencing , albeit to varying degrees , similar situations .
In fact , they are already , at this juncture , faced with the fundamental challenge of how , in particular , to control and cover the costs of health care .
The ageing of the population , developments in medical technology and rising demand for health care services have led to a significant increase in the costs of health care across the board , which , at times , cannot be sustained by current economies , and in the costs of care for the elderly throughout Europe .
Here are some examples : in the European Union , the proportion of the population over the age of 65 will rise from 16.1 % in 2000 to 22 % in 2025 and 27 % in 2050 , that is a third of the population .
At the same time people over the age of 80 , who made up 3.6 % of the population in 2000 are likely to make up 6 % in 2025 and 10 % in 2050 .
Although the provision of health care and care for the elderly remains essentially the responsibility of the Member States , we realise that this trend , owing to the significant and complex implications , cannot find an effective response at exclusively national level .
These problems must be included in the context of broader European cooperation so that we can achieve successful results , as set out by the principles and goals of the Community action programme in the field of public health and the specific objectives established by the United Nations Plan of Action .
In order to meet these objectives , the cooperation of all health care professionals is required .
There needs to be greater cooperation in the exchange of information and best practice , research , the establishment of a data bank covering the social and health care sector containing statistical analyses and projections , and the definition of common qualitative and quantitative standards , which will establish health indicators and formulate common standards to monitor the health services .
In March 2002 , the Barcelona European Council also stressed the need to launch and develop cooperation between Member States in this sector , through exchanges of best practice and information and discussion of the common challenges facing them at European level .
The European Union has already affirmed on various occasions the need to draw up a global strategy covering the economic , employment and social implications of an ageing population , by harnessing the full potential of people of all ages and strengthening solidarity between generations .
The safeguarding and further improvement of high quality social protection and health care provision in the Member States , based on the principle of solidarity and accessibility to healthcare for all concerned , will be necessary in order to fully attain the goals of financial viability , accessibility and quality .
All this should , in the future , also lead to the creation of an internal market in health services and products : an internal market not treated in the same way as a commercial product and subject to its rules , but a product subject to the rules on quality and accessibility for all , and I am saying this in particular for Mrs Jöns , who has contributed a great deal and whom I would like to thank for her work on this report .
Another key aspect to take into account is the risk of overemphasising the importance of the goal of financial viability at the expense of accessibility and quality .
Solutions should be defined at the earliest opportunity : there need to be awareness-raising and information campaigns , specific analyses and research , programmes to fund training projects and refresher courses for medical , nursing and care staff , as Mr Mussa also suggested .
Lastly , more attention needs to be paid to certain aspects of developing health care and social services for the elderly , especially for those who are not self-sufficient , who constitute the main , most important problem , such as the treatment of mental illnesses affecting the elderly , preserving peoples ' autonomy , integration , access to rehabilitation and readjustment services , prevention , assistance and support for families caring for elderly people and combating maltreatment and neglect .
Yesterday , the Commission sounded the umpteenth alarm , seeking to make us the most competitive economy in the world by 2010 : precisely what was determined in Lisbon three years ago , owing to slow growth .
Well , the thorny question of ageing of the population is important in this context .
Therefore , in the hope that we shall soon see the European Parliament participating more actively in drawing up the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines and health policy guidelines , I would call on the Commission and the Council to take into consideration the decisions contained in this report when preparing the joint synthesis report for the Spring 2003 European Council , and also the European Convention , which should include a high level of health protection as a general goal .
I believe that having a ' Social Europe ' is the only way that we will move from being a Europe of banks and money to a Europe of people and peoples .

Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mr Mantovani and the honourable Members for their report .
The Commission will be taking account of the proposals and recommendations made in it .
The fact that the report is in favour of Community cooperation to improve health care in the European Union is very important .
The information provided by Mr Mantovani , which illustrates that the viability of social systems , especially care services for the elderly , has deteriorated dramatically and that we really do need cooperation at Community level , is equally important .
The ageing population , the increasingly technological nature of services for the elderly , the special programme needed and the increase in the prosperity index are creating huge problems which need to be addressed .
As you know , the Barcelona European Council called on the Commission and the Member States to work together in this sector .
The Commission presented its first communication in December 2001 and this parliamentary report is in response to it .
A series of questionnaires was sent to the Member States in the autumn .
They have now been returned and the Commission is working on a new report which will be presented to the Employment Council and then to the European Council in 2003 .
I should like to point out that this whole procedure centres around social protection rather than care issues .
Our aim is to make sure that citizens , especially elderly citizens , have access to a high standard of affordable care and long-term care services , which is what the elderly generally require , and to address the question of cost , which often exceeds the financial resources of both the patients and their families .
Another important objective is the economic viability of care services faced with an ageing population which , as I said earlier , is one of the main causes of the crises in a number of Member States and will be one of the main causes of future crises in others .
This entire process forms part of a coordinated strategy to modernise social protection systems .
The Commission proposed this strategy in 1999 as part of the social agenda under the Lisbon strategy .
Of course , this report will influence our work throughout 2003 and I think that both Parliament and the Commission will be formulating the same urgent request to the Member States to cooperate and teach each other so that three basic objectives can be achieved : access to these systems for the elderly , the provision of quality services and economic viability .
We are working constantly on the comparability of the data and indices needed to facilitate cooperation between the Member States .
The Commission will issue a new communication on measures which need to be taken during the current year on the basis of this experience and the work I referred to earlier .
Obviously , the entire procedure comes under the Community strategy on public health and the Community action programme which has finally been approved and to which Mr Berend referred .
Mr Mantovani 's report also examines a whole series of other issues relating to public health and the free movement of people and services on the internal market .
These are important issues which we shall continue to work on , using appropriate political tools and bearing in mind that they need to be complementary and cohesive .
I should like to finish with the candidate countries .
Last year , my services started a series of studies into the social protection systems in the 13 candidate countries and they are currently examining health care systems .
The conclusions of these studies , which were discussed in Brussels on 5 and 6 December , will be available to you shortly .
Mr President , as has already been said , this is one of the major issues facing the European Union .
As the elderly population increases , we need to work out ways of coping with it and to find a strategy across the European Union which really works .
But this is ultimately the responsibility of Member States .
Our challenge is to ensure that Member States carry on with their own provision , but with coordination and cooperation and the sharing of best practice throughout the European Union .
We must also be aware that not all elderly people fall into the same category .
Elderly people should be encouraged to remain active because otherwise , as previous speakers have said , this will ultimately cost more money than we are able to afford at the moment .
So we need to find a sustainable way of keeping people active and healthy for as long as possible .
I welcome Mr Mantovani 's report and the Commission communication .
We must ensure that , sooner rather than later , there is real dialogue between Member States and an exchange of best practice , so that we can put the strategies into effect and make this a reality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my compliments to Mr Mario Mantovani , who has carried out the onerous task of determining the difficult challenges which health care systems and public health polices in European Union countries will have to face , in view of the ageing of the population , and , not least , in view of enlargement .
Although the provision of health care in general and care for the elderly in particular is essentially the responsibility of the Member States , it is right that we look to broader European cooperation in order to face these problems , given the extremely difficult situation which countries continue to experience .
One of the difficulties is the nursing shortage : in fact , an ever-increasing number of nurses will be needed .
The increased life expectancy of the European population , with a growing adult proportion , will create the difficult question of the staff who must care for them , staff who must , moreover , be increasingly qualified owing to the specific nature of the diseases which affect the elderly .
Employment of nursing staff has already increased by more than twice the average in the last five years : a level of employment which , however , is still not enough to meet the demand .
Secondly , it is easy to foresee that this shortage will be felt particularly keenly when , thanks to enlargement , there will be increased mobility of patients from the CEEC , whose health systems provide less than those in the Community , because they will automatically turn to cross-border health services .
From this point of view , an issue comes to the fore : ensuring a high level of human health protection , as set out in Article 152 of the Treaty of Amsterdam and as specified by the goals of the Community action programme in the field of public health , which , moreover , calls for universal and equal access to health services , the constant improvement of these services and promotion of the social inclusion of people with disabilities and people in the most vulnerable categories .
Qualitative principles in the field of health care can be put into effect through the creation of specialised higher training for nurses , financed by European training funds , which encourage people to obtain further professional qualifications in important areas such as oncology , transplants , heart surgery and all the age-related diseases .
With the launch of this higher training , we will ensure access to health services for European citizens , the provision of high-quality care and financially sustainable care systems , which is included in the three objectives proposed by the Barcelona European Council .
In order to ensure care for all , however , the European Union Member States need to take steps to raise young people 's awareness of paramedical professions .
The solution to this problem must be implemented quickly since it concerns all the Member States .
It is all well and good to raise awareness of the profession among young people of the Member States but , up to now , this has been on too small a scale , so much so that there are far fewer qualified nurses than the countries need .
This opportunity should therefore also be extended to CEEC qualifications , in order to resolve a twofold problem quickly : to respond to the nursing crisis in the Member States and to respond to the situation of countless immigrants seeking work in Europe .
What I am about to say may sound like a provocation , but I cannot avoid talking to you about another serious problem which concerns citizens from every European country , that is the 500 000 job cuts in the engineering industry over the next four or five years , a figure I have been given by an international trade union source .
This employment problem could be resolved in part though the transfer of qualified resources from one sector to another .
The mobility and retraining of the unemployed engineering workers who hold an advanced secondary education qualification could be achieved by providing them with access to information on nursing .
I would close by calling on everyone to reflect on what has been said regarding the need to remedy as soon as possible the nursing shortage in the European Union , the need to meet the quality criteria for care specified in the Community action programme by providing higher training , and the need to respond to the specific employment needs of the citizens of the Member States with solutions such as mobility and retraining , looking , where these prove inadequate , to human resources from the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , rapporteur , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Mantovani on the quality of his report , which I believe is serious and well-balanced .
I have heard it said on occasions that we cannot give our opinion on numbers and therefore we are saying nothing new when we say that world demographic tendencies reveal a gradual ageing of the population .
The rapporteur has already mentioned the percentage of the European population over the age of 65 , 16 % , an estimated 22 % and 27.5 % for 2025 and 2050 , and that the number of people over 80 is going to increase as well , from 3.6 % in 2000 to 6 % in 2025 and to 10 % in 2050 .
In view of these statistics it is no good to bury our heads in the sand like an ostrich and wait to see what happens and nor must we be alarmist .
The demographic situation is obviously a success for society , which can be attributed to medical care and an improvement in living conditions in general .
Elderly people do not make up an homogenous group and their needs therefore also vary .
Policies relating to the elderly must focus on the double perspective of their needs and the care they require - and which they have a right to - in order to meet those needs , and of their potential and the services they lend to society .
No society - including European society - can afford not to take advantage of the contributions elderly people can make in terms of their experience , training and knowledge .
As well as Article 152 of the Treaty , these policies comply with Article 21 of the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights , by prohibiting all discrimination - in this case on grounds of age - and Article 25 , stating that the Union recognises and respects the rights of the elderly to lead a life of dignity and independence and to participate in social and cultural life .
These principles would be deprived of content if they were not accompanied by policies to turn them into realities .
In this regard , the Barcelona Council of March 2002 pointed out the need to initiate and develop cooperation between the Member States on these issues during 2002 and 2003 , the need for an exchange of good practices and information and the need to hold a debate on the common challenges at European level .
Healthcare systems must face a triple challenge .
Firstly , access to care for all , with the special characteristics of care for the elderly ; secondly , a high degree of quality and , thirdly , the financial sustainability of the systems .
I believe these are three necessary , minimal and laudable objectives , and I would like to draw attention to the close link between them .
Whatever the system of funding , taxation or contributions , their achievement can and must be promoted also through the promotion of healthier lifestyles , prevention measures and increasing awareness on the part of service providers and users on the correct application of therapies and medications .
This will allow a balance between the three objectives .
The risk of prioritising the objective of financial sustainability could undermine those of quality and accessibility , but also , without sustainability , quality and accessibility would only be possible in the short term .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by extending my very warm thanks to Mr Mantovani for his excellent cooperation .
I think we have succeeded in securing a broad majority in tomorrow 's plenary for this most important report .
It is also timely that we should at last achieve closer cooperation in health policy and , of course , also in care for the elderly , something to which the Gothenburg Summit , albeit very late in the day , pointed the way .
Let us just be honest .
In matters of health policy , the EU is still catching up with reality .
In many fields , after all , a European health policy already exists - the Euregios spring to mind .
Even now , to take an example , patients in the German Rhineland have the right to use their German health insurance cards to obtain treatment in health centres in the Netherlands .
Apart from that , Europe has hospitals generally recognised as specialising in specific diseases , and there are also European networks that draw up guidelines for the treatment of those diseases .
All the Member States are looking for strategies to guarantee that their health care systems will , in future , remain accessible to all and to secure their standards of quality and performance , as well as ensuring that it is possible to finance them .
New mechanisms are constantly being tried out , but , as yet , nobody has made the great breakthrough .
So , when governments realise the importance of organising an EU-wide exchange of experience on matters concerning health care and the care of the elderly , they are simply being logically consistent .
Just to take the wind out of the sceptics ' sails , let me say that I am convinced that nobody in this House actively wants a single European system of health care .
The Commission does not , and the Council very definitely does not .
The organisation and funding of health care systems is a matter decided at the national level and should remain so in future .
It is far more a case of how we are to retain , in the long term , our European model of a health care policy based on solidarity .
I am speaking quite deliberately in terms of a European model , as the following four principles underlie all health care systems .
The first is that health is not , and must not be allowed to become , a purely economic commodity .
The second is that equal access to health services is a fundamental right and must remain one .
The third is that , as has already been said , all systems of health care are based upon the principle of solidarity .
And the fourth is that the State has a crucial role to play in regulating , funding and providing services .
Now , the Mantovani report makes quite practical proposals as to what enhanced European cooperation in health care policy might be like .
These proposals have to do with methodology , objectives and specific content .
As regards the working method , the report proposes that the open method of coordination should now be brought into play in this area as it has been elsewhere , which is consonant - I am very glad to say - with what the Greek Presidency has said .
Now , though , we must not lose any more time , and it is for that reason that the report urges the forthcoming European spring summit to resolve upon a precise timetable for further action and to agree on common targets and indicators within one year .
If , though , we are to be able to carry out any kind of exchange of experience , we have to start by improving the national and European systems of health monitoring .
Comparable data are absolutely indispensable here , but to date the EU has not even had a standard measurement of mortality rates .
This is where we can even now make progress by using the new action programme on health care policy .
The same is true of the establishment of common criteria for patients ' rights , and , in view of eastward enlargement in particular , there is a need for a survey of patient mobility in the Euregios , for we know all too well that the shortfall in health care provision is especially pronounced in the regions bordering on the new Member States , and any European constitution must not only stipulate a high standard of health care as an objective , but also health policy 's continuing status as a responsibility shared between the EU and the Member States .
We do all , after all , want the EU to be able to keep on , in future , using legislation to supplement the Member States ' policies .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Mantovani for the work he has done on this report .
I say that , even though there are features of the report in its final form with which my group disagrees .
I should like to thank the Commission for the survey it has given us of future care for the elderly , for I do believe that the Commission communication is genuinely constructive .
It indicates a number of overriding goals in terms of access , quality and financial sustainability .
It also points out that , even though we know that there will be many more elderly people in the future , it is quite uncertain what that will actually mean in the form of future financial burdens .
Over and above this , it points out that , in many areas , the EU has opportunities to make joint contributions under the current rules .
That is true in relation to public health policy , on the basis of Article 152 of the Treaty , to economic policy and to the development of the internal market .
We therefore have a host of opportunities for cooperating under the existing rules .
My group must therefore also reject Parliament 's present proposal , as put forward in the report , that we should introduce outright open coordination when it comes to health policy and policy in relation to the elderly .
We have tabled a number of amendments , and if , as I really believe will be the case , it is not possible for these to be supported by Parliament , we shall find it difficult to support the report as a whole .
The open coordination method has , of course , become very popular in recent years and is used in a great many areas of economic policy , such as pensions , social exclusion within education and the convergence criteria in employment policy .
It is a good form of cooperation in which a number of common objectives are set that can be achieved in different ways .
I am a great believer in using open coordination because it is a way of achieving common objectives without needing to legislate in a lot of new areas , but I think it important that open coordination be binding .
In some areas , open coordination is directly authorised by the treaties .
That applies in the case of economic policy and employment policy .
In other areas , there is a less obvious basis in the treaties , or else there is really no basis .
It might be said that the Member States have every possible freedom to decide to coordinate their efforts and develop good practice .
That is something we have done within the framework of the OSCD for many years , but the difference between OSCD reports and the open coordination we undertake within the framework of the EU is - and , in my view , should be - that open coordination is more binding and that the countries in actual fact undertake to pursue the common objectives . In addition , the parties concerned are very actively involved .
I think it would be wrong of us to allow the use of open coordination to escalate to the point of its being used in every possible area .
It is of course a basic principle of EU cooperation that we accept diversity and difference .
It is an advantage that we have many different models so that we can learn from each other .
We must not sneak harmonisation in through the back door in areas where national competence should clearly apply .
That is not something for which we would be thanked .
In the health sphere , there are many areas in which cooperation and common rules are important and necessary , and there are therefore clear rules about this in the Treaty .
Cooperation will develop via the internal market , as a result of that internal market and through other cooperation , such as cooperation on research .
As for a common EU policy on residential homes , however , my response is no thank you .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the institutions of the European Union and of the Member States need to pay special attention to health care and in particular to care for the elderly , because health is a fundamental human and social right recognised in international and national legislation .
So it is important to give absolute priority to policies and measures based on an integrated approach which aim to promote health , ensure primary prevention , eliminate health risks , include a high level of health protection and which define and implement sectoral policies designed to eliminate health inequality .
It is also worth highlighting the close relationship between socio-economic measures and health , particularly in the fields of employment , housing , education , transport , income distribution and social welfare .
The emphasis placed on monetary policies , on giving priority to nominal convergence and on maintaining the blinkered criteria of the Stability Pact is leading to restrictive social policies and being used to justify such policies , and it is having a negative impact on public health policies and on health care for the elderly , as has become clear in Portugal .
The Commission communication on this subject , which the report welcomes despite some occasional criticisms , is indicative of the contradictions in social policies .
Despite statements about defending the quality and accessibility of health care , too much weight is given to the objective of achieving financial viability with a view to establishing an internal market in health services and products . This could lead to the liberalisation and privatisation of an essential public service , which health certainly is , whilst ultimately jeopardising equality of access to high-quality health services .
This is an untenable position and it is the main reason why we intend to reject the report before us if it is not revised on this key point , and if the amendments that we are tabling are not approved . These amendments advocate better quality health services , security and solidarity , and propose new means of financing statutory retirement schemes with a view in particular to extending social welfare contributions to all income , at a rate identical to that levied on wages and salaries .
The challenge here therefore remains that of achieving some coherence amongst those who say that they are committed to defending health care and care for the elderly .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity for debate on this report , on what is an important issue for all our countries .
I am grateful to Mr Mantovani for his work .
Caring for the ageing population throughout Europe will be one of the biggest challenges facing the Member States in the future .
Although , as has already been said , the organisation of health care is a matter reserved for Member States , they cannot do this in isolation .
That is why my group welcomes the cooperation suggested by the Commission , in terms of exchanging information and best practice and developing common quality standards .
The current provision and funding systems for care of the elderly vary greatly throughout Europe , from comprehensive free care with financial risks spread throughout the population to state funding as a last resort safety net .
Drawing comparisons and exploring the care systems within Member States could be a valuable way of highlighting successful solutions .
I welcome the reference in Mr Mantovani 's report to social care as well as health care , as the combination of both is an essential element in the welfare of older people .
If those responsible for health and social policy took a real life-long approach to preventing disease and disability and viewed health promotion and prevention as the cornerstone of a ' foresighted policy ' , in the words of the report , this would not only improve health but would also cut costs .
The reduction in costs would not be temporary or short term , but long term .
For example , we know that older women and people in rural areas experience greater levels of poverty .
In my constituency in Wales , three out of five older people live in poverty .
Most pensioners depend entirely on their state pension or other state benefits as their only income .
More people have long-term illnesses in Wales than in England or Scotland .
These facts are not unrelated .
Some methods of health prevention and early detection of illness are essential .
Hand-in-hand with this is the importance of a multi-agency approach to coordinating care and a multi-sectoral approach to policy-making , to include social , employment , environmental and economic considerations as well as the need to involve users and their families .
The elderly play a very valuable role in our society .
Life-long learning , communication between the generations , voluntary work and similar issues on which the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has done a lot of work are intrinsically related to this discussion .
Trying to establish a free market of care and treatment and harmonising health care systems has its dangers .
Meeting the Stability Pact requirements , whilst providing the necessary funding for health , welfare and social services , is a major challenge .
Health care , as I said earlier , is the responsibility of the Member States .
The references in this report to an internal market in health services and products reflects the move towards liberalisation .
As has been seen time after time and as we see in the private finance initiative in health services in the UK , privatisation does not improve services or reduce costs , but leads to longer waiting lists , worse levels of care and staff shortages .
My group believes that health care and the care of the elderly is too important to be put at risk by privatisation and the GATS Agreement .
The focus of this report and one of the main issues in this debate must be equality of access .
This means access to care for everyone and securing a local supply of services .
GATS threatens this .
I would ask , therefore , for support of Amendment No 6 , to call for exemption of health and care services from GATS , ensuring that the very good proposals made by Mr Mantovani - which I hope will be adopted by Parliament tomorrow - can be implemented and services to older people secured for the long term .
Mr President , I too would like to join my colleagues in congratulating and thanking the rapporteur , Mr Mantovani , for his work , and also to thank the Commission for coming forward with the proposal .
Care for the frail and elderly is a challenge that faces us all and unfortunately it is one that we will probably all face ourselves at some stage in our lives .
How we provide care and services for people is how we will be judged .
Health care and care of the elderly , whilst an important part of the overall health system , does not necessarily represent the overall health system .
There is a tendency in the report to assume that issues concerning health care of the elderly apply to the health system as a whole .
A detailed study on the financing of long-term care for older people is being carried out in my own country , Ireland .
I look forward to examining the policy proposals which this will bring forward .
Particular attention has been paid in the report to meeting long-term care needs , reducing unnecessary recourse to institutional care and widening consumer choice .
In Ireland we have a very active health policy to give old people a better way of life .
The implications of Amendments Nos 1 to 6 run counter to this policy .
I am able to support Amendments Nos 7 to 11 on replacing the ' open method of cooperation ' with ' cooperation ' .
Also , in the area of private financing for the health service , there must be a risk equalisation element whereby , if you bring in a private health insurer for the health care system , they must take the same risk as existing insurers or the state , which means covering everyone and all sections of society .
We have been developing our own health strategy which includes payments and allowances for carers , including carers looking after two or more people .
Another aspect I want to highlight is the changing role of the family and community .
We must ensure that support is put in place to allow people to remain in their families and their local communities as much as possible .
In providing and caring for the elderly , that will mean utilising new technologies and new methods of ensuring that they have independent means of living and can fully participate in their own community .
All Member States have faced the same common issues : how to address the impact of demographic ageing or healthcare systems and expenditure , how to use the new technologies for the benefit of the elderly , how to ensure a better standard and quality of life for the elderly .
Sharing information in these areas can only be beneficial .
I would also like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Mussa , for his work on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy in tackling issues which were not fully addressed in the Commission proposal , in particular training for health professionals , nurses and those involved in specific expert care for the elderly .
These are now being included in the report by Mr Mantovani .
That is a welcome move .
There are many organisations that want to work in assisting the elderly .
This year - 2003 - is the year of the disabled .
There are many elderly people who suffer from disabilities as well .
We must ensure that we not only pay lip service to the disabled this year , but also give particular emphasis to those who cannot speak for themselves , and mostly that means the elderly disabled .
We all want to grow old , but we would prefer not to be old .
This is a Dutch expression about the consequences of getting older .
After all , age generally comes with ailments .
Ailments which , with proper attention and care , a person can live with .
This proper attention and care involves people .
People who provide the necessary hands-on care .
With the support of good policy and the commitment of politicians , this can be accommodated .
Mr Mantovani 's report aims to provide the space to do so from a European perspective .
He puts forward a range of proposals based on a great concern about the demographic trend towards an ageing population and the consequences this will have for our health systems .
In addition to expressing my appreciation for the report , I would like to indicate why , in my opinion , his proposals lose sight of the reality of care provision .
The report is brimming over with the politics of good intentions .
Good intentions alone will not , in my opinion , be the mainspring of political and policy-related activities .
Certainly not if Europe would have to be given new powers on such a basis .
Assigning powers to European institutions is a failure to appreciate the fact that care is provided between people at the micro level .
Promoting good healthcare and exchanging good practices are points I endorse .
Also of great importance is the fact that it is made clear that healthcare and care of the elderly must not only be approached from the point of view of what it costs .
Elderly people and patients are more than just an item of expense to society .
The number of new policy-coordinating proposals and inventories will not , in my opinion , promote good care and assistance but will rather impede it .
In my country there is a lot of discussion about healthcare at the moment .
Dozens of rules , procedures and administrative obligations are impeding the work of nurses and carers .
If one thing has become clear , it is that we need hands at the bedside and not at the computer .
If we also have to comply with European wishes in respect of the provision of information , you will understand that there are few hands left over to actually provide the care .
Although many of Mr Mantovani 's ideas appeal to me , I cannot endorse his report .
The report misunderstands the position of the concept of subsidiarity when it comes to the role of Europe and the role of the Member States in these areas of policy .
The report furthermore disregards day-to-day practice .
Practice is not waiting for new rules from Europe , it is waiting for people who want to do the work .
You will understand that I do not regard the European institutions and the Convention as being assigned a role in the policy areas of care for the elderly and healthcare .
I therefore support Mrs Lynne 's amendments concerning scrapping paragraphs 18 and 20 .
This will ensure that responsibility for healthcare and care for the elderly remains with the national governments .
It is there that the parameters are established and a substantive policy can be pursued that enables us to respond to the people 's demand for care .
Finally , I would like to point out the importance of interrelationships between people in family , church or home circles .
That is where the care is provided in practice , at the micro level .
It is pointless worrying about care , you have to go out and do it !
Mr President , let me begin by disagreeing with Mr Blokland for once , and I will explain to Hans why later .
I would like wholeheartedly to support the proposal from the European Commission , together with my colleague 's , Mr Mantovani 's , proposal .
In Europe we all have the same problem .
We all have healthcare that is expanding , certainly financially .
Why ?
Because we are dealing with emancipated citizens , citizens who have a different lifestyle , citizens who want more and who want better quality .
We also have facilities that are making healthcare more expensive .
We all want to keep this system under control , but we would all also like to be able to respond to this justified demand on the part of our citizens .
This means we will have to discuss a number of matters with each other , perhaps not with a view to doing everything in the same way but with a view to finding out how we can all learn from each other 's experience .
Incidentally , I must now make a critical comment about the communication from the European Commission .
In the Netherlands , healthcare is not financed via taxes but via premiums ; the situation is therefore different from what it says in the communication .
I also see that the communication - and this is why I am so much in favour of this open method of coordination - states that in those countries in which only a small proportion is financed via private insurance and the bulk via taxes , the best example in the table being Luxembourg , the per capita cost of healthcare is simply considerably lower .
That is therefore something that we can learn from one another .
What we should also have learned from one another is that Europe actually plays a major role in the field of healthcare already , despite the fact that we have little to say formally .
Firstly via the article in the Treaty in which achieving a high level of healthcare protection is stated as an objective .
Incidentally , Hans , Dutch citizens benefit a lot from this .
Secondly via the deepening of the internal market ; we do in fact have a great deal to say about appliances and certainly also about medicines .
So we should - and I would like to ask the Commissioner if she agrees - come up with solutions for the shortages and gaps in order to achieve proper financeability .
In this case I am thinking about the whole range of medicines , for example .
If we were to do something about generic medicines , we would be able to save EUR 500 million a year in our country alone .
I therefore say to the Commissioner : do something about it , start taking targeted action on this point in consultation with your colleague Mr Byrne .
Now to go back briefly to that high level of protection .
The Dutch citizen benefits from that too .
Why ?
Because with that high level , we can at least arrange for people to have the opportunity to go abroad for healthcare if care in the Netherlands is inadequate because it is a demand-led system , the last communist system still in existence in Europe .
Furthermore , we cannot declare a certain treatment to be experimental .
No , that has all been tested by the European Court of Justice .
I am convinced that Europe can do a lot , does do a lot and should actually do even more in the area of healthcare , even if it is initially via the open coordination method .
In any event the first reports reveal that we can learn an awful lot from one another .
Mr President , like other Members , I would firstly like to thank and congratulate the Commissioner and the rapporteur , Mr Mantovani , because I believe it has really been an excellent idea to produce a communication on the needs relating to healthcare and the care of elderly people .
Commissioner , holding this debate is consistent with all this House 's concerns about the needs of elderly people , and it is very helpful that Mr Mantovani 's report has achieved such a broad consensus on certain very important ideas .
I am one of those people who believe that the dignity of a society is basically measured by the dignity with which it treats its elderly people ; I also believe that issues relating to health , rather than being commercial goods , are a matter of rights .
Fortunately , Mr Mantovani 's report and the amendments which I hope we will approve tomorrow and others which we will reject - I hope - will highlight these elements , which are fundamental to the future of Europe .
I am pleased that it moves in this direction , that it stresses the coordination elements which the Commissioner has mentioned , that it maintains the open coordination method , and I hope that this is the beginning of a broader consideration , so that it may also reach other elements of our society .
As the Commission has said in some of its documents , Europe - despite its great progress and despite having increased its standard of living and life expectancy over recent decades - still has problems such as the fact that one in every five citizens dies prematurely ; the new risks ; inequalities and differences on health issues , ...
These problems are not exclusive to elderly people , but they are problems and issues for all European citizens , who are appealing to us , to the politicians , to the European Convention , to finally treat Europe as an area in which there can be competition but also cooperation and solidarity .
The European citizens are asking for it for essential elements of their lives such as health .
I therefore hope that this method of open coordination , this detailed and exhaustive approximation of health needs - but also social needs and the humanisation of the lives of the elderly - and of these problems , is extended in future communications .
I hope that we will have new instruments so that Europe is not just a market , but also a collection of rights and a source of hope , which is what the public are asking us for .
Mr President , as a visibly greying member of the population I have a considerable interest in this debate , as do many others in this House .
I have some concern about the climate of it .
I would like to believe that it is genuinely about providing universal high-quality care in a variety of situations and circumstances , but that is certainly not the tone of the debate as it often comes across in a number of our Member States , where it seems to be all about how we can cut costs and find the money to make provisions .
As others have said , that is not the only way in which we should be looking at this issue , if we should be looking at it that way at all .
One way of improving the situation is to pay reasonable wages to well-trained and qualified staff .
I am aware that non-medical care is one of the fastest growing areas in terms of job creation .
However , it is all too often very poorly paid , it is often done by women , by migrant women , and the staff are often recruited with difficulty .
It is certainly a boom area for temporary work agencies in the UK .
Yet those workers are then treated as if they are some sort of disposable commodity and as if the work is unskilled , whereas care work is immensely skilled and stressful .
We also need to look at the implications of the current employment policy which not only encourages but actively pushes more people , especially women , into the workforce and away from the caring role they might have fulfilled or the voluntary work they might have done .
I am not saying that women should be forced to stay at home .
I have never believed that .
But it means that we must look carefully at the financial and social support for carers , which should reflect the much larger costs that society would otherwise bear .
We also need to recognise that carers who are in work need leave provision , not just parents .
We need to look at the employment needs of carers .
I am pleased to say that the equal funding is being used for at least one such project involving the UK .
Some of my other concerns also focus on the issue of discrimination in the provision of health care for the elderly .
This is observed in quite a number of Member States .
It is a useful area for comparison between Member States and might at some point be part of another horizontal directive for Article 13 .
We mentioned in the debate the issue of an adequate income for older people .
I am very pleased that paragraph 7 of Mr Mantovani 's report , quoting the World Health Organisation , talks about health being best served in a more socially cohesive , egalitarian society with a smaller burden of relative deprivation .
People have raised the question of the internal market in health care , not just in terms of cross-border treatment , although , judging by the post I receive , the ability to transfer disability allowances and carers ' allowances across borders under Regulation 1408 / 71 would be welcomed .
It is also an issue of cross-border service providers and increasing provision from third country providers .
As Mrs Evans said , it is not yet clear what impact the future negotiation on GATS will have on service provision and which aspects of health care and other care for the elderly will be put into any EU offer for discussion under the World Trade Organisation 's agreements .
It is certainly the view of my group that such services should not be included .
It is also clear that at some point we will need a framework for the cross-border liability of service providers .
I agree with Mr Crowley on the issue of risk equalisation in the private sector , to avoid cherry-picking of the purely profitable .
We also need to consider , both inside and outside the Convention , to what extent health care and general care are services of general interest and whether universal and affordable access should be guaranteed in the Treaties of the European Union .
We have to look further at what constitutes goods or services in health and other care .
I am aware that Denmark has already introduced legislation on this .
It would be another useful area for comparison in an open method of coordination .
Mr President , Commissioner , this report is good , the Commission proposal is a good one , and , although you , Commissioner , can be thanked for this , permit me one comment .
I found in the report the word ' Überalterung ' .
I do not know what that is in Greek , English , or any other language , but in German it amounts to quite offensive discrimination against older - or as the word in question would have it , superannuated - people .
When one is no longer as young and beautiful as you are , but , like me , is in one 's seventieth year , that sort of thing causes an enormous amount of anguish .
Let us at last stop using these stupid expressions about the superannuation or geriatrification of Europe .
Even though you can read it all over the media , it is quite simply not true .
Never have there been so many people alive in Europe as there are today and never before has there been such high life expectancy as there is now .
As recently as 150 years ago , average life expectancy was around 40 years , and now it is 80 .
Any girl born today has the chance to live to a hundred .
People today have the good fortune to be able , at long last , to live to an age that has in fact always been genetically possible .
So let us stop talking about any geriatrification of Europe or about its superannuation .
I assume that this has simply escaped your notice .
Please stop talking about people being superannuated .
Let me make another comment .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I tabled a whole series of amendments , all of which were adopted .
I am very pleased about that .
There is one amendment of which I am particularly proud , Commissioner , and it is one that I should especially like to commend to you .
It has to do with something that is a quite splendid addition to what has been achieved in terms of family and social policy - continued remuneration for one week in the year in the event of a person remaining at home to care for a close family member - perhaps a parent or grandparent - who has become ill .
That is the law in Austria , so that any working person can stay at home for one week in the year to care for his or her elderly family members .
I think it is a great thing that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has adopted this amendment .
I hope that we will do the same when we vote tomorrow .
Commissioner , I commend this matter to your care .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Mantovani on his excellent report , which highlights the need to guarantee people 's right to high-quality protection against health risks and loss of independence , and the importance of ensuring that that right reflects the challenges of our times , and in particular the demographic trend towards an ageing population .
That phenomenon is the result of low birth rates and increased life expectancy , especially amongst women .
In less than one decade , between 1990 and 1999 , the number of women over 65 has increased by nearly 3 % .
The effects of an ageing population are being felt at various levels .
In Portugal , for example , if we consider the population of working age , greater longevity amongst women means that since 1995 the number of elderly women has been greater than that of young women .
At the same time , the increase in the number of elderly persons is imposing a greater burden on health care and social services .
The issue we face is a simple and intuitive one . Society cannot be said to be progressing if greater life expectancy is not matched by improvements in quality of life .
So the great challenge for us is to achieve a high level of satisfaction amongst the elderly with their quality of life , while keeping the costs that this involves in check .
This will inevitably make demands on public finance , which plays a key part in expenditure on health in all the Member States .
Even in Greece , the country where public finance makes the lowest contribution to health services , the figure is about 56 % , rising to 84 % in the United Kingdom .
An ageing population will have a considerable impact on budgets , which will in turn increase public expenditure .
Health care systems in the European Union should therefore be pursuing the objective of being simultaneously accessible , high in quality and financially viable .
Each Member State is responsible for the organisation and financing of its own social protection system .
Nevertheless , this responsibility is increasingly being exercised in an overall context that affects various Community policies .
For this reason , as has already been mentioned , the Barcelona European Council stressed the need to establish and develop closer cooperation between the Member States as regards social protection , exchanges of good practice and information , research , establishing common indicators and standards and the development of health and social services for the elderly .
Lastly , I believe that the Greek Presidency should examine the European Community strategy and action programme in the field of public health , with a view to the next European Council in the spring adopting the use of the open method of coordination and a precise timetable for cooperation between the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Flemming 's remarks oblige me to say that we should not view this report in isolation from other reports and initiatives , for example , the Lisbon strategy , which also aims towards social cohesion and sustainability , the Commission report on the evaluation of national strategies for adequate and sustainable pensions , or the Streamlining Report on the coordination of employment policy with economic policy .
All these serve the purpose of ensuring that our social security system continues to be financially viable , because that is what is needed .
Demographic changes are relevant to every area of policy and have effects on the social fabric and on the socio-political framework , and so I welcome this report and this debate as helping to increase our awareness of these things .
Action is needed , on the part of all of and us at every political level .
A survey by Eurostat , a few days ago , showed that in 2002 there were fewer births , but more deaths , recorded in the EU .
The number of live births in the EU reached 3.99 million in 2002 , which is 0.3 % fewer than in 2001 .
It is estimated that , in 2002 , some 3.68 million people died in the EU , which amounts to some 60 000 more than in 2001 .
These figures alone show that our society faces a change which will affect policy on social security , employment , finance and the economy .
There is just one aspect that I would like to pick out - that of care .
In my country - Austria - alone , 540 000 people are at present in need of help and care .
This figure will increase to just over 800 000 by 2011 .
At the same time , 84 % of all those in need of care - and this is the case in all countries - receive that care from members of their own family .
Only 26 % require or receive additional help or avail themselves of it .
Demographic and economic changes mean , though , that the family members who provide care are becoming fewer in number .
The number of people employed in the care field has increased by 5.5 % , so the health and welfare sector is creating jobs .
Underdevelopment of many areas of the mobile care and support services means that far from all the sufficiently trained staff can be employed . I therefore demand certain things above all in this context .
Among other things , we should be attaching greater importance to the mobile services and to the services needed to supplement them - hospices , family support , and day centres - and extending them .
There is a need for a build-up of resources in personal environments and for more extensive support both for recipients of care and for their families .
In my view , though , we also need uniform standards of training and professional development , as aid is often required across national boundaries .
The caring professions need a campaign to enhance their image and we have to explore why they are so unstable and why staff remain in them for so short a time .
Care is one of the greatest challenges of our time , and we need European standards for it .
Thank you very much , Mr Karas .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.07 p.m. )
Afghanistan : one year after the Bonn Agreement
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Afghanistan , one year after the Bonn Agreement .
Mr Yiannitsis , President-in-Office of the Council , has the floor .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is now a year since the Bonn Agreement was signed in 2001 and , as we look back over what has already been done and what has yet to be done in order to ensure it is fully implemented , I would point out that this Agreement laid the foundations for a new , modern Afghan state and that there is cause for reserved satisfaction with the progress it has made so far .
Once a transitional authority and administration had been set up , an emergency Loya Jirga was convened and elected a president .
A Judicial Commission and an Independent Human Rights Commission have been set up .
A central bank has been established and has introduced a national currency .
A drafting committee has been set up as a forerunner to a Constitutional Commission .
A proposal has been adopted for a national development framework , which will be used as a guide for rebuilding and improving the situation in the country .
President Karzai has issued a decree creating an Afghan national army , an important step towards Afghan ownership in the field of security and stability .
On 22 December 2002 , Afghanistan and its six neighbours signed the Kabul Declaration of Good Neighbourly Relations , in which they agreed not to interfere in each other 's internal affairs ; this will do a great deal to foster peace and stability in the region .
Generally speaking , President Karzai and the Afghan Transitional Administration have achieved substantial results and the Bonn Process is on the right track .
During the Petersberg Conference on 2 December reaffirming the commitment to supporting the Bonn Agreement on Afghanistan and inject new impetus into efforts to rebuild the country , a declaration was issued containing a clear reference to the objectives and timetable for applying the Bonn Process , introducing a new constitution and holding elections in 2004 .
Both the Afghan Transitional Administration and the international community , however , still have a great many challenges to meet between now and then .
Over the past six months there have been a number of reforms , some visible reconstruction and limited restoration of the balance of power both within the central administration and between the centre and the regions .
Progress needs to be made in these sectors in order to boost the confidence of the Afghan people , which is the key to support for the administration .
The whole idea behind the Bonn Agreement was that transitional arrangements should be based on traditional , local , national and religious structures in Afghanistan . And every effort must be made to ensure there is proper representation , in accordance with rules introduced by the central administration .
Consequently , the administration will need to introduce even greater order over coming months , keep a lid on hostilities and improve how the institutions function , because otherwise it risks incurring the disappointment of the people , with the risk of their turning their back on the central administration , relaxing in their efforts to meet the demands of the international community and jeopardising the efforts being made to achieve the objectives of the Bonn Agreement .
By definition the administration is fragmented , with its members coming as they do from every corner of the country , which is why it is vital for it to consolidate its efforts and speed up the process to rebuild the country .
One way of supporting the central administration is to ensure that all aid is channelled through it ; this will affirm its authority to the entire country and ensure that neighbouring countries and local leaders are on board .
Security continues to be a priority and we feel that all the Afghan groups should be encouraged to solve their grievances in a peaceful manner .
We share the view of the Afghan people that , as long as there is a state of insecurity , the degree of progress hoped for has still not been made .
Rebuilding the country 's economy should also be a priority .
The Afghan authorities need to work with the International Monetary Fund and introduce an efficient and cohesive macroeconomic and monetary framework within which stable economic development can be fostered and donors ' contributions invested .
As part of this , we need to encourage the Tokyo donors to make the promised funds available through the national investment budget presented by the Afghan administration .
Naturally , Community aid to Afghanistan will continue to be provided on terms dictated by the basic principles and values we subscribe to as members of western society .
Our terms are geared to achieving the aims of the Bonn Agreement and , by extension , ensuring all sides in Afghanistan comply with the procedure set up to achieve peace , a representative government and stability , convict terrorists and stop the illicit production and trafficking of narcotics .
Community aid must be geared to rebuilding a stable nation , improving the food supply and supporting the return of refugees and exiles .
Unless democratic values , pluralism and the respect for human rights , including women 's rights , are strengthened , there can be no social or political development in Afghanistan .
We are encouraging the Afghan Transitional Administration , in close consultation with the international community , to establish verifiable benchmarks and timetables to ensure the full implementation of the Bonn Agreement .
The Council has already expressed its appreciation for the role Turkey assumed as lead nation for the international peacekeeping force and we would like to commend Germany and the Netherlands for agreeing to take over the command of ? SAF for the next six months and wish them every success with this difficult mission .
I should like to reiterate the European Union 's commitment , in cooperation with the United Nations , to help Afghanistan eliminate the illicit production and trafficking of narcotics through accelerated implementation of reconstruction programmes , including in poppy-growing areas , the development of law-enforcement institutions , and provision of an alternative , better livelihood for the local people .
If Afghanistan is to enter modern statehood , it needs to reform its security , administrative , judicial , financial and social domains .
We welcome the fact that a constitutional drafting committee has been set up to draft a constitution which will modernise the judicial system and protect human rights .
However , we note that the Civil Service Commission is not yet fully functioning .
The European Union is committed to contributing to the work of these bodies .
The Judicial Commission needs to be strengthened if it is to improve the procedural system .
We welcome Italy 's contribution here in organising the conference on the Afghan legal system in Rome last December .
We need timetables and benchmarks here in order to ensure the provisions of the Bonn agreement are applied .
Activating the constitutional drafting committee and adopting an electoral law so that elections can be held by June 2004 are immediate priorities here and the presidency will continue to monitor these issues through the European Union 's special representative in Afghanistan .
2003 will be a crucial year for Afghanistan and will most likely decide the future shape of the country .
During 2003 , President Karzai will need to push through the reforms needed for fast reconstruction and rebuilding , curtail the powers of local leaders , draft a modern , working constitution based on the principles of honest administration , convene a constituent Loya Jirga and start preparations for elections in 2004 , so that the Afghan people can realise their aspirations for peace and progress in Afghanistan and determine their own future , free from violence and fear .
We have reiterated the European Union 's continued commitment to delivering a substantial contribution to the reconstruction of Afghanistan .
Finally , may I remind you that , in its conclusions of 4 December , the Council invited the High Representative and the European Union 's special representative , Mr Vendrell , to follow closely the implementation of the Petersberg commitments and , in cooperation with the Commission , to make recommendations for further actions that the European Union can undertake in support of the Afghan Transitional Administration .
Mr President , I very much welcome this opportunity , with my colleague Mr Ionitsis , to discuss progress in Afghanistan over the past year .
As I said to the Foreign Affairs Committee in December , the changes have been in many respects dramatic , and do offer a real chance to build a stable democracy .
But timing is critical ; there is - as the Minister properly underlined - a limited window of opportunity which we have to exploit .
Unless President Karzai and his Government manage to strengthen their position throughout the country , then there is a risk that these early gains will be lost .
But before turning to the substantial challenges that lie ahead , I would like to say something about the successes of 2002 , successes accomplished in extremely difficult circumstances .
Only a year ago donors met in Tokyo to pledge over USD 1.8 billion for 2002 .
Much has since been achieved in Afghanistan .
In the summer , President Karzai was elected by an Emergency Loya Jirga to lead the Afghanistan Transitional Authority ; constitutional and judicial commissions have been established ; a new currency has been introduced , and the process of recovery and of reconstruction is well under way with increasingly strong leadership from the Afghan Government .
The international community has not only honoured the pledges made at Tokyo , but , not least in comparison with some problems we have experienced in the past , the speed of disbursement has been remarkable .
The track record of the European Union and the European Commission has been , I think one can fairly say , particularly impressive .
By early December , EUR 755 million of the total European Union commitment of over EUR 830 million had actually been disbursed .
The Commission has played a leading role in co-ordinating the European Union effort and we have been actively involved in building up a strategic dialogue on Afghanistan with the United States and other G-8 partners .
I must say that I am very proud of the quality of the EC assistance programme and the speed with which it has been delivered .
It is a fine example of a successful linkage between relief and recovery , and it has been a good test case for the reform of the management of the external service .
It is also fair to pay tribute to the excellent staff we have at the newly set-up EC office in Kabul .
I would also like to pay tribute to the Special Representative , who brings so much knowledge and so much expertise to his extremely challenging work .
In more concrete terms , our development programme of over EUR 205 million in 2002 has helped to finance : firstly , the operation of 238 health clinics and over 450 primary schools as part of the Government 's 2002 Back to School campaign ; secondly , the clearance of landmines and unexploded bombs from more than 8 000 square kilometres of land ; thirdly , the return of some 17 000 key public sector workers , including the return to service of over 2 000 teachers and 2 000 nurses and doctors and fourthly , the creation of jobs .
Through our rural recovery and urban rehabilitation programmes , we are financing over 3 million person days of work this year alone , and I should also refer to the rebuilding of infrastructure .
The Commission , along with the Swedish government and Pakistan , has already started the emergency rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Kabul-Jalalabad-Torkham road and full reconstruction will start next year .
In addition , our humanitarian aid has helped to support the return of over 1.8 million refugees to Afghanistan .
Over EUR 70 million has been spent by ECHO in 2002 .
That means that the money which we have spent in total in Afghanistan over the last twelve months , the money which is voted by this Parliament , now stands at EUR 275 million .
I do not think anybody can suggest that we have not played - or are not still playing - our full part so far in the reconstruction of Afghanistan .
For 2003 , the challenge will be to consolidate this early progress .
The Commission will continue to play a leading role .
We anticipate total development assistance of about EUR 185 million , and there will also be continued humanitarian assistance from ECHO of between EUR 45 and 55 million .
That means that we will be spending in Afghanistan this year , on present estimates , between EUR 230 and 240 million .
Colleagues will recall that at Tokyo on behalf of the Commission I pledged EUR 1 billion over five years in reconstruction assistance .
That is not including the humanitarian assistance figures that I have mentioned , so the total contribution of the European Commission , from your taxpayers ' money , to Afghanistan , quite apart from contributions from Member States , will be well in excess of EUR 1 billion for the reconstruction of Afghanistan .
Some people in the past have derided that sort of work as nation-building or social work .
Frankly , when I look back , I think if we had done more of it in the 1980s and 90s , we would not have the problems that we have had recently in Afghanistan .
Success in 2003 will hinge on three key issues .
First , the need to improve internal security .
Second , the need to ensure human rights are fully respected , including those of women and minorities .
When I visited Kabul last year , one of the most moving visits that I paid was to a school in the extraordinary bomb site that is southern and western Kabul , where young women had returned to schooling for the first time in six years and were sitting in classrooms without blackboards , without textbooks , being taught physics .
I must say the commitment and dedication of the staff , and of those young women , was remarkable : anybody who ever thought that it would have been right for us to stand by and allow Taliban rule to continue indefinitely should perhaps have been present on that occasion .
The third key issue for us is the need for continued long-term commitment from donors and for effective coordination .
The argument about coordination is one which has been extremely well made by Members of this Parliament , and I will say another word about it a little later if I may .
Internal security is critical not only for the future of Afghanistan but also to the delivery of aid .
Aid workers must be able to work without fear of recrimination .
In this context , I would like to express my strong concern about the death of one aid worker , and the serious injury of two others , in Kabul just before Christmas .
I think sometimes we underestimate the amounts of courage and commitment which are required for aid workers working in these sort of circumstances .
President Karzai 's commitment at the 2 December Bonn II Conference to form an Afghan National Army is a welcome step forward , as is the recent signing of the Kabul Declaration on good-neighbourly relations .
The Government must press on quickly with the creation of a National Army , but clearly this will not be achieved overnight .
In the meantime , the international community must do everything possible to support President Karzai and to strengthen the Government 's position across all regions of the country , including in the fight against opium poppy production .
The Minister has already referred to our concern about this .
If you look at the present UN figures , there is very considerable reason not just for concern , but alarm .
There has been a substantial increase in the amount of hectares under opium production , a rapid increase in the farm-gate price of poppies , a ballooning in the production of heroin with implications not only for surrounding countries , but for European countries , and for the funding of organised crime and terrorism in the region and beyond .
I believe that we have to give far more attention to this problem in the next year or so , a problem which directly affects political authority in Afghanistan itself .
Overall , as agreed at the Bonn II meeting , we need tangible benchmarks to measure progress . These are critical not only to shape our vision of Afghanistan 's future , but to provide support to the reformers within the Government .
This is of critical importance for human rights .
Recent reports highlight the unacceptable situation faced by minority groups , and women , in some parts of the country .
We must secure fundamental change by ensuring that the establishment of the independent Human Rights Commission translates into tangible change on the ground , and that the new Constitution enshrines human rights for all , including women .
Clearly , these issues are vital in view of the general elections which are scheduled for mid 2004 .
We also cannot hope to deliver sustainable change without good donor coordination .
We must all continue to give a strong and consistent message to the Afghan Government about the need to tackle internal security , to respect human rights for everyone and to set benchmarks for progress .
I would like to finish by stressing that we must be prepared for the long haul - regardless of other events that may unfold in 2003 .
Rebuilding a cohesive state will take time , as will improving the unacceptably low levels of education and healthcare .
I want to assure Parliament of my personal commitment to these tasks .
I paid a first trip to Kabul in May 2002 and will be returning this February as part of a trip to the Central Asian Republics .
I intend to make one of the priorities of my visit the discussion of the better coordination of donor efforts , including the work done by NGOs .
The support received from this House has been very reassuring , especially in helping to secure funding for Afghanistan for 2003 .
I look forward to an equally rewarding working relationship with Parliament over the coming year and I want to express my great gratitude for the informed and thoughtful contribution which Parliament has made to the discussion of these issues .
It is sometimes difficult for the international community to focus on more than one or two blips on its radar screen at any one moment .
There is a real danger of us assuming that , because we do not read as much about Afghanistan on the front pages of the newspapers , our job in Afghanistan is , as we would say colloquially in English , done and dusted .
It is far from that .
There is a huge job for us to do in Afghanistan .
There are worrying tasks for the international community in the Central Asian Republics and there are reasons for concern about the situation in Pakistan .
So I hope that we can continue to focus on this work in the years ahead , whatever the tragic distractions may be elsewhere .
Mr President , to those who have been there , who have stood on the mountains , who know the people , Afghanistan is a beautiful country .
The Afghan people are a strong people who deserve our support .
The liberation of Afghanistan by the international coalition against terrorism , against the Taliban and against the Al-Qaida network has fortunately been very successful .
Commissioner Patten has rightly said that this is in no small measure thanks to the efforts of the European Union .
There is a new provisional government , and no fewer than 1.8 million Afghans have returned after what has , for many , been decades of forced exile abroad , and thousands of girls and women once again have the opportunity to enjoy an education in Afghanistan .
At the same time , this success is being threatened by the diversion of some of the very important international players to a new playground - Iraq .
It would be very tragic if the international coalition against terrorism were to allow itself to become divided and diverted towards Iraq .
We now specifically want the international coalition to give us extra support for Afghanistan and to concentrate on it , as it has rightly been pointed out in this context that we could otherwise lose ground .
The Afghan transitional administration , the ATA , under the leadership of President Karzai , has control over the capital , Kabul , with the help of the ISAF , but in reality the warlords still play far too great a role in the various regions of the country such as Herat .
Human rights , women 's rights and reconstruction are threatened on a daily basis in these regions .
The first and most important priority must be to extend the ISAF 's mandate so as to help the ATA to build up a national army that will cover the whole of Afghanistan .
Starting in February , the Netherlands and Germany will be playing a leading role in the ISAF forces on behalf of Europe , hopefully with a mandate that will actually demobilise the warlords , build up the national army and re-establish authority over the whole of Afghanistan .
The important agreement which Afghanistan concluded with its neighbours on 22 December last year should thus also be given another chance .
Only then will Afghans have sufficient trust , and only then will they have the opportunity to take the reconstruction into their own hands .
Almost two million refugees have returned , and 700 000 are trekking around inside Afghanistan - in other words , they are internally displaced .
That is why it is so very important that we actually give substance to the reconstruction that Commissioner Patten was talking about and that has now begun , with the cooperation of local forces , particularly in the area of education and healthcare , giving priority to women and girls .
Free and fair elections must be held and a new constitution prepared in 2004 .
The preparations for these elections are essential , as this is the way to actually establish a broad gender-sensitive , multi-ethnic and representative government .
Tremendous steps have been taken .
A human rights committee has been set up , a central bank has been established and a constitutional committee has been set up , but much ground may still be lost , as General Morillon rightly said .
I therefore very strongly support the view of the Greek Presidency and of Commissioner Patten .
Let us use the substantial amounts we have at our disposal for the coming year , coupled with our effort , in a focused way .
Given everything that is happening elsewhere in the world , we must make a success of Afghanistan now .
That will only work if we maintain this focus during the coming year .
Mr President , may I first congratulate the Greek minister for taking up the Presidency .
We look forward with confidence to a very successful and very effective six months .
The President today commented that our aim must be to bring Afghanistan into a modern statehood .
Women 's rights give increasing cause for concern , they are not improving , they are becoming worse .
Facial covering has become mandatory in many parts of the country ; the movement of women is heavily restricted .
Virginity is examined on the whim of the police , women are dragged into hospitals and physically examined .
In other words , women are reverting to their traditional subordinate role of being the property of the male .
The Commissioner has already commented that women 's rights in certain areas of the country are under assault , but I say this is also happening at central government level .
Women are now forbidden to be presenters on radio or television , which some of them were doing successfully .
I have no doubt that women journalists are also under pressure in the written media .
Under-representation of women has been commented on already , but I would ask you to recall the famous Loya Jirga , which was almost 100 % male .
When the deputy Health minister visited the European Commission recently , it was the - male - deputy Health minister , Dr Feroz , who attended , not the Health minister herself , the only senior minister who is a woman .
40 % of all health facilities do not have one single woman at any level of their staff , yet it is women worldwide who are fundamentally responsible for all aspects of family health .
The word Afghanistan translates correctly into the words ' the land of sorrow and suffering ' .
For women Afghanistan is becoming , yet again , the land of their deepest sorrow and suffering .
Humanitarian aid undoubtedly helps , but just as obviously it is simply not enough .
I warmly congratulate both ECHO and the entire Commission involved in Afghanistan , for their fantastic work .
But if we want to bring Afghanistan into the modern world , the most basic of human rights , equal respect between the sexes , must become , both a hallmark of our aid and a continuing measurement of our success .
It is not so today .
If we look at what Mr Solana identified as the aims of European Union involvement in Afghanistan , women are not mentioned : women 's rights are just not there .
Yet if we mean business , this attitude must be tackled , and it is an attitude , a tribal culture in Baluchistan , which has spread around the region .
Why be so squeamish about tackling women 's rights ?
Is it because Afghanistan is an Islamic society ?
I do not need to quote the Koran to you to remind you that men and women were equal in the Koran from the very start of Islam ; it cannot be because of that .
I urge you , alter the priorities of the Council of Ministers , place women 's rights high on the agenda .
If we fail on that , then we will have no success at all .
Mr President , yesterday the Greek Presidency stated that the priority under its mandate is to put the motto " Our Europe " into effect , and share the future in a community of values .
However , values should not just be described ; justice , the fight against poverty and peace must be pursued in difficult circumstances .
In reality , the more we talk about peace , the more war there is ; there is talk of negotiations while troops are being prepared .
When will this duplicity end ?
How much longer will bullets kill Palestinian children , suicide bombers kill Israeli citizens , Russian soldiers kill people in Chechnya and the USA kill wherever it thinks it has an interest , and so on ?
I shall not give any further examples , since the world is such a big and terrible place .
Is this rhetoric or sentimentality ?
No . I am expressing political and moral outrage , a stern warning against creating a Europe which has a forked tongue , as an American Indian chief once said while his people were being wiped out and moved to reservations .
One year on from the Bonn Agreement and clearly many positive steps have been taken .
The Commission 's facts and Commissioner Patten 's outstanding analyses , which I shall not dwell on as he read them out very clearly , are impressive .
We all know that in a situation where there is devastation such as this , there are no shortcuts to achieving common interests without destroying specific aspects .
We need to develop civilian infrastructure , rebuild houses , roads , schools , hospitals , not allow returning refugees to die from starvation and cold and attack the cultivation or sale of opium but give the population an alternative .
I have personally seen the progress made this year , especially in Kabul - schools reopened , girls studying journalism - but at the same time , I have seen and heard that key figures such as military leaders and the United States have allowed human rights failures , which are still apparent .
I am not just referring to abuse and discrimination against women at work , in the streets , in the media and not just , moreover , in the Herat area - land of the infamous Khan - but all over the country ; I am also referring to social discrimination , to favour-based politics and nepotism , applied to everyone , but especially - and the USA is primarily responsible for this - with regard to the supply of arms , aid and political support for military leaders who should be before the International Court .
We need to help the central government , the Ministry of Social Affairs - the Minister for Equal Opportunities , Habiba Sarabi , has appealed to us all to increase aid and support for gender policies and women 's policies within the European Commission too - and enable democratic elections to take place in 2004 : these are all essential things .
Moreover , it is also essential , as Commissioner Patten said , to extend central power to the various areas of the country , above all separate military power from civilian power and encourage the Human Rights Commission , not just the Afghan one - Sima Samar is a courageous woman who bravely continues her work - but also UNAMA .
I met UNAMA representatives in Kabul who could not travel round the country for fear not only of warlords , but also of marines , for fear of speaking out and exposing human rights violations , in which we were also complicit .
We must therefore carry out investigations for UNAMA .
The passage of time does not , however , help democratic forces : Commissioner Patten also said this , just as he said we are arriving late ; perhaps we could have done more in 1980 .
Donor countries should pay greater heed to the government , but above all to women 's organisations which are saying loud and clear that the warlords ' power must be cut off and the country must be reconstructed on the basis of law and democracy , because there can be no democracy if there is torture or massacres such as the one at Mazar-i-Sharif .
Europe must continue to do its part ; we cannot take a different path : we must give continuity to our work and our commitment .
Mr President , four months ago we took part in another debate about Afghanistan in this very room , with some of the same people .
I have just re-read the report and must come to the conclusion that a large number of subjects dealt with at the time are regrettably still highly topical , such as the position of women .
To be honest , I have little to add to Baroness Nicholson 's impressive arguments on that point .
I do , however , think that the time has come to do more than just acknowledge that the position of women has deteriorated over the past year .
The UN Human Rights Committee , which has a special rapporteur for the position of women , should really go and carry out targeted investigations in places where we all know the position of women has deteriorated , like in Herat , for example .
The time has also come for the international community , including the European Union , to make it clear that aid depends on progress with regard to the position of women , and that deterioration will have long-term consequences .
Another subject that we dealt with four months ago - and this has also been mentioned now by a number of fellow Members - was the extension of the ISAF 's mandate outside Kabul .
Kofi Annan has described this extension as a precondition for continuing stability in Afghanistan .
In his response to our contribution four months ago , the Commissioner himself stated at the time , and I quote : the Member States will certainly take note of the comments of many MEPs .
Mr Yiannitsis , I would like to once more ask the question I also put to your Danish counterpart at the time : is the Council prepared to make money and troops available in order to enable this extension to happen ?
If not , please tell me ; then we will not have this illusion hanging over our heads .
I am convinced that this is necessary , otherwise there will be no stability anywhere at all in Afghanistan .
Why is it so necessary to extend the ISAF 's mandate ?
That has everything to do with what I would call the perverse return of the warlords .
I again refer to what Mr Patten said on 4 September : we must not use the warlords in the fight against Al-Qaida again .
Regrettably this is still happening .
Some of the warlords are still being supported financially but also with weapons in the context of the fight against terrorism .
This must come to an end .
Otherwise everything we have been discussing here about reforms will simply have no chance at all .
Take , for example , the fact that many warlords and generals are governors at the same time .
This must not be allowed to continue .
This only advances their standing ; this really must come to an end .
The position of the ISAF has started to suffer , even in Kabul .
There are increasing numbers of incidents , and the present Turkish commanding officer has rightly warned that this situation will only worsen in the event of an attack on Iraq .
Understandably , there is increasing concern in Germany and the Netherlands , the countries taking over command of the ISAF , that the warlords , together with Al-Qaida , are very likely to use an attack on Iraq to turn people against all Westerners , not only soldiers but aid workers as well .
If the ISAF 's mandate is not extended , if the role of the warlords is not diminished , the reforms will simply have no chance at all .
Then the human rights violations will continue and - let us not forget this - the credibility of the international community and that of the European Union will be called into question .
This must not be allowed to happen .
Mr President , we should applaud the action of President Karzai who , faced with countless problems , has set in motion the creation of a new Constitution and the formation of a national army , essential cornerstones for the construction of a secular , democratic and functional state .
The facts set out at the Petersberg Conference are encouraging : EUR 830 million already allocated by Europe , with a tangible impact on medicine and health , education - education which is now finally accessible to girls too - security through mine-clearing and the deactivation of unexploded bombs , agriculture , the restoration of urban areas , the reconstruction of infrastructure and return and assistance for refugees who are at last going back to their country .
There is , however , still a long way to go : many of the funds allocated by Europe are still frozen , and we need a stronger commitment by our countries ' governments to the democratic development of Afghanistan .
A key issue for development , in fact , is to expand agriculture , which will take land away from opium cultivation .
At this point , it is clear that not just the Union but also individual national governments , their Ministers for Agriculture , possibly also in conjunction with national farmers ' organisations , must help Afghanistan and Afghan farmers with more immediacy to reconvert their crops , with , moreover , the help of specialists and experts in this area .
The terrorism emergency is , in any case , unresolved and Europe must renew its political and moral commitment to helping the secular governments of those Muslim countries that wish to combat fundamentalist extremism .
Members of the various terrorist networks are not only continuing to operate in areas of Afghanistan not yet controlled by the government but , in fact , live and are active in bordering countries and are operationally linked with areas which have become centres for attracting and recruiting others , such as certain areas of Somalia and South-East Asia .
Support for Afghanistan goes beyond the exclusively political or economic principle of international cooperation , and constitutes a very real challenge for the protection of civilisation , the dignity of peoples and freedom now and in the future .
With regard to the issue of women , this is still a vast and ongoing problem , but it is helpful to point out that there are female Ministers in Afghanistan , such as the Minister for Women 's Affairs , and that the First Counsellor of the Afghan Embassy in Brussels is a woman who works and actively collaborates with the government precisely in order to improve the status of women .
Finally , we cannot , in this first report on free Afghanistan , forget Commander Massoud and Europe 's lethargy when he asked for help just a few months before being assassinated and before the Twin Towers tragedy .
We would therefore reiterate the call on Parliament to award him the Sakharov Prize posthumously , or better still , to establish a Massoud Prize to be bestowed on those who tragically , have lost their lives defending their people and freedom .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is interesting to hear certain reconstructions of the facts which - quite rightly - merely skim the surface of the present , while totally overlooking or pretending to overlook the past , the Taliban past , or , as in other contexts , while criticising the actions which may lead to war in Iraq and forgetting the thousands , the hundreds of thousands of people massacred , tortured and exterminated under Saddam Hussein 's regime .
I would say to Mrs Morgantini that , while today there are human rights violations in Afghanistan , if we had listened to her and her friends , and the international community had refrained from intervening in Afghanistan , as they were asking us to do , there would not have been any human rights violations in that country simply because there would not have been any human rights whatsoever , just as there were none in the past .
Therefore , these ex post lessons must offset what existed in the past with what , with difficulty , the international community and the Karzai Government are trying , clearly with numerous problems , to establish .
From this point of view I would like to draw your attention , ladies and gentlemen , to something that happened two days ago and that I consider to be of extreme importance : the Afghan Government acceded , it ratified the treaty establishing the International Criminal Court .
This is an extraordinary fact , if you think about it , as things stand in Afghanistan , when many countries - starting with , unfortunately , the United States - are against the Court .
Well , I feel that Parliament should take note and encourage this desire to become a fully paid-up member of the international community , also in this respect , because who knows , in the future the Court could operate precisely to try crimes committed in that country .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the human suffering in Afghanistan has lasted for decades and precludes a cynical approach to these deliberations , although such would be a very tempting option .
It must be clear to us that the years since the Soviet invasion saw a country that was poor in any case progressively smashed to pieces , only then for it to tear itself apart in a civil war , before the Taliban finished off what was left . The removal of the Taliban regime has now provided the opportunity for reconstruction .
The question arises , however , of to what extent both the military victors and the present government have the authority to achieve real stability and get reconstruction underway .
We cannot fail to observe that the stability needed to get real aid efforts to the whole of the country is not in place .
Are we not deceiving ourselves when much of the reconstruction work is going on only in Kabul ?
In Kabul , non-governmental organisations are falling over each other in their efforts to get projects going in that city , the reason being that other locations are too dangerous , and so aid soon becomes concentrated on projects that do not help rebuild the country as a whole .
If , though , it proves impossible to stabilise the whole country , we can organise as many conferences of donors and so on as we like , but we will not get business to put its hands in its pocket and come up with private-sector funds for investment .
The fact is that private-sector funds for investment are forthcoming only when there is a degree of certainty , founded upon both military security and firm legal policies , that these funds can continue to be put to work and that they will not be lost .
I believe this to be a reason why this issue has to be examined in a very critical light , so that we do not end up engaging in the sort of activism that looks good but helps nobody .
The country as a whole needs aid to be provided quickly , but it must then be distributed fairly .
It seems to me that there is as yet no guarantee , for example , of the Pashtuns , who make up the majority of Afghanistan 's population , having a share equal to that of others in political decision-making in Kabul , or in other beneficial things .
If they do not , it appears to me that there will be a grave danger of a nascent resistance movement that new warlords could use for their own ends , so that , in spring or summer , new internal conflicts could flare up and make it even more difficult to guarantee the entire region 's stability , to attract investment , and organise aid - with the country thus ending up in another vicious circle , and with us in a situation in which we can achieve even less .
The fact that soldiers from my own country are working together with others in taking charge of Afghanistan means that I am very aware of the implications when I say that the situation could indeed arise in which these conditions make things far more dangerous for individual soldiers on the ground in Afghanistan than does anything currently being planned in Iraq .
This is also a point of view that it is not wise to express openly .
Even though it is not politically correct to make this connection , I fear that this is the case or , at least , that the danger is real .
Anyone who knows Afghanistan 's history will be aware that foreign troops have never felt at home there for long .
When I see how even the United States of America can no longer guarantee the safety of its troops , and how they are now starting to set up camps in certain areas into which they can withdraw at night , it reminds me of other examples .
It is for this reason that I wish to ask you to join with us in considering these facts in an open debate , in order to bring about real improvements on that basis , rather than merely giving the impression that money is being poured away even while we know it will not solve the problem in the long term .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , I am sure you would understand me perfectly if I spoke in German but , in honour of the Greek Presidency , I shall torment the interpreters with my Greek .
Mr President-in-Office , I fully endorse your presentation of the situation in Afghanistan .
I think we all feel a reserved satisfaction ; we all see the continuing shortcomings in Afghanistan and we all know what has to be done over coming years .
You yourself referred to the lack of security , the hostilities and the production and trafficking of narcotics , as did the Commissioner , and I think that the House is in full agreement with the timetable you suggest for elections in Afghanistan and improving the situation in general .
There is no need for me to repeat what we are all agreed on .
I should like to highlight two points which should not be left out of any discussion of Afghanistan .
One is the terrible events which have taken place in the name of the fight against terrorism .
Let there be no misunderstanding : I am behind the fight against terrorism in Afghanistan or anywhere else 100 % .
The warlords and the Taliban were never our allies .
It was not the European Union that trained , armed and helped the Taliban through Pakistan .
It was not us who created the forces we are now fighting against .
But the fight against terrorism , the fight against violations of human rights and terrorism against women , the fight for democracy and the rule of law is only a credible fight if it is fought within a framework of respect for human rights and respect for the right to life of people who may be terrorists or criminals .
I should like to add to today 's debate on Afghanistan by mentioning two very dark sides to this war .
First , the horrendous allegations about the slaughter in Mazar-I-Sharif .
I think the UN has an obligation both to investigate and examine these allegations closely and to make known and publish the results of their enquiries .
And secondly , we should be ashamed about the fate of prisoners in Guantanamo and other detention camps run by the American military for members of the Taliban who have been arrested and people who have been imprisoned and are being called Taliban .
The European Union should do something about this , it is a disgrace .
Mr President , the danger with foreign policy initiatives designed to counter terrorism following the 11 September disaster is that we are deluded into thinking that in the parts of the world where this strategy has been deployed everything has therefore been resolved .
The reality is , however , rather different .
In Afghanistan , most of the country outside Kabul is still under the control of warlords and regional leaders who continue to commit human rights abuses on a large scale , including torture and the disappearance of Afghan civilians .
Women 's rights , as has already been mentioned , are also consistently being violated .
Along with the detention of 600 people without charge or trial in Guantanamo Bay , Cuba , that Mr Sakellariou mentioned , these are matters that we tend to forget , deluding ourselves that the problems have been and are being resolved .
In Afghanistan , in the Herat province under the governorship of Ismail Khan , the situation has deteriorated .
Whereas once there was a liberal , literary and cultural tradition , women are again being persecuted and barred from education , health care and the justice system .
Even under the Taliban there was at least a semblance of central control that limited the excesses of these regional autocrats .
Now many regions have reverted to a quasi-dictatorship and reconstruction funds are benefiting regional leaders who are committing human rights abuses politically and financially .
This must stop .
UNAMA , the United Nations Assistance Mission to Afghanistan , must stop funding these offending warlords immediately .
Some of us in the European Parliament recently saw a film by Jamie Doran , the Scottish film-maker , backing with hard evidence the existence of a mass grave in the Mazar-i-Sharif region which might contain the remains of 3 000 prisoners of war , killed and tortured by anti-Taliban forces .
This is an atrocity that members of the American forces witnessed and did not prevent .
I am glad the United Nations and the European Union have now agreed to investigate this alleged crime .
Mr President , the reconstruction of Afghanistan has not , in my view , remotely begun , despite the assurances given in the House today .
The warlords still maintain their iron grip outside Kabul and women still wear the burka and have no rights whatsoever , for instance to education or primary healthcare .
It is , in my view , right for the United States and the rest of the Western world to seek to destroy Al-Qaida and eliminate Osama Bin Laden , but so far they have failed .
Much has been made of women 's rights in Afghanistan , but as I said , nothing has changed .
I believe that Afghanistan is only the tip of the iceberg as far as the United States is concerned .
Many commentators suggest that it is part of the strategy to ensure access to oil from the Caspian Sea .
Now the question arises , how many fronts will open up after Afghanistan ?
The American administration is preparing for war on Iraq , with unpredictable consequences that no one will be able to control .
They will of course have won control of the Iraqi oil wells , but Afghanistan is ignored .
In a recent poll in England , 71 % were against their government participating in a war without the approval of the Security Council .
No doubt as soon as the war begins , other European leaders along with Tony Blair , will bend to the will of the United States , ignoring the views of the people , which says a lot about our democracy .
The Iraqi people have suffered death and destruction for the past eleven years under the United States sanctions , as have the people of Afghanistan .
We have to look clearly at our policy in the Middle East and elsewhere .
Mr President , I might well continue where my fellow MEP , Mrs Theorin , left off .
It is as if many of the things we take very seriously when we make speeches are not really taken seriously in practice .
Women 's rights and legal position are among these things .
Others are international law and human rights .
When the talk turns to Afghanistan , I find myself thinking automatically of those people , including European citizens , who are imprisoned in Guantánamo .
What has become of their rights ?
What legal system do they come under ? None at all .
The United States does not respect international law - of that we are well aware - but nor does it respect its own law .
I find it bizarre that we have a resolution by Parliament that takes no account at all of the fact that a number of European citizens are in a prison camp and that we do not know for how long they will be there , what their future prospects are and what legal system they come under .
I also find this in stark contrast to the fact that , in other situations , there is a demand that international law be complied with .
A very good example is Iraq , which we demand comply with international stipulations and UN resolutions .
In that way , we give people the impression - in Afghanistan too - that there are two standards in this world , namely that which we demand that they themselves uphold and that which we , for our part , are willing to uphold , because it is we who have the power and thus , in our view , also the right to make demands .
Another area in which we face similar problems is in relation to the massacre in Mazar-i-Sharif .
There is quite a lot to suggest that there were American soldiers present .
Some people maintain that they took part in the massacre .
There is much , however , to suggest that they were present .
That being said , we are doing nothing to have this matter thoroughly investigated and have the people responsible brought to trial .
I think these double standards are causing us problems .
They make matters more difficult in relation to Afghanistan and the Afghan people .
Why is it so difficult to bring about change ?
To arrive in Afghanistan or Kabul is to enter a world that is exclusively male .
Men with piercing eyes scowling at women .
Some men may have changed outwardly , but on the inside they are still the same .
When you wander around the famous Chicken Street in Kabul , for example , you see women in dirty old burkas begging , children begging , men standing around chatting .
We must not forget that there is still a culture of men who think that women should not be educated .
Are there any solutions ?
Yes .
In a country in which people have always fought each other , you must involve women , you must put women in a prominent position , and this must be enforced .
After all , can we imagine a society in the European Union which provides healthcare without women , where there is education without women , for example ?
This is only one of many examples .
Mr President , one year on we can take much satisfaction from what has been achieved by the Afghan people supported by the international community , but all this reveals the size of the mountain to be climbed .
It is not going to be a quick fix for Afghanistan .
It is likely that the democracies will have to maintain a commitment for many years to come .
There will be reverses that will place this commitment under severe strain .
We see the scale of the problem when we understand that the writ of President Karzai does not extend far beyond Kabul and a few other towns , and his personal security remains largely in foreign hands .
I endorse the presidency 's congratulations to the Turkish armed forces , which took over the organisation and command of ISAF from the United Kingdom last June .
There is a compelling argument for the international peace-keeping force to deploy to key locations outside Kabul until the Afghan National Army is in a position to assume its responsibilities , but such forces will be highly vulnerable .
The fact is that warlords continue to hold sway in many of the more remote areas , and their commitment to peaceful development and democracy is largely non-existent .
They are interested in personal power and the fruits of criminal activity .
They can be won over - but by anyone .
Even more worrying , therefore , is the evidence of an Al-Qaida-Taliban resurgence in border areas with Pakistan , regrouping in camps on both sides of the border in alliance with local mujahedin .
This is in spite of a large American-led counter-insurgency force which operates in parallel to ISAF .
At the moment western military forces are operational in Bosnia , Kosovo and Macedonia , as well as in Afghanistan .
There will be fresh demands , not only in relation to Iraq , but in other places as well .
The fact is that all our countries need to generate more military capability and the willingness to use it in concert with America and other allies , along with other instruments .
Afghanistan 's neighbours have been enormously affected by the refugee problem , but equally countries such as the United Kingdom have felt the impact .
In recent years Afghans have been the largest single national category of those claiming asylum in the United Kingdom .
In due course these people must go home .
With this in mind I welcome the Council decision of 29 November to adopt the return action plan for Afghanistan , the first application of this programme .
Finally , Afghanistan is one of the most heavily mined countries in the world .
This is a consequence of activities by the former Soviet Army and more especially by warring factions over the past ten years .
In spite of massive international financial assistance , where the European Community in particular has been a major contributor , only a small proportion of anti-personnel landmines have been cleared and the casualty rate continues to be very high .
Landmines and their suspected presence are one of the greatest obstacles to reconstruction and return to any sort of normality .
We need to find more effective , quicker methods involving local people to overcome the scourge of landmines , not just in Afghanistan , but elsewhere as well .
This is not just a question of funds , this is a specific practical area where the Commission has a key role to play and needs even more focus .
Mr President , the subject of today 's debate is Afghanistan : one year after the Bonn Agreement .
What we are in fact debating is several decades of Afghan history , with Bonn as just one stage in an ongoing crisis and , as we take stock , we realise that there is good news and bad news .
In cases such as these it is , in fact , the people who need to take stock , by which I mean that it makes no difference to the people whether the violence is perpetrated by the warlords or the Taliban .
In this sense , our objectives must be to establish a stable rule of law with stable institutions that allow democracy to function and everyone 's rights to be respected .
A great deal of costly work needs to be done ; more to the point , a long-term strategy is needed .
The question is : do all the forces operating in the area have a common strategy ?
We have talked about the European Union , be it of the 15 or 25 , but we have said nothing about , for example , Russia 's , America 's or Pakistan 's plans for the area .
Are they with us or do they have a separate agenda , in which case our common objectives may not be so common after all .
Under these circumstances , as we take stock , we see that there is a great deal of cause for satisfaction : the situation is not the same as it was a year ago , but we still need to worry on a number of counts ; are we perhaps turning back the clock and will situations return which should not return ?
So it might be a good idea to take stock of a few basic facts , such as the increase in crime , the operational limits of the state , whatever form it takes , and where the European taxpayers ' money is going .
Because , if memory serves me well , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , for example , said that 80 % of the money was being used by non-governmental organisations working in the area in order to stay afloat and only 20 % was going to the country .
If this is true , the best thing we can do for institutional development , democratisation and stabilisation is to involve as many Afghan citizens as possible .
Mr President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , the strategic importance of Afghanistan cannot be overestimated .
A peaceful and stable Afghanistan is an important bulwark against the resurgence of extremism in the region .
One year after the Bonn Conference , it is an opportune time to reflect on the EU 's contribution in restoring peace , stability and credible political structures .
Commissioner Patten was right to emphasise the contribution that the EU as a whole and the EU Commission in particular have made during the last year .
EU funds have been used to finance health clinics and primary schools , the clearance of landmines , the return of key public service workers , the creation of jobs to combat the opium production that is spiralling in post-Taliban Afghanistan , the rebuilding of infrastructures , clean-up operations in 7 cities and support for the return of the 1.8 million or so refugees returning to the country .
This in an impressive list and the Commission , ECHO and the various aid organisations involved deserve credit .
However , on the general issue of aid , it is important to point out that , although the total aid from the international community may seem enormous when compared to other areas in crisis , Afghanistan is at the bottom of the pile when we look at aid given per capita .
The average aid pledges to Bosnia , Kosovo , East Timor and Rwanda were approximately $ 250 per person , as against $ 75 for Afghanistan .
The international community should take note of this .
As the Commissioner himself pointed out , investing money earlier is much more effective and more economical than spending money to pick up the pieces afterwards .
Given our strong record on aid , I believe we have the moral authority to put pressure on our international partners to translate their verbal pledges into money .
We should also use our influence to ensure a proper balance is struck between providing short term relief and undertaking long term reconstruction .
The EU has done a lot , but we cannot become complacent or allow the problems of Afghanistan to be sidelined by the prospect of war with Iraq or problems with North Korea .
We have a moral obligation to create permanent peace and stability , tackle the problem of the warlords , improve human rights , especially , as other speakers have pointed out , women 's rights , and establish real democracy in Afghanistan .
Much still needs to be done .
The holding of democratic elections next year , the establishment of a national army and the pursuit of good neighbourly relations are all positive steps in the right direction .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to give a brief but warm welcome to the third year of the D. E. Montemurro National School of Media , from Gravina , in Apulia , which has been awarded the ' Let 's Build Europe Together ' prize , established by the Italian Chamber of Deputies .
The main aim of this initiative is to promote the involvement of our younger citizens in the debate on the future of Europe .
We therefore offer these young people our congratulations on having gained first place in this competition and we also congratulate them on their attentive involvement in the work being undertaken in the plenary sitting .
Well done !
Mr President , I too have had the unique experience of visiting Afghanistan and seeing the situation with my own eyes .
The first thing that needs to be said is that our staff are doing an excellent job , as you yourself said , Commissioner , and the European Union has a high profile there .
However , a year after Bonn , I think coordination is a serious problem , both in the provision and distribution of aid and , more to the point , the policy being applied .
By which I mean that the European Union is following one political tack and supporting a strong central administration in Afghanistan , while the United States are taking a different approach and sticking to their favourite tactic of divide and rule from the days of the Taliban and the Mujahedin by backing the warlords , who they seem to think have taken their side .
Mr Morillon and Mr Sakellariou said likewise .
Unfortunately , the upshot of this divisive western policy is that entire areas are beyond the control of the central administration and this is precisely what caused the recent surge in the production of opium , which accounted for 70 % of world production in 2002 .
Women , of course , are still in a dire situation in all sectors .
Blue ghosts continue to waft round the streets of Kabul , with few women daring to risk their lives by taking off their burka .
The Taliban may have lost power , but their spirit still haunts Afghanistan .
In my opinion , there can be no economic or social progress as long as a culture of violence , religious fanaticism and misogyny reigns in Afghanistan .
98 % of women are illiterate and economically dependent and 99 % give birth without medical assistance .
This sort of soil provides an ideal breeding ground for extremist movements such as the Taliban .
I think the Greek Presidency , Mr President-in-Office , could do a great deal to help by proposing that a European fund be set up and a line included in the 2004 budget especially for women in Afghanistan .
This fund could be used to finance new infrastructures to integrate women into public life .
I also suggest , Commissioner , that we should invite President Karzai to Strasbourg to speak before a plenary session of the European Parliament .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council and Commissioner Patten for what they have told us today .
I too , like other fellow Members , recently went to Afghanistan with a European Parliament delegation and I can bear witness to the truth of the things reported by Commissioner Patten .
Let us not forget that we found a country ravaged by 23 years of war and years of drought .
The progress made in one year since the first Bonn Conference is truly remarkable , and likewise we should applaud the determination , selflessness and competence of our Commission officials in Kabul .
All this is true : schools have been opened , they have started to rebuild some health facilities ; valuable work is being done , particularly in terms of supporting the administration .
In this connection , I would like to urge Commissioner Patten not to abandon the aspect of specific personnel training , including for customs officers , which is fundamental .
It is also true , however - and the last Bonn Conference showed this to some degree - that the most committed donor countries are asking the Karzai Government to show more determination .
There has been some criticism : reforms announced by the Karzai Government itself have been delayed ; even though a commission has been appointed to draw up the new Constitution , it is being obstructed by religious issues , by minorities , whereas it needs to go ahead , especially with a specific acknowledgement of women 's rights too ; security is still a serious problem ; there is no judicial system and there is no national defence force ; an operative police force is still lacking .
All this is true .
The European Union , which has done a great deal , must therefore persevere on these issues .
Lastly - a final word on women 's rights - I would like to refer here , to the European Parliament , to the appeal which the Minister , Mrs Sarabi , made to us : each donor country has chosen a specific area of intervention ; however , no one has chosen the specific issue of women 's rights .
This is an urgent appeal that I am making to the European Union and to us all lest we forget this : there is no chance of making progress or finding a way out of this situation unless women are directly involved in this process .
Mr President , I should like to thank the honourable Members of the European Parliament for the debate we have had , for the support they have expressed for many of the Presidency 's thoughts and proposals and for the Commission 's thoughts and proposals , even though they do not come within my jurisdiction .
We have set out a whole series of useful proposals .
I must say that I agree that the role of the administration needs to extend beyond Kabul city limits if there is to be greater stability and normalisation in the country as a whole , that the mission of the ISAF needs to be extended so that it can work along the same political lines and , thirdly , that human rights must be respected , be they women 's rights , prisoners ' rights or adversaries ' rights .
We have a history of respect for human rights for institutional , historic and cultural reasons .
It is a tradition in Europe and we must respect it wherever necessary .
The debate as a whole has shown that what we want to create in Afghanistan , as everyone knows , is a country in which the values of democracy and freedom take hold and the potential for economic development and confidence is realised .
History has taught us that this is a long , hard process in any country and I know of no other country in which such huge changes have come about in such a short space of time .
We , for our part , need to show political determination , we need to provide economic , political and humanitarian assistance , but we also need to be realistic about what we can do , how far we can go , what the prevailing circumstances are , what difficulties the people there face , what balances need to be respected , what values hold sway and how we can provide help in the right direction .
We are still a long way from being able to say that the game in Afghanistan has been won .
We are only a short way down the line and we still have a great deal to do over a very long period of time .
Developments in Afghanistan will be influenced by numerous factors , both internal and external .
We need to look at individual concerns , what is happening with the constitution , what is happening on the humanitarian and numerous other fronts , and we need to take an overall view and apply an overall strategy as to how we can influence developments .
Success cannot be measured by one criterion alone or by a number of individual criteria which we might mention , and several have been mentioned , be they institutional or individual rights or economic progress .
Success will be measured by simultaneous progress on a number of political , institutional , social and economic fronts in Afghanistan .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The next item is the report ( A5-0001 / 2003 ) , by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 76 / 768 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products ( PE-CONS 3668 / 2002 - C5-0557 / 2002 - 2000 / 0077 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , you are right to say that today sees the third reading of the report on cosmetics , a topic to which - as will be known to most of us - Parliament has now been repeatedly returning over the space of ten years .
By far and away most of the proposals , both in this parliamentary session and in the last one , concern themselves with a ban on experiments on animals and on the sale of products tested on animals .
These areas have been the subject of the most controversy , and , indeed , still are .
Both within the European Union and outside it , the most controversial issue was about whether experiments on animals would continue to be permitted in the future in connection with toothpaste and shampoos .
Controversy continued to rage around the issue of whether a product that had been tested on animals could still be sold .
It was said over and over again in this House that the only way to prevent tests being exported was to couple a ban on testing with a ban on the marketing - and hence the sale - of the products .
Both in the first and second readings of this seventh amendment to the cosmetics directive , that was the crucial issue , but , both in the competent committee and here in this House , we made the point that cosmetics and cosmetic products are of immediate relevance to the protection of consumers .
We pointed out that , for example , the information on a product 's useful life was of importance to consumers , who were to be told for how long they could use a cosmetic product once it had been opened .
That was one of the points on which this House made proposals at first and second reading .
This House 's final demand - one that I was happy to endorse as rapporteur - was that hazardous products , those known to be carcinogenic , to affect the reproductive system or to be mutagenic , should not be permitted to be used in cosmetics .
These proposals were what , in essence , our second reading was about .
All of them gave rise to controversy .
Although they passed through second reading by a very large majority , the Commission did not exactly welcome us with open arms .
Today , though , at third reading , we can permit ourselves some self-congratulation , because the conciliation procedure was , I have to say , difficult .
Over the years , I have had direct or indirect experience of many conciliation procedures .
In this one , I started out uncertain as to whether we would achieve a compromise .
We did .
The outcome is that a ban on testing cosmetics on animals will be in place - six years after the legislation is adopted .
There will be a sales ban on most of the products still containing ingredients tested on animals - six years after the legislation is adopted .
We have also said that there will be a derogation for three tests , the development of alternatives to which is not yet in sight .
The cosmetics industry is not entirely blameless in this .
That so little has been done to develop these tests is partly due to the cosmetics industry having been , in the past , what we might call dozy .
But we are now giving them an incentive , and a certain amount of time , to come up with alternatives .
Let me make it clear that what we have achieved is a compromise , a compromise which , like all others , is not ideal .
I am aware that the cosmetics industry finds it less than ideal , and also that the animal welfare organisations are convinced that more could have been achieved .
I have had to keep on telling our friends in the animal welfare organisations that if they can find someone who can achieve more , they should get them down here and let them get on with it .
My fellow-Members and I have tried to get a workable solution accepted , and so let me conclude by saying that I am grateful to the outgoing Danish Presidency , whose cooperation with us has been excellent , and also to the Commission , which had become cooperative by the end .
Mr Liikanen , I wish it had done so a bit sooner , but at least it was never too late .
I will also express my thanks to our colleagues in the Conciliation Committee , and to all those with whom we dealt during the conciliation procedure .
This all adds up to one of the reasons why I love this Parliament so much , and why I would not wish to be a member of any other .
The cooperation between Members of every nation and political group was open , decorous , frank and supportive to such an extent that I am convinced that you will not find the like of it in any legislature in the world .
It was a joy to work through the night with you until twenty past four in the morning .
It was a joy to achieve this outcome and to have been allowed to be your rapporteur .
So I again want to thank most especially the colleagues who have always , and repeatedly , assured me of their support , even when conditions were rather less favourable on every side .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to warmly congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt on having made progress on this difficult directive and particularly on the manner in which she has done so .
During this legislature , I have had the opportunity to debate many issues , some of them genuinely difficult and complicated , but perhaps in none of them have I seen so much desire to reach consensus through cooperation amongst all the agents involved as in the case of the rapporteur on this directive .
I do not believe that this has been a debate based on the positions of the different political groups , in confrontation ; it has essentially been a debate between stagnation and progress in an area on which the European Parliament has for years maintained a united and coherent position , with a view of the issues which differs from that of the cosmetics industry and , on several fundamental points , also from that of the Commission itself .
Parliament had a clear view of what it wanted : to set time limits for the end of experimentation on animals , and of the marketing of products experimented on them and , furthermore , to improve the general framework of the legislation regulating these products in the Member States .
For its part , the industry initially maintained the same position of rejecting these requests which Parliament had been defending for years , which made the application of the sixth amendment of the directive unviable .
The rapporteur has already mentioned the long process of debate and joint work between the parliamentary groups with the industry , the Commission and also with the competent administrations of the Member States and finally a compromise was achieved last November following an extremely long conciliation which , if I remember correctly , lasted twelve hours .
I genuinely believe that there are no losers in relation to this issue .
I am convinced that the industry is also a winner with the new commitments on prohibition , experimentation and marketing of six years from the entry into force of the directive .
And this is essentially because they will be better able to serve the interests of the citizens in the field of animal protection , without in any way also undermining the safety or diversity , of course , of the products on the market .
In this regard , one of the most difficult parts of the work on this directive has been managing to establish the field of exceptions through the definition of tests which , for a period of ten years in specific and essential cases where no alternative methods have been found , will still be able to be carried out .
Another element which increases the safety of products is the prohibition of dangerous substances such as those which are carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic for reproduction which must be excluded from cosmetics .
I am convinced that this seventh amendment offers the industry a new range of opportunities for research and development of new products , which , while guaranteeing their effectiveness and above all their safety , will need to be tested on animals .
I believe this is a great challenge for the industry , which I would encourage to seek new sources of competitive advantage through this research and to initiate , with interest and good will , close cooperation with this Parliament .
I believe that the European Parliament not only can and must communicate that this seventh amendment is a success , but also it would be a mistake for the industry not to take this opportunity to draw up a new communication strategy based on the agreements reached and on its position in favour of the concerns of the consumers , not only with regard to animal experimentation , but also , as we have seen , with regard to other points of the directive which imply greater control of the marketing of these products .
Finally , I would like once again to highlight the issue of cooperation between the parties involved , in particular the eventual , it is true , but positive , flexibility of the Member States and the industry which has led to this final agreement .
Madam President , I should like to add my congratulations and conclude with a warning .
I congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt , who has achieved so much over this long process .
Perhaps if she had known at the outset the scale of the obstructions and difficulties , she would not have achieved so much .
It helps sometimes to be a little ignorant of the difficulties .
This proposal puts animal welfare above human vanity , but never above human health .
It sets time limits , graduated in accordance with the difficulties involved , and it sets new standards of reference which should and will be respected .
I also want to thank the Commission for carrying out its intermediary role , mindful of law and precedent , but also of the strong views of this Parliament which have been echoed here under three different Commissions , for more than ten years .
To come to this final conclusion is an enormous satisfaction for all of us .
My colleagues on the Conciliation Committee expressed the long frustrations of this process in that last marathon session .
It was literally at the eleventh hour that we achieved the result that all desired .
A new model strip cartoon has just been distributed to Members showing how exciting the work of the European Parliament is , with glamorous young male and female characters .
If there is another edition of this series , it should deal with the long night with Mrs Roth-Behrendt at the end of these proceedings .
I also want to thank the Danish presidency .
One often sees a presidency looking at a problem firmly in the eye , and then running away .
The Danes knew that they could get a deal and they got it - through great skill in my opinion .
This was a deal - I want to say this before going on to a word of warning - that meets Parliament 's principal concerns .
It sticks .
It is a signal for action , and not an argument for delay .
The animal welfare organisations which campaigned tirelessly for this outcome should not complain about the compromise that we achieved .
The spotlight is now on compliance , with a provision to find alternative tests , especially in the most difficult areas of toxicity .
None of us should make any apologies for how we came to be in this place today .
I am personally proud of the fact that the rapporteur got us through this procedure and it enhances the reputation of Parliament , not merely for its procedures but also for their effectiveness .
Madam President , my dear Dagmar , I have to tell Mr Barnier that , when I came into the plenary , I was still in a good mood .
No doubt it is my fault that I have been unaware of your existence in recent years .
At any rate , you have had nothing to say for the whole of the debate on cosmetics , and , if you are going to go away today and say that everything went wrong , I cannot recall you having made any serious or creditable contribution to this debate .
My dear Dagmar , a veritable fanfare of compliments has been sounded in your honour today .
It is one in which I am happy to join .
Having done well , you have earned it , and it was our great good fortune to be allowed to spend whole nights in your company - and how many can boast of that ?
Every directive has , of course , its pros and cons .
We have not yet slammed the door shut , but I believe that we have made a great advance by saying that the cut-off point will be at the end of a period of time - in 2009 as far as I am concerned .
I know perfectly well from my study of the market economy , Mr Barnier , that industry needs facts and data in order to be able to plan ahead - and there is nothing you can teach us on that score .
Today , industry will go away and take on young people - researchers , doctors , engineers - whose job will be to look for alternatives .
That is precisely what management needs , and that is why this is the right way to go .
Mr Liikanen , you know that , much as I respect you , your office sometimes puts forward wearisome proposals .
Now , though , you are on the right track , and I would like to give you strong encouragement to stand firm when it comes to the question of whether or not all this is acceptable to the WTO .
And stand firm you certainly will , for you know that the whole serried ranks of this House are behind you .
That means , I believe , that another solid success will be ours .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have no need of three minutes .
Europe and her people 's representatives have grasped that animals are to be valued in a different way .
I cannot but go along with that , and we will do everything to ensure a respectable and credible reduction in the number of experiments on animals .
That there has to be , yet again , one small category in which such tests must still be carried out , is something that we accept , and that I believe to be necessary , but the great number of them must be brought down , never to increase again .
The victory is yours , Mrs Roth-Behrendt - congratulations !
Madam President , I want to begin by saying a big thank you to Mrs Roth-Behrendt for her skilful and very consistent work on the directive . I certainly also enjoyed working into the night with Dagmar .
It looked very difficult at the beginning .
There were a number of Member States and also parts of industry that did everything to block decent rules concerning animal experiments . Thanks to Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's and others ' stubbornness , however , acceptable results were in actual fact achieved in two areas .
The first of these was in relation to animal experiments .
We are now to have bans imposed on animal experiments and on the marketing of new products developed by means of animal experiments .
Where most experiments are concerned , the ban will apply in six years ' time ; but , unfortunately , the bans on three areas , or methods , of experimentation will only apply in ten years ' time , and then with a risk of the deadline 's also being extended .
It might of course be said that both deadlines are too far in the future .
That is also what we have said here in Parliament but , as we know from the negotiations , there were some Member States that simply blocked the experiments concerned being halted more quickly .
It is now crucial that the Commission be consistent in following up the issue .
I am able fully to endorse Mr Davies 's observation .
Compliance with the current directives has not been sufficiently well monitored , and this has inflicted quite unnecessary suffering upon millions of animals used in experiments .
There has most definitely been an acceptance of laxity in developing alternative methods , and that laxity must cease with this directive .
The second major result concerned ourselves as consumers .
First and foremost , we are obtaining a ban on the use of a range of carcinogenic substances and on the use of substances that impair our reproductive ability .
We are to have special safety requirements in relation to children ; allergy-producing ingredients are to be labelled ; and details are to be provided of the shelf-life of individual products .
I believe that , overall , there has been a breakthrough in relation to unnecessary animal experiments and that there has also been a breakthrough in terms of public health and consumer protection in the cosmetics area .
Overall , this is a constructive outcome , and I would once again call upon the Commission to be consistent in following up this matter . I also believe that it is necessary for ourselves in Parliament to monitor such follow-up from the sidelines .
Madam President , there were three goals that were important to the Greens .
Firstly the abolition of animal testing in cosmetics .
That has succeeded ; congratulations to Mrs Roth-Behrendt who negotiated so excellently .
The second point , which was given less of a chance , relates to dangerous substances .
Dangerous substances must not be allowed to be used in cosmetics .
We also won on that point , so compliments are due to Mrs Roth-Behrendt in that regard too .
The third point concerns allergens .
Some cosmetics still contain allergens .
Originally the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance wanted a complete ban on these substances , but we are quite happy with the labelling that has now been decided upon , because we think that it will mean the same thing in practice .
There are already signs that quite a few big companies will be removing these allergens from their cosmetics .
So we have also won on that point .
There is one thing I would like to get off my chest , though : I really cannot understand the criticism from the animal protectionists .
We have achieved the most we could achieve , and we commend the rapporteur and the whole negotiation delegation .
Madam President , current policy whereby industry has been given time to develop alternative methods of experimentation has not produced results .
It is essential to impose bans on experiments and marketing .
Animals should not suffer through its being possible to develop new vanity products .
I should therefore like to congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt on the outcome of what will soon have been a long fight .
Even if the conciliation text turned out not to be as restrictive as Parliament had wished , it contains the right principles .
It is still a puzzle to me that the Council does not consider that dangerous substances that are carcinogenic , mutagenic or reproductively toxic should , in accordance with the precautionary principle , be completely excluded from being used in cosmetics .
All substances , including those in category 3 , must be covered .
Children too use products , such as shampoo and shower soap , containing these substances , and no type of risk should be taken .
The conciliation text is along the right lines , however , so I would once again congratulate you on your worthwhile struggle , Dagmar . The June Movement will of course vote in favour of the conciliation text .
When viewed solely from the point of view of cosmetics , the outcome of the conciliation can be described as good .
The industrial lobby has once again triumphed over the interests of animals who suffer unnecessarily .
Europeans will only allow animal testing if it is absolutely necessary .
This necessity does not apply to beauty products , so this directive should have implemented an unconditional ban on the sale and testing of these cosmetics .
There is no such ban , however .
The standpoint taken by our Parliament was already a compromise , but the outcome that has now been achieved makes things even worse .
A partial prohibition will not enter into force until 2009 , and three tests will be allowed to continue until as late as 2013 and perhaps even after that .
It is not the Parliamentary delegation in the conciliation committee who is to blame for this flawed compromise but the Commission and the Council who have unilaterally bowed to pressure from the cosmetics industry .
Better information for the consumer will hopefully result in consumers not wanting to become more beautiful by buying ' ugly ' cosmetics .
It is of the greatest importance that governments , science and industry invest in alternative methods .
There is nothing at all wrong with a constant stream of new cosmetics coming on to the market ; it must just not be at the expense of animals suffering unnecessarily .
There are already very many products on the market which contain very many safe ingredients that have been tested on animals , and as far as I am concerned , that is enough now .
This directive makes Europe look ugly , so I will not be supporting it .
Madam President , we have been on a long journey .
This third reading stage it is not the end of the journey , but it is a very significant point on that road towards the protection of human health and the enhancement of animal welfare .
That is why the rapporteur has rightly received the plaudits today because she has taken us along that road .
When we hear the phrase ' long gestation periods ' we have tended hitherto to think of elephants .
In future we will think of European legislation .
It has been a long gestation period .
We then had a long period in labour from 4 p.m. in the afternoon until 4 a.m. in the morning , and at the end we gave birth to a programme which will stand the test , which is why we welcome this point on the debate today .
The Commission originally came forward with a proposal to end tests .
However , that would have done no more than the proposal which went through in the United Kingdom , which ended testing on animals , but which simply resulted in the tests on animals being exported .
We were in danger of doing just that and putting the testing into countries where the welfare of animals was a much lower priority than it is within the Member States .
It was right that we moved the debate on to the end of the marketing of products tested on animals within the European Union .
We reminded ourselves , and we do so again , that on 1 July the sixth amendment came into force .
Technically that would have brought any research using animals to a standstill .
There would have been no further progress on the production of new items , not just in the makeup field , but in areas such as medicated shampoos and dental hygiene .
We looked beyond that and we see the seventh amendment as the last chance .
It sets the target dates to end that marketing .
We decided that a blanket target date was not sustainable and so we looked for a timetable , and as a validated alternative becomes available for each test , that test on animals will be banned .
All such tests will be banned within the six years with the exception of the three to which the rapporteur has drawn attention , for which there will be a ten-year permitted timetable and a possibility of an extension of two years if , and only if , this Parliament endorses that extension through codecision .
Now the challenge is not only to the Commission , other colleagues have said that , but it is to the industry .
It is up to the industry to accelerate that search for validated alternatives .
The cooperation that exists already between Parliament and industry has been impressive .
It has helped to convince firstly the Commission , and then even the minority on the Council which was reluctant to go along with this .
This minority too came into line and that is why we are at the point we are today , in optimistic mode .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the compromise reached by the Council and Parliament after much deliberation represents progress for animal welfare , as it will mean a ban on animal testing in cosmetics - as long as there are alternative methods available , of course .
Congratulations are in order for that .
I am wholly in favour of it .
I am also extremely pleased about the transitional period of six years to allow alternatives to be found , as there are only three categories of tests that are particularly difficult to replace and the industry has until 2013 to develop alternative methods for these .
After all , ladies and gentlemen , let us be honest , which of you would volunteer to be tested with new substances ?
The widespread criticism about this transitional period , which argues that permitting animal testing to continue is a loophole in the law , is therefore unjustified .
As long as people do not volunteer for testing themselves , other ways of testing certain bulk products must be permitted .
After all , these bulk products are also used in the pharmaceutical industry , and the standards we apply to medicines are naturally different from those we apply to lipstick .
I therefore wholeheartedly endorse this compromise .
Madam President , Commissioner , today is an immensely important day for the European cosmetics industry , ushering in a completely new era for cosmetic products , one for which a very large number of women have waited for a very long time .
I hope that products will come on to the market that will make beautiful young girls even more beautiful , but these are also very important to older women , who of course want to be attractive grandmothers to their grandchildren - and you try and find a grandmother who would dare tell her grandchildren that the cream she has just used , or that she uses on the children , has caused suffering to an immense number of animals .
Such a grandmother would be done for !
You see , celebrated and truly beautiful women have for a long time used products made without experimentation on animals .
Julia Roberts is one such ; she loves natural cosmetics , preferring to use a rose cream from a German firm - and , ladies and gentlemen , as she is a celebrated American actress , perhaps that is sending an important message to the American cosmetics industry .
Do American actresses really have to resort to European products simply because they are not tested on animals here ?
That attests to the inadequacy of the American cosmetics industry .
I love cosmetics .
I owe my hair colour to l 'Oréal , my perfume is by Dior , and my face cream comes from Great Britain - Englishwomen have such wonderful complexions .
In future , though , I will use far more cosmetics , and will be proposing Mrs Roth-Behrendt for honorary membership of all animal welfare organisations .
Today , though , I really would like to thank Europe 's cosmetics industry most warmly for its cooperation , and I wish you a turnover of staggering dimensions .
May these new products earn you masses and masses of money .
The next item is the vote .
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0027 / 2003 ) tabled by Giuseppe Di Lello Finuoli , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on immigration and asylum policy
( Parliament rejected the motion for resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution
Mr President , I rise on a brief point of order .
I have two short comments to make : firstly , to express my regret and to apologise , because I am the author of an alternative motion for a resolution which , as a result of the appalling time constraints , could not be included in Monday evening 's debate on this report .
I wish to apologise for this and have my apology recorded in the House ; secondly , I wish to ask the Bureau to draw attention to the fact that the first vote we will be holding on Amendment No 49 is not an ordinary vote ; it is not a common vote on the amendment .
It is instead the first time that we shall be using one of Parliament 's new rules - Rule 140 ( 4 ) and , consequently , the possibility of adopting an alternative overall text .
In accordance with the new Rule 140 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , we will take your amendment to replace the whole motion for a resolution by a new text first .
Before the vote on Amendment No 23 :
Mr President , our voting list does not seem to be following the same order as yours .
That may be our problem rather than yours , but could we just take a moment to clarify ?
We did not have Amendment 6 or Amendment 30 , so we are a bit lost at the moment .
Could my colleagues help me here ?
I think we have lost the page .
We have lost a whole page .
It is OK .
We will catch up .
( Laughter and applause )
The Liberals have been saying that for a hundred years .
( Laughter and applause )
Before the vote on Amendment No 24 :
We will ensure that all language versions are compatible .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
It is my pleasure to welcome to the public gallery representatives of the Egyptian Parliament , led by Dr Mustafa El-Feki .
This is the first visit by representatives from the Egyptian Parliament since 1987 .
It occurs at a very important time , in terms of the Middle East .
We particularly wish the delegation success under the current circumstances .
Mr President , the oral amendment consists of a social measure .
In paragraph 14 , letter s , where it refers to attention to the care needs of those in rural communities , I would add " and mountain communities " .
This is also in honour of the International Year of Mountains and the many mountains we have in Europe .
Mr President , I nevertheless deplore the way in which this vote has proceeded .
I regret that our colleagues were not serious to the end and showed no respect for the efforts of our fellow Members who worked on this resolution .
I agree with you entirely .
That concludes the vote
- ( DA ) Overall , we are voting against the joint resolution on immigration and asylum policy tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
We are against the EU 's having influence in this area , since it should be up to the Member States themselves to decide on these matters .
We are , however , able to support those parts of the resolution that take account of the social and humanitarian situation of refugees and immigrants and that try to improve it .
- ( DA ) We have , today in the European Parliament , voted in favour of the joint resolution ( B5-0031 / 2003 ) on immigration and asylum policy .
The proposal contains quite a number of useful features for improving immigration and asylum policy in the EU .
We are nonetheless aware of the fact that this area includes states of affairs covered by Title IV of the EC Treaty and not relevant to Denmark , cf. the Protocol on Denmark 's Position .
Mr President , it was with great pleasure that I voted for the report against the experimentation of cosmetics on animals , tabled by Mrs Dagmar Roth-Behrendt .
Why did I vote for the report ?
I must say that fish , which I have helped and supported for a long time with regard to reports concerning them , have spread the word that Mr Fatuzzo helps and listens to animals , and consequently the news has spread from them to many other animal species .
So many of these creatures have asked me to ensure - in my own small way with my vote - that these experiments , which they do not look on kindly , are ended .
They also asked me to try my best to stop fur coats being made from their pelts : another important achievement which I hope will come about soon .
In the meantime , we have obtained what I voted for , contained in the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee in the Roth-Behrendt report .
. ( PT ) The European Parliament has fought for the Directive on Cosmetics to be extended and deepened , especially in the field of testing on animals .
Parliament was therefore calling for : a ban on animal testing from 2004 ; a ban on the marketing of products that have been tested on animals five years after the adoption of this directive and the promotion of alternative testing methods that do not involve experiments on animals .
Unfortunately , the original position of the European Commission was to advocate a ban on animal testing in the European area rather than a ban on the marketing of such products .
I welcome the fact that , in the conciliation process , both the Council and the Commission moved towards the position maintained by the European Parliament . I am also pleased that an agreement was reached , stipulating a ban on experimenting and marketing for most testing methods within six years and , with regard to tests for which alternative methods have not yet been tested , a ten-year transposition period for this ban .
Mr President , the final two lines of paragraph 55 of the Swiebel report , which has been adopted by the House , calls for steps to be taken as soon as possible , on the basis of the Treaty of Amsterdam , to issue a directive abolishing all the other kinds of discrimination not yet regulated , which are set out in Article 13 , including the prohibition of discrimination against citizens on the grounds of age and disability .
In Italy , we still have a law which does not grant a disability pension to elderly citizens , whereas it does grant it to its younger citizens .
I think that , when someone falls ill , the age that this occurs is unimportant : people fall ill to the same degree ; if people have no income , they are the same , whether young or old .
In particular , I feel that not giving a disability pension to European citizens just because they are over 65 , whereas one would be granted before , is discrimination , and that is why I gladly approved this report .
Mr President , as has already been said , by just five votes Parliament has provided the news reports with one of the most disappointing and shameful pages on our work in this forum : a report entitled ' on the human rights situation in the European Union ' and which , on the contrary , has violated , or is violating , many of the rights which most affect citizens .
Let us consider one of many : the institution of the family , which is , to say the least , distorted by this report ; a family model which proposes the free union between men or women of the same sex and liberalised single-parent or , precisely , homosexual , adoption laws .
And furthermore , a country is put forward as a model - the Netherlands to be exact - which , in addition to these things , has official euthanasia and liberalised drug policies .
Well , if this is the social model which is now coming out of Parliament , I dissociate myself from it and - here lies the weak spot - the majority of Member States dissociate themselves from it too : only two or three indirectly follow the Dutch model .
There will now be an institutional deadlock , because neither the Commission nor the Council - they have already announced this - are willing to accept this trend .
We have missed an opportunity to be clearer and more coherent .
The British Labour members and I have voted in favour of the Swiebel report , which as a whole serves a valuable purpose .
All Member States must , by their very nature , be strong and confident enough to accept criticism .
This does not automatically mean that every criticism should be accepted as valid .
The report is based on second-hand information from NGOs and other organisations .
A number of factual inaccuracies have therefore crept in .
The UK takes very seriously all allegations of violence and racism by public servants .
Any allegations are rigorously investigated and prosecutions sought .
The detention of foreign nationals suspected of terrorism is a very serious matter .
However , exceptional measures are sometimes necessary to deal with potential threats to national security .
The 1951 Geneva Convention was surely never intended to give protection to terrorists ; it is therefore right that they should be excluded .
Whilst not perfect , UK legislation seeks to promote the rights of workers and encourages employers to treat employees with due consideration at all times .
They also have access to legal redress if appropriate .
With respect to maternity rights in the UK , all pregnant women are entitled to 18 weeks leave , which may begin up to 11 weeks before the birth of the child .
So we have reservations about the accuracy of the report but we welcome it and have voted in favour .
? he motion on fundamental rights in the European Union is , generally speaking , a good motion .
However , there are several problem paragraphs , such as paragraph 78 on the ban on women entering Mount Athos .
I do not think it is against this criterion that women 's rights will be measured ; they will be measured in terms of employment , equal pay , domestic violence and the fight against trafficking in human beings .
We can hardly talk about freedom of movement on this tiny strip of land which has its own sense of time and observes customs and traditions which date back thousands of years .
Soon we will be calling for freedom of establishment and freedom of business activity and the monasteries will be overrun with Coca-Cola stands .
In an increasingly plastic and homogenised world , we should respect the cultural wealth which comes down from the past , without affecting modern society , and leave Mount Athos to travel through time at its own pace .
It is because of paragraph 78 that I am forced to vote against the report as a whole .
- ( IT ) The defence of fundamental rights cannot and must not become the ideological flag of any particular group , but must be the joint heritage of all citizens .
Reading the pages of the Swiebel Report , however , it can be inferred that this important commitment to everybody 's rights is being transformed into an accusation against some quarters : in particular Italy and those who , in Italy , took the liberty of voting against the rapporteur 's wishes .
Also with regard to defence of the family and related values , the report takes a one-sided , prejudiced view , which is certainly legitimate for a political group , but which cannot and must not become a common position of the European Union .
Apart from religious aspects - which , nevertheless , cannot be completely overlooked , given the importance attached to Christian culture in Europe - the report completely ignores the great social and educational value undeniably inherent in the traditional couple , intended as a basic cell in the connective tissue of society .
Defence of the right of individuals to conduct their relationships in their preferred manner is sacrosanct , but the European institutions cannot , in my view , equate these relationships with the social institution of the family in its traditional meaning .
( Text abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
I am deeply concerned to read the many criticisms of the United Kingdom in this report .
I note that most Labour members voted for the passages concerned with the UK and can well understand their despair at the state of the United Kingdom after just under five years of a Labour Government .
For myself , I felt obliged to vote against the report .
Possibly , at the next election the Labour Members should unite around the slogan : ' Things can only get better ' .

- ( DA ) We have today voted in favour of paragraph 41 of Mrs Swiebel 's report for , if the common EU asylum policy should unfortunately be adopted , we want it to be based upon humanitarianism and respect for international conventions . Moreover , respect for human rights must be , and remain , its indispensable point of departure .
On principle , we do not however believe that this is best achieved by developing a common European refugee policy based on the supranational first pillar .
The June Movement is also voting in favour of the whole report , because human rights within the EU must naturally be respected , if not improved .
We are doing this in spite of the fact that we do not wish to see a common asylum policy , the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the development of an EU human rights agency .
The June Movement endeavours to support and improve the human rights situation both within and outside the EU .
We support the right of everyone to a life of dignity , but we do not believe that this is necessarily best achieved within the framework of the EU .
. ( PT ) The report both criticises and praises the human rights situation in Portugal , in a way that we feel is accurate and balanced .
It would not be acceptable for the Portuguese institutions not to take account of them on the pretext that the integrity of the State takes precedence over citizens ' rights and this is the factor that won my vote .
The report 's explanatory statement also contains less rigorous information which did not , however , influence my vote , because I do not feel they are important in determining the report 's content , since they are not being voted on or published .
Like local , regional or national institutions , the European institutions must also be free to adopt a position , criticise or praise the practices of institutions other than their own .
Nevertheless , a report on the situation of fundamental rights in the EU that makes no assessment of the legislation and activities of the European institutions is not a report on the European Union - it is merely a report on Member States .
This report on the Member States must therefore be followed up with another , more important report , assessing the practices of the European institutions in the field of human rights .
. ( PT ) We wish to distance ourselves clearly from the approach contained in the motion for a resolution which seeks to give the Charter of Fundamental Rights a ' constitutional ' value that it does not have and we would recall the criticism we made of any such intention and of the motion 's retrograde content in the field of rights at the time it was adopted at the Nice Summit , whereas others have supported it and continue to do so .
We wish to distance ourselves clearly from a vision of control and of interference in the domestic affairs of the Member States , which is reinforced in the Treaties and which we criticised at the time , whereas others have supported it and continue to do so .
At the same time , we must not forget the methodological aspects that occur throughout the process , and we feel that the motion that has been tabled lists a set of recommendations - and we should emphasise here that these are only recommendations - which , in general terms , will protect fundamental rights .
These include personal freedoms , immigrants ' rights , freedom of movement , the right to privacy , non-discrimination , gender equality , children 's rights , the rights of people with disabilities and the protection of social rights . These recommendations will protect social rights - particularly by making optimal use of the revised European Social Charter and the ILO conventions - and access to justice .
Hence our vote in favour of the report .
.
( EL ) The PASOK political group 's vote on the motion in Mrs Joke Swiebel 's report is a clear vote against , as far as Greece is concerned .
On most points criticising Greece or urging it to make improvements , either the relevant articles of Greek law have already been amended and the called-for improvement already introduced or the first steps toward legislative reform have already been taken .
For example :
1 .
We are urged ( paragraph 17 ) to abolish the death penalty .
However , the three facts are omitted :
a ) the death penalty has been abolished , except in the military penal code , and then only for crimes in times of war ;
b ) the bill to abolish the death penalty in the military penal code has already been drafted ;
c ) no death penalty imposed is ever carried out .
2 .
Conscientious objectors :
a ) the new arrangements allowing exemption from military service are now included in a constitutional decree ;
b ) Greek legislation no longer limits these favourable arrangements to religious objection ; they now extend to conscientious objection in general .
Anyone establishing fundamental rights in the European Union must know whether these rights are being observed seriously by the governments concerned .
It is to Mrs Swiebel 's credit that she has documented so well how much is wrong in Europe in the area of human rights .
She correctly focuses attention on police misconduct , abuses in prisons , discrimination against ethnic minorities , failings in criminal proceedings and the vestiges of inequalities between men and women .
This also applies to child labour , the access of non-EU citizens to the labour market , the difficulties people have in obtaining the nationality of the country in which they are now living , and the lack of the right to vote for those who have not yet obtained this nationality .
EU Member States are apparently failing to ratify international treaties on national minorities , cross-border television , the revised European Social Charter and the status of adopted or illegitimate children .
Minors are being used as child soldiers .
Excessively authoritarian security measures that are now being justified with reference to the current threat of terrorism are threatening to become permanent .
We are very much in need of this inventory so that we can put an end to abuses more effectively .
It is striking that this report , which speaks for itself , was only adopted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs by 25 votes to 20 .
Evidently there is a large minority in this Parliament that does not want to tackle the existing violations of fundamental rights .
. ( PT ) There is nothing like a good political fight .
From the democratic point of view , I congratulate Mrs Swiebel on her ultimate success .
The narrow margin between votes , however , which meant that my own motion for a resolution was not adopted in plenary ( by only 23 votes ) and the extremely slim majority ( of only five votes ) that has just adopted the final resolution , clearly show that the wrong course has been taken .
This adds nothing positive to European integration on which , being an issue so bound up in the tradition , history and consensus of the European peoples , we have been so profoundly divided , heading towards radical confrontations .
In fact , anyone reading the motion that has been adopted might believe themselves to be living in a terrible atmosphere of persecution , under one of the murkiest dictatorships of the twentieth century !
The methodological shift employed by the rapporteur ( and by the narrow majority ) has led to exaggerated views that show utter contempt for the fact that the European Union is one of the few privileged regions in the entire world where human rights and respect and guarantees for these are concerned .
Lastly , we have heaped scorn on the reality of a situation with which we are all familiar and we have ended up looking ridiculous , for having given in to a left-wing and sectarian political agenda .
This does no favours , either for Europe or for human rights .
Finally , I welcome the initiative of tabling an overall alternative motion : since the UEN Group has only 22 Members , the 246 votes obtained in plenary by the alternative motion clearly demonstrate the relative success achieved , as an instrument for political clarification and for affirming our difference .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Swiebel on her outstanding work .
I also find it disappointing that 13 of the 15 Member States appear not to have honoured their obligation to report periodically on the human rights situation in their countries to the international supervisory committees set up for this purpose .
As the European Union , we have to set an example , otherwise our credibility with third countries will be in jeopardy .
As the chairman of the Intergroup for Regional and Minority Languages , I would like to emphasise how important the use of regional and minority languages is to people .
Language forms part of our personal and cultural identity and is thus one of our fundamental rights .
It is the most important means of communication between people .
Encouraging the use of minority languages reinforces social cohesion at regional level .
I have therefore voted in favour of paragraphs 66 and 68 .
It is the first step .
According to Article 149 of the Treaty on European Union , the European Union 's task is to support linguistic diversity .
This is not enough : we urgently need a legal basis for regional and minority languages in the Treaty .
Language is an important part of our cultural heritage , and it would be a sin if regional and minority languages were to be lost on account of neglect and suppression .
Mr President , the Pensioners ' Party , which I represent here , strongly approves of this report on the European Union 's management of the external borders of our 15 Member States , soon to become 25 , and shortly thereafter , 27 .
In my opinion , it is important to immediately give economic strength and , in particular , the European Union 's support , to all these new candidate countries which , in two or four years ' time , will constitute the external borders of the Union .
In fact , it is clear that this is where the weakness of the borders lies , and the first months following the entry of these States , in law and in fact , into the European Union , is when there will be the greatest danger of a violation of the new external borders of Europe .
- ( DA ) We have , today in the European Parliament , voted neither in favour of , nor against , Mr Pirker 's report ( A5-0449 / 2002 ) on integrated management of the external borders .
The proposal includes quite a few useful features , but we do not believe that the time is ripe for setting up a joint Corps of Border Guards .
At the same time , we would draw attention to the fact that this area includes states of affairs covered by Title IV of the EC Treaty and not relevant to Denmark , cf. the Protocol on Denmark 's Position .
.
( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mr Pirker on the excellent report he has produced on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament entitled ' Towards integrated management of the external borders of the Member States of the European Union ' which I fully support , in particular with regard to the aptness of creating a European Corps of Border Guards . Whilst not replacing the national authorities responsible for managing their external borders , this would enable them to work together to ensure the internal security of the Union and the implementation of the principle of freedom of movement .
I would also stress my conviction that the efficiency of border management will probably be improved by the adoption of common measures in the field of external border management .
The collective training of officials , the collective development of radar equipment , the purchase of mobile surveillance installations and a collective border surveillance service belong to a different sort of Europe than the one the European Union has up to now professed to be .
If the EU develops into one single superstate , it goes without saying that there must be one single minister of foreign affairs with one single embassy in every country abroad and one single collective seat in the United Nations .
The remarkable thing is that nobody is openly advocating a superstate such as this .
The Member States want to keep their embassies and their seats in the UN and the ministers of foreign affairs would rather coordinate their work through a common secretariat than through the European Commission .
Specifically when it comes to everything to do with foreign affairs and defence , we try to show that the EU still consists of 15 sovereign states .
It would therefore only be logical to opt for a standard access procedure for migrants and visitors from abroad and a standard border surveillance service if we really wanted to be one single superstate .
What is remarkable is that we are now making a decision to screen off ' Fortress Europe ' against the poor parts of the outside world without having reached agreement about a common future inside this fortress .
I therefore reject this proposal .
. ( PT ) Illegal immigration networks , trafficking in human beings , organised crime and the fight against terrorism are situations that certainly warrant widespread and priority concern and , as defined in Laeken , call for cooperation mechanisms between the current services responsible for controlling our external borders .
Nevertheless , it is clear that in the Schengen acquis , structures with competences and powers to define ' common standards ' and processes for police cooperation are already in place .
This proposal , however , goes further and the aim behind it is to create a European Corps of Border Guards , with duties that fall within the strict competence of the national authorities and to which , therefore , we cannot agree .
Its activities would involve , in particular , the inspection of documents , the questioning of foreign citizens and the notification of admission or refusal of entry into our territory .
Clearly , a European police corps of this nature raises questions , primarily with regard to its questionable and highly dubious effectiveness .
Essentially , however , and as affirmed in the Commission Communication , it would pose delicate constitutional problems in various Member States .
It is therefore a priority to make national police forces with these powers more effective and to ensure appropriate cooperation between them in order to provide a satisfactory response to such situations .
. ( PT ) This report focuses on the Commission communication on better management of external borders , which links the action of the Member States with measures of a European nature , which are crucial given the threat , posed in particular by organised crime , terrorism , illegal immigration , and the imminent entry of new countries into the EU .
In light of the experience gained from applying the Schengen acquis , we feel it would be appropriate to implement a common policy in the field of managing current and future external borders , incorporating into this policy the best practices established by the Member States .
Nevertheless , European border management still falls within the sphere of national competence and must be applied at national level and , on this point , I am in full agreement with the rapporteur 's position .
In this context , the programmes for the training and re-training of staff and senior officials , updating the design and installation of equipment and the drawing up of an integrated risk analysis model are absolutely crucial .
Despite the rapporteur 's suggestion to create a European corps of border guards composed of special units , to be made available on a temporary basis to the national authorities in high-risk sectors at external borders , when needed and requested by the Member States , which is controversial , my opinion on the report as a whole is positive and I have therefore voted for it .
Mr President , many pensioners purchase securities in an attempt to be better off in their later life .
The document by Mr Generoso Andria which we have adopted , helps these small investors , citizens who do not have much money but for whom it is even more important to have fewer expenses when they invest the little money they have available in securities .
I therefore applaud the initiative and content of this report which my friend , Mr Generoso Andria , tabled to the House and which the House , myself included , voted for today .
. ( PT ) This report should be seen against the backdrop of the action plan for financial services planned under what is known as the Lisbon strategy , which aims to integrate markets and financial services by 2005 and to achieve greater liberalisation of movements of capital , to which we are opposed .
On the basis of a recent Commission communication , which seeks to regulate the clearing and settlement of securities transactions , in other words , the functioning of the integrated securities markets , especially in crossborder transactions , and in the aim of liberalising movements of capital and of creating a single market for financial services , it also seeks to harmonise the rules , legislation and methods of clearing and settlement in the various Member States , taking account of the considerable national differences that exist in this field .
Hence the desire to create a common European infrastructure and the proposals to follow the American example , exerting pressure on the Commission to study a similar approach for the European Union , also calling on the Member States , in the forthcoming revision of Directive 93 / 22 / EEC , on investment services , to give investment companies from other States the right of access to national clearing and settlement systems .
This is something with which we disagree .
Mr President , the proposals contained in the document tabled by Mr Mario Mantovani on the future of health care and care for the elderly that we have adopted , is perfect , and we should approve every single line , as I did .
I would like to stress how important it is , in my opinion and in the opinion of the Pensioners ' Party which I represent in the European Parliament , for more substantial European funds to be granted to the development of remote surgical operation techniques .
Nowadays , a surgeon in Rome can operate on an ill patient - usually an elderly patient - in Finland or Belgium and vice versa .
This is what living without borders is all about , and we have to provide as much help as Europe can give to all citizens in this field , in particular those who are ill .
The issue of health care and care for the elderly is an important one and of concern to us all .
The report is thoughtful and well-considered .
I would underline the point made early in the report that the provision of health and health care services is a Member State competence .
It is important that this should continue to be the case .
But all Member States can learn from each other , and in particular they need to learn in the key areas covered by this report .
I was pleased that my amendments were accepted by the rapporteur as well as the full House today .
The specific needs of the elderly regarding health care need much more attention , especially in rural areas .
In my own country , projections are that more and more elderly people are moving to rural areas to retire .
They put down roots in such communities .
Long , active and fulfilled lives depend more on socialising than exercising , and it is important that as many as possible of the needs of the elderly are addressed within their local communities rather than addressed at a distance in the towns and cities .
This is a challenge , but it is a challenge which must be met .
Useful and essential community services cost money .
Without the input of community money , people who are old , sick or unemployed will not be able to exist .
We would have no decent healthcare for the vast majority of people , no education , no public transport , no environmental protection and no services for the aged .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs wants a combination of best practices , access , high quality and accessibility .
It makes little sense to formulate such nice objectives without providing sufficient resources to enable these objectives to actually be achieved .
By constantly striving to cut taxes , we make it impossible to provide good services and the solidarity required for these .
People constantly maintain that the cost of services can be cut without compromising on quality .
That would have to be achieved by calling in private profit-oriented businesses , by reducing the number of services , by having the work done by fewer people and by increasing contributions from users .
In the Netherlands , years of cut-backs have resulted in the closure of small hospitals , waiting lists for healthcare , a shortage of new teachers and a severe reduction in services in what used to be a good public transport system .
At the end of the day , this report is based on a model such as this .
As it is ultimately the weakest who pay , I reject this model .
. ( PT ) As a result of the Member States ' policies , the EU is benefiting from clearly exceptional health systems compared to the rest of the world .
This does not mean , however , that the ongoing need to protect those who are particularly vulnerable or who have serious financial difficulties due to the high cost of treatment should be overlooked .
Against this backdrop , the proposals contained in the Commission Communication are of strategic importance to guaranteeing accessibility , quality and financial viability with regard to healthcare for the elderly .
The fact that the organisation of healthcare systems , their funding and planning are the responsibility of the Member States is not a barrier to Community cooperation in policies on issues of ageing , in particular in the field of health . Instead , the sharing of experiences and solutions could help to achieve the social cohesion that we wish to see .
I have fully supported this report , which has , in fact , incorporated valuable contributions from the opinion delivered by Mr Mussa of the UEN Group , not least with regard to : recognising the important role of healthcare providers , the proposal for Community funding for various training projects and the issue of ill treatment of the elderly .
Lastly , we should emphasise the need for a ' New Attitude ' with respect to the elderly , seeing them as an important new resource that should be cherished - not as a burden on society .
Life expectancy has almost doubled in the last fifty years , which has created a completely different world .
Through better levels of protection , Europe and the Europeans will benefit enormously from the huge wealth of wisdom , experience and knowledge that is the valuable capital of the elderly .
Mr President , I have the pleasure of having a nephew , Silvio Nardini , my sister 's son - he does not know that I am mentioning him in the European Parliament - whom I am very proud of because he is part of the European Force involved in a peace mission in Afghanistan : he is a ' top gun ' , as they say in films , but has his feet firmly on the ground .
He said to me : ' I have been and am in the United Arab Emirates controlling air traffic from Italy to Afghanistan .
I am very happy and proud of what I am doing , and it is very satisfying .
This is not war ; it is about bringing peace and building on it where there is need ' .
This is why I voted , even more enthusiastically , for this report on Afghanistan .
British Conservatives voted in favour of the resolution on Afghanistan , which contains many useful elements , but we do not accept the implied criticism of US actions in Recital I , and in the new paragraph 15a ; the desire for the EU as such to create a political role for itself ; the suggestion in paragraph 15 that the Council should reconsider its proposals for return of refugees ; or indeed the proposal in the new paragraph 10a that ISAF military forces should be employed to investigate human rights abuses , notwithstanding our earnest desire for improvement in the human rights situation , particularly in relation to the situation of women .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.29 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

I should like to give you the results of the second ballot in the vote of the election of the Ombudsman :
Members voting - 535 ;
Blank or spoiled ballots - 26 ;
Votes cast - 509
Absolute majority - 255 .
The votes cast were as follows : Mr Diamandouros , 294 votes , Mr Perry , 215 votes .
Mr Diamandouros has obtained the majority of the votes cast .
I therefore declare him to be the European Ombudsman .
I congratulate him on his appointment and invite him , in due course , to take an oath before the Court of Justice , pursuant to our Rules of Procedure .
I should like not only to congratulate our new Ombudsman , but to take the opportunity to place on record our thanks for and appreciation of the work of the first Ombudsman of the European Union , Mr Söderman .
Mr President , may I take this opportunity to be the first Member to congratulate Professor Diamandouros on his election as European Ombudsman .
It has been my pleasure over the last few years to work with Jacob Söderman , who has been an outstanding Ombudsman for Europe , but I am very happy to see that the position of Ombudsman will continue in the safe hands of Professor Diamandouros .
The post of Ombudsman is a crucial post for European democracy .
It is important that it is in competent hands and we now see that it will be .
One point I would like to make is this . All the candidates for Ombudsman - and they should all be thanked for their contribution to the debate - have upheld the code of good administrative behaviour proposed and endorsed by this Parliament and proposed by Mr Söderman .
We should very firmly say to the institutions of Europe , particularly the Commission , that they should also now seize the opportunity without any further delay to endorse that code , so that we can be quite sure that Europe has the good administration it needs and deserves and which all the servants of the institutions wish to provide .
I offer Professor Diamandouros all my congratulations .
Mr President , as President-in-Office , may I offer the European Parliament my warmest congratulations on its selection .
I know that the candidates , especially those remaining in the final round , were both highly qualified and extremely able .
I think the European Parliament has made an excellent choice and , as a result , Mr Diamandouros will , I think , be able to contribute to European affairs and make even more improvements to the office of the Ombudsman .
As Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs , as Mr Diamandouros 's colleague at the University of Athens and as a long-standing friend , may I say that I am delighted and excited by his election to this post .
I would like to congratulate him and , at the same time , say how sorry I am that Greece will be losing him for a while .
He is so valuable that this will be a real loss to us .
However , we look forward to winning him back , even more experienced and able than when he left us .
President , on behalf of the Commission , on behalf of the College and on behalf of all who work in the Commission , I would like most warmly to congratulate Professor Diamandouros on his election .
It is a great day for him and a great day for Greece , though I recognise Europe 's gain is Greece 's loss .
The Professor comes to these onerous responsibilities with extraordinary credentials , not least that he is a friend of Commissioner Diamontopoulou , so there are many reasons to recognise that he has all the qualities and all the experience and knowledge which are required for this demanding job .
I would also like to pay a tribute to the work done by Mr Söderman over the last few years .
I am sure that Professor Diamandouros will undertake his responsibilities in a way which will enjoy the confidence of this Parliament and which will overwhelmingly earn the confidence of Europe 's citizens as well .
We wish him the best on this journey and we assure him that on this occasion , arriving and landing in Ithaca is even more exciting than travelling there .
I would also like , if I may - having myself lost almost as many elections as I have won - to pay a tribute to Mr Perry who has , I know , enjoyed the esteem of the whole House , and his graceful remarks a few moments ago will , I know only serve to enhance his reputation .
All our best wishes go to the Professor who I am sure will do this job outstandingly well .
? he Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Thank you , Mrs Thors .
Your comments have been noted .
Mr President , I would like to point out that in the provisional Minutes for yesterday which have been distributed , it is recorded that I voted in favour of the final Resolution of the Napolitano report .
This is a mistake .
The final version should reflect the fact that I abstained on that report .
The next item is the joint debate on the recommendation ( ? 5-0410 / 2002 ) by Mr Galeote Quecedo and questions ( ? 5-0508 / 2002 , ? 5-0509 / 2002 ) to the Council and the Commission , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the conclusion of a Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Lebanon , of the other part .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , any debate on Lebanon refers us directly to discussions on the Middle East , both about issues relating to Israel and about discussions on Iraq over the last 24 hours .
The situation in Lebanon is still extremely complicated , mainly because so many different communities live there , meaning that problems require a multiethnic , multilingual , multi-religious approach , not forgetting that Lebanon offers shelter to a great many - about 370 000 - Palestinian refugees .
These communities are represented at institutional level .
The application of the arrangements in the Charter of National Reconciliation of 22 October 1989 allowing Syrian forces to be stationed in certain areas of Lebanon , basically comes within the framework of relations between Lebanon and Syria .
The Council is closely monitoring internal political dialogue in Lebanon .
The first step was the Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon in May 2000 , followed by a partial withdrawal of the Lebanese-Syrian army in June 2001 .
At the same time , there is a risk that the presence of Hezbollah forces in the south of the country will become a destabilising factor in Israeli-Lebanese relations .
The free parliamentary elections held on 3 September 2000 indicate that things are moving in the right direction , towards the normalisation of the situation in Lebanon , and we must not therefore underestimate the destabilising effect on Lebanon of the conflict in the Middle East .
The Council has stated on several occasions that the fight against terrorism is a priority and the recent terrorist attack in Bali highlighted once again the need for close international cooperation on the fight against terrorism .
Implementation of the action plan adopted by the European Council in September 2001 is progressing well .
As far as its foreign dimension is concerned , the Council has decided to include the fight against terrorism in the agreement between the European Union and third countries .
The fact that Lebanon was one of the first countries that agreed to sign the agreement with the European Union on this issue demonstrates that it is prepared to cooperate actively with the European Union , including in the field of information exchanges .
The link between the Cooperation Agreement and the Association Agreement with regard to the fight against terrorism is emphasised by the fact that both agreements were signed on the same day , in Luxembourg on 17 June 2002 to be precise , and will enter into force simultaneously - and soon I hope .
As far as respect for human rights is concerned , the Council is monitoring this issue closely .
The Council expressed its concern about action by the Lebanese army against Christian activists in August 2001 and about the closure of the independent television station ? ? F last September .
The Association Agreement will also strengthen the potential for monitoring this issue and will encourage the authorities in Lebanon to have greater respect for human rights .
As you know , the agreement requires respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms to be a basic element in both sides ' domestic and foreign policy .
In addition , regular political dialogue will be established at various levels , mainly in the Association Agreement , on all matters of interest .
I should like , if I may , to make a number of comments on the Association Agreement , to which the European Parliament is being invited to give its assent .
The signing of the Association Agreement is an important development and marks the start of a new chapter in our relations with Lebanon .
Although it refers mainly to intergovernmental relations , the agreement also offers an operational framework for the business community and civil society .
This agreement is vital to the European Union 's entire Mediterranean policy and is yet another step towards the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean free trade zone .
I should point out that Lebanon has just ratified both the Association Agreement and the Interim Agreement which comes into force on 1 March 2003 .
Good communications channels between politicians on both sides of the Mediterranean are an important factor in building constructive relations between the ? U and its Mediterranean partners .
At bilateral level , the Association Agreement makes provision for an EU-Lebanon Association Council , to facilitate cooperation and contacts between the European Parliament and parliamentary institutions in Lebanon .
The Members of Parliament involved will have to set the framework for this dialogue which , as far as the Council is concerned , will supplement Euro-Mediterranean dialogue in general .
I welcome the results of the last meeting of the Euro-Mediterranean Forum in Bari in June 2002 , which highlighted the parliamentary dimension of our cooperation with the countries of the Mediterranean .
We are currently examining cooperation mechanisms in order to create a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly .
The European Parliament has started working on just such an assembly , which will include members of the 27 national parliaments and the European Parliament .
The Euro-Mediterranean summit in Valencia proposed strengthening the parliamentary dimension of Euro-Mediterranean dialogue by creating a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly .
I welcome the recent meeting of the Euro-Mediterranean Forum in Bari on 17-18 June 2002 , which supported the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly and decided to form a working party to set up this new assembly .
For their part , the senior officials responsible for the Barcelona process also agreed to set up a group to coordinate with the Bari working party .
One of the objectives of the Greek Presidency is to use the dynamics of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation in order to strengthen its parliamentary dimension .
One of our presidency 's priorities is to achieve new levels of integration and boost the credibility of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation , which is why we are currently examining the cooperation mechanisms and measures needed in order to create this assembly .
What we want , not to say need , is for the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Forum to decide at its next meeting in Crete on 27 March 2003 to evolve into a parliamentary assembly .
If it does , the summit of Foreign Ministers meeting in Crete on 26 and 27 May 2003 would be able to welcome their decision and this new institution could be set up .
Mr President , the House is considering today a very important resolution on the adoption of the Association Agreement signed with Lebanon in June last year .
This agreement is not only important for our relations with Lebanon - it is also crucial in the overall European Union-Mediterranean Partnership since it represents another step towards the completion of the grid of Association Agreements within the Barcelona Process ( the only agreement still being negotiated is the one with Syria and I am hoping to have the opportunity next month of trying to persuade the Syrians to go ahead themselves more seriously to negotiate an agreement ) .
Lebanon is a key partner in the Euro-Mediterranean structure .
When Prime Minister Hariri was elected to office in September 2000 , he set his government an ambitious deadline - to conclude the negotiations with the European Commission by the end of 2001 .
I am very pleased that he has delivered on this promise and I call upon Members of the House to vote favourably on the resolution , and to endorse the Agreement .
Parliament has before it , in my judgment , the means to provide Lebanon with a firm foundation for building its future .
The country has experienced a terrible civil war .
It has been the victim of outside interference , it still remains vulnerable .
Lebanon is now grappling with recovery and with modernisation under difficult economic circumstances , faced with poor immediate prospects for peace in the Middle East , smouldering tensions along the border with Israel and the unsettling possibility of a military conflict in Iraq .
There is broad support in Lebanon for this new strengthened relationship with Europe .
The Lebanese Parliament ratified both the Association Agreement and the Interim Agreement in December .
The interim agreement allows both sides to start the 12-year transition period from March 2003 , leading to the gradual introduction of free trade .
This is a clear sign that Lebanon is serious in meeting at an early stage its commitments to opening up large areas of its trade and approximating its legislation to that of the European Union .
It will also be bound by its engagements on respect for the fundamental principles of human rights and democracy from this date and I want to return to that in a moment .
The free-trade area will bring about profound changes to Lebanese commerce .
Lebanon is rightly prized for the entrepreneurial skills of its work force .
Its economic strategy is already liberal .
World Trade Organisation membership has been requested .
The opening of markets and economies will bring benefits through economic liberalisation and increased competitiveness .
Lebanon will benefit immediately from market access for its agricultural and processed agricultural products .
And the Union will gain from improved access to service sector industries in Lebanon , once these arrangements have been concluded .
By signalling Lebanon 's commitment to economic and social reform , this Agreement will send a clear and positive message to the international and European investment community of the opportunities for direct foreign investment in Lebanon .
The successful outcome of the Paris II donor conference in November last year , organised with great commitment and success by President Chirac , suggests that this message has already struck home .
Of the 18 governments participating , six were Member States and the Commission was also represented at its highest level .
There is a clear interest in seeing that Lebanon weathers the economic storm of post-war recovery , and reduces its debt .
The amount pledged to assist in debt relief matched expectations ( about $ 4.3 billion were pledged in all ) .
But , the Association Agreement is first and foremost a political agreement , which is why it devotes so much importance to political dialogue .
The Agreement is a potent expression of shared values and common objectives .
It is through dialogue that members of this partnership can pursue the shared commitment to achieving peace in the Middle East .
Our dialogue , and this was a point which Mr Galeote Quecedo referred to , will embrace the fundamental principles of human rights and democracy with an honesty and appreciation born , I hope , out of close partnership .
Lebanon 's pluralist society , embracing numerous sectarian and religious groups , has functioned most effectively when there is consensus , tolerance and open debate - a unique feature in the region .
We are , however , conscious of the concerns expressed by the Parliament 's Foreign Affairs Committee on specific points of the human rights situation in Lebanon .
The agreement provides an additional forum for tackling these concerns .
By ratifying the Association Agreement , the European Union will trigger the important commitments from Lebanon concerning human rights and democracy , migration and re-admission , money laundering , the fight against organised crime and illicit drugs , and judicial cooperation .
And I know too the concerns which have been expressed about freedom of the media . I can reassure you that the Commission will continue to monitor and follow these concerns wherever and whenever possible .
The Agreement will also , as the Minister pointed out , trigger Lebanon 's undertakings on cooperation in counter-terrorism , set out in the exchange of letters to which he referred .
Our partnership will extend well beyond trade and politics , and will be wide-ranging , covering areas as diverse as cooperation in the fields of science , education , energy , tourism , the environment and industry .
Social and cultural cooperation is also central to the Agreement , in terms of rights of workers , and social dialogue .
Our partnership will be sustained by contributions under the MEDA programme which I hope will be focused , as far as possible , on implementation of the Agreement .
So we are moving towards our overall ambitions in the southern Mediterranean with the agreement that we have put before Parliament with the Lebanon and I very much hope that we can move on from this to completing the grid of association agreements by successful negotiations with Syria .
I commend this agreement most warmly to Parliament .
Mr President , Mr Yiannitsis , Mr Patten , the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement marks a step forward in our long-standing relations .
It has already been pointed out several times that Lebanon is a country which has seen 16 years of civil war and which has now managed once again to turn its ethnic , cultural and religious pluralism into the basis for a peace process : it is a country both complex and important , owing to its history and geopolitical position .
We hope that the closer relations which this Agreement formally marks , will help make this process irreversible and represent further progress in the respect for human rights and the strengthening of democracy and the rule of law .
It is precisely for this reason that the article in the Agreement which refers to human rights must be taken seriously by the Lebanese authorities and the European institutions .
Parliament is persevering on this point since the economy and trade must be able to advance at the same pace as advances in freedom , democracy , the role of women and freedom of information .
We are pleased to note that Lebanon has signed the International Convention on Women 's Rights and the Convention against Torture .
We hope that ratification will follow these signatures and that by continuing along this path , we will see the abolition of the death penalty , Lebanon 's participation in the International Criminal Court , the truth about missing persons and a revised legal system which specifies the limits and role of military jurisdiction .
This process should be supported by the MEDA programme , with clear support for the autonomous development of civil society .
Another crucial issue is an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and pacification of the region , where a lasting solution can only be found by creating a Palestinian state .
The Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon was an extremely important event , but peace was not a consequence .
But it is precisely because peace is never automatic but requires great political will that it is important to state the desire to achieve it , starting with the countries in the region .
To this end , the tension on the Lebanon-Israel border must cease , Syria should withdraw its military presence from Lebanon and the Palestinian refugees should be given prospects for the future , starting with the provision of better living conditions ; I would point out that responsibility for this does not only fall to the host country , but to the whole international community .
In pursuing this aim , it is therefore essential for the refugees to be able to benefit from the MEDA programme and for Europe , taking all of this into account , to be especially generous .
Lastly , we hope that the Agreement will support economic reforms and trade , which were already important issues .
Today 's opportunity is , however , also a chance for us to make a more general appraisal of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership - as the President-in-Office of the Council did - following completion of the enlargement process , in the context of the reform process which started with the Convention .
We must now redefine the enlarged Union 's external relations and we must give Europe a more significant role in the world .
The Partnership , launched in Barcelona in 1995 , was created with 12 countries .
We now have a broader , more systematic view of this process which encompasses the Mediterranean , the Balkans and the Gulf states .
Secondly we must ask : which policies ?
President Prodi has often stated : ' Everything but institutions ' .
The European Parliament , for its part , came out in favour some time ago of a Euro-Mediterranean Partnership which includes all the policies which we subscribed to with the candidate countries .
I would therefore urge us to go further than the - albeit important - decisions of the last Interministerial Conference in Valencia .
Lastly the institutions : in Valencia - as you , Mr President , pointed out - it was decided to grant the Parliamentary Forum the status of a real parliamentary assembly .
This change could be truly significant , and to be a success it must take into account the remarks already made on the geopolitical dimension and policies .
By becoming a true institution , the parliamentary assembly should acquire real powers concerning the decisions which this process involves and should be an active participant in the great meeting of cultures .
The most important thing is for it to have instruments in order to make real progress in the field of rights , democracy and freedom .
Mr President , I should like to begin by welcoming the Greek Presidency , which is embarking on its duties here and also the election of a European Ombudsman , who is also Greek . This is all happening at a time when plenary is being led by a colleague of same nationality , which is making this sitting a veritable Greek political Olympiad , which I am delighted to share in .
Mr President , the European Parliament today has the task of delivering its opinion on the conclusion of the Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the European Community and its Member States on the one hand and the Republic of Lebanon on the other .
This agreement clearly forms part of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership launched by the Barcelona Declaration of 1995 , whose progress we have a duty to promote , despite the uncertainties in the political situation in that region with regard to peace and security .
One of the most noteworthy aspects of the process opened in Barcelona is that it enables complementarity to be established between the dimension of bilateral cooperation involving the Member States with Mediterranean connections , including Spain , France , Italy and Portugal - although Portugal borders the Atlantic , it has significant economic and geographical links with the Mediterranean countries of the Maghreb - and the multilateral dimension taken on by the European Community , which can and must mutually strengthen one another .
There is no doubt , Mr President , that , to a large extent , the stability of the Mediterranean region , and in particular of the Middle East , depends on appropriate partnerships for economic , political , social and cultural development , for which the Union is particularly suited .
Other types of problem remain , however , which are today entirely undeniable , especially concerning security and the fight against terrorism , but also concerning the fight against corruption and money-laundering as well as promoting democracy and human rights which , in the particular case of Lebanon , are a cause for concern .
This is why we believe the questions raised by Mr Brok , the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , to be of the greatest relevance and to require tangible and consistent answers from both the Council and the Commission .
We cannot ignore the fact that the political leanings of the Lebanese authorities are still dominated by Syria and that Damascus has a decisive influence over the position of the Lebanese Government in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process , despite the Israeli army 's withdrawal from Southern Lebanon in May 2000 .
Unlike Lebanon , whose government has fortunately been moving towards democracy and the separation of powers , despite its obvious institutional weaknesses and intricate political and religious imbalances , Syria is a dictatorship , with a singularly Monarchist bias , which has remained technically at war with Israel since the Six-Day War , with all the dangers that this situation entails for the Middle East peace process .
Even worse , it maintains a significant military force in Lebanon , of around 30 000 men , in addition to the 300 000 immigrants there , who work mainly in farming and construction .
If we add to this presence - or perhaps we should call it an ' occupation ' several more Palestinian refugees , who are by and large poor and poorly integrated into Lebanese society , constituting around 3.5 million people , and the presence in the country 's parliament of Hezbullah , the extremist movement - since it cannot be called anything else - it is easy to understand Lebanon 's delicate situation , to which the Union must be attentive and in which it must play a moderating role in order to achieve peace , security and development .
This Euro-Mediterranean partnership is all the more important at a time when the Union is enlarging into Central and Eastern Europe and will be focusing the lion 's share of its financial resources there .
We must not forget that Europe is or should be polycentric : it is Nordic , Mediterranean , and Atlantic ; it is also ultraperipheral and certainly continental .
It is , however , by balancing its components and respect for its diversity that it will become a Europe that is more democratic , safer , more developed and definitely more respected on the international scene .
With the conclusion of an Association Agreement with the Republic of Lebanon , the EU is putting its own political credibility on the line , both internally and externally .
As recently as at the last European Council , the Council of Copenhagen , the Council again acknowledged Israel 's legitimate concerns about her security .
The Council also committed itself to the fight against international terrorism .
The two central points of the foreign policy of EU Member States are not compatible with the power base that Hezbollah is forming in Lebanese politics .
It is not for nothing that Southern Lebanon is known as ' Hezbollahland ' these days .
The party of Allah has been lord and master ever since Israel 's military withdrawal from the border area in May 2000 .
This Shiite terror organisation has built up an impressive military presence thanks to the combined cooperation of Syria and Iran .
Including a large arsenal of missiles within range of the whole of the north of the Jewish state .
All within easy reach of Lebanese Islamicists who unremittingly and openly advocate the physical destruction of Israel .
The attention being paid to the depressing situation on Israel 's northern border in the present resolution of this Parliament deals with the cause and effects and ignores the political reality in situ .
This European unease will not upset Hezbollah .
The party of Allah is simply not mentioned .
How does the Council view that ?
I would like to ask the Greek Presidency what steps it intends to take against Hezbollah in Beirut , Damascus and Teheran .
Diplomatic inactivity gives the EU absolutely no credibility as a peace broker in the Middle East .
Hezbollah is just as unlikely to be intimidated when it comes to direct and indirect involvement in terrorist activities against the state of Israel , including forming terrorist cells amongst Israeli Arabs and complete identification with the second Palestinian intifada .
Or , as the secretary-general of Hezbollah , Hassan Nasrallah , puts it : the intifada in Palestine now forms their front line .
In short , if the common fight against terrorism is to have real credibility , the EU must immediately place Hezbollah on its list of terrorist organisations - hence my amendment - and the Lebanese authorities must assert their authority over the whole country .
Only these measures will have the effect of stabilising the whole region and promoting peace in it , as they simultaneously send a signal to the destabilising regimes .
A powerful stance such as this would also set the right tone for the negotiations on the EU 's future relationship with Damascus and Teheran .
Otherwise the European institutions would only be paying lip service to the bare fact of Israel 's existence and the global fight against terrorism .
Until such time as the EU shows that it is taking these points very seriously in its relations with these countries , I will vote against an Association Agreement with Lebanon .
What makes me even more resolute in my stance is that the European institutions are demanding virtually no genuine guarantees from Beirut regarding the observance of human rights .
Mr President , there is no doubt that the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement goes beyond relations with the Lebanese Government and takes on an extraordinary importance within the network of relations based on dialogue and cooperation in the Mediterranean and the Middle East , especially at times like these when the threat of war looms so large and risks undermining the development of cooperation between our peoples and harming the still vulnerable Lebanese Government .
There have been many years of war with Syria but also with Israel , with external interference and invasions , which have not yet been definitively settled ; also a civil war which has devastated social and family relationships , though the International Community 's neglect has done damage too .
Lebanon 's rebirth could lie in that strength which previously was its weakness : the intertwining of cultures and religions , rooted in the country but different from each other .
The Lebanese Government should be acknowledged for having managed to maintain a balance between the parties and for wishing to rebuild a sovereign country in a difficult democratic process , because there are still clear violations of freedom of expression , human rights , social inequality and corruption .
In particular , I am referring to the situation of the Palestinian refugees , who have been prohibited by law from having any opportunity to work , for healthcare or for travel and it is hypocritical of the Lebanese to assert that this is because the refugees have to return to Palestine .
In this connection , when developing relations and projects with Lebanon , we have to persevere and find means to ensure compliance with the agreements and commitments which are made , even if the example of the EU-Israel Agreement and Israel 's blatant violation of Article 2 , certainly do not provide a guarantee that this will be respected .
I nevertheless consider it extremely important for this step to be taken , in the clear and certain knowledge that it is essential to help rebuild this country ; but it is essential that this country is rebuilt on the clear basis of freedom of expression and human rights .
Thank you for your comment , Mr Brok .
It is my duty to tell you that plenary 's services are already preparing a new list of amendments with this correction and this will be announced tomorrow before the vote on the recommendation and motion in question .
I have received a motion for a resolution in accordance with Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure on the subject of the debate1
In accordance with the agenda - and I would also go as far as to say in homage to the Greek Presidency - we will proceed to the Commission Statement on the Northern Dimension .
I understand , Mr Patten , that we all have problems with the timetable and I would therefore be grateful if the honourable Members could be as brief as possible , since there are problems with flight connections which affect the Commissioner himself .
Mr President , I will try to live up to that request .
We turn now from one end of Europe , as it were , to another .
The Northern Dimension continues to occupy an extremely important place on the Commission 's external relations agenda .
The Commission has been working hard to implement the Northern Dimension Action Plan that was endorsed by the European Council at Feira in June 2000 , and to prepare for a new action plan .
We are determined to continue to take a leading role in carrying forward this important initiative .
Last year saw significant progress in all nine sectors encompassed by the Action Plan .
The Commission 's 2002 Annual Progress Report on the implementation of the Northern Dimension action plan presents a complete overview of these results .
I would like to pick out a few concrete examples .
The Commission has actively contributed to launching the Northern Dimension environmental partnership , with its support fund for environmental and nuclear projects in Northwest Russia .
The Commission is by far the largest contributor to the fund , with EUR 50 million over three years , mainly for nuclear-related projects .
The Northern Dimension environmental partnership is a clear example of how cooperation in the Northern Dimension region can achieve tangible results in very sensitive areas , calling for urgent action .
In this context much attention is also being devoted to resolving the remaining details of the Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Programme for the Russian Federation , the so-called MNEPR .
I hope that we are now very close to a solution and that this key agreement can be signed very soon .
Much attention has also been devoted to the Northern Dimension , energy issues , transport , infrastructure , business and trade cooperation and to cooperation in the fight against organised crime .
We have continued to support cross-border cooperation through the Tacis programme , with a total assistance to Northwest Russia between 1996 and 2003 of about EUR 122 million , about half of this being for border crossings .
The Commission has also attached great importance to enhancing the coordination and interoperability between its principal programmes operating in the region ( mainly Tacis , Phare and Interreg ) in order to facilitate the implementation of joint projects in the Northern Dimension area .
This has already helped bring about a considerable increase in the number of joint projects being presented for Tacis / Interreg or Tacis / Phare funding in 2001-2002 .
The past year has also seen continued dialogue with the most important actors involved in the Northern Dimension .
The final agreement with Russia and Lithuania on the issue of transit to and from the Kaliningrad region is a good example of a concrete success in the EU-Russia relationship that should bring benefits for the wider Northern Dimension region .
We have already provided more than EUR 40 million to the development of Kaliningrad and an additional EUR 25 million is planned for the coming years .
We are determined to assist the Russian authorities in improving living standards and addressing the challenges it poses to the wider region .
The Commission has also been closely following the work of the intergovernmental organisations of the Northern Dimension region , including the Council of the Baltic Sea States ( CBSS ) , the Barents Euro-Arctic Council ( BEAC ) and the Arctic Council itself .
Building on the positive results already achieved , the Northern Dimension will be further strengthened in the near future .
In the coming years , the Northern Dimension will have to address the impact of European Union enlargement , and focus on enhancing links with the Russian Federation as a neighbour .
Two ministerial meetings were organised by Denmark in the last six months , both focussing on the next Action Plan .
On the basis of Guidelines adopted by the Council in October last year , the Commission is preparing the next Northern Dimension Action Plan for the period 2004-2006 .
We are carrying out an extensive consultation process involving Member States , Partner Countries , and regional bodies , as well as the business world , academia and civil society .
Our objective is to have a consolidated draft of the Action Plan ( which will replace the current one on 1 January next year ) tabled by the middle of this year at the latest .
There is still a lot of work to be done .
The Commission is willingly taking the lead in preparing this new Action Plan .
But I want to make it clear that success will require an active contribution of all partners concerned with the region and I am sure that the European Parliament will want to play its part in this process .
I am certainly looking forward to hearing the contributions which Members have to make in ensuring that the Northern Dimension , which has begun so well , can go on from strength to strength , particularly after the enlargement of the Union .
The enlargement of the European Union places the countries of the Northern Dimension in a very special and much changed position .
Everyone is expecting a great deal from this - including strong economic development in particular .
The greater mutual openness shows that there are extremely attractive prospects for cooperation in the economic , ecological and social fields .
If we are to benefit from this we will have to change our attitude towards Russia .
It has already changed , fortunately , but it was not just a matter of course .
Despite some worrying signals from Russia regarding parliamentary democracy , the acceptance of non-indigenous religions and in particular the continuing war in Chechnya , we must still have a positive attitude towards Russia .
The politics of the Northern Dimension is therefore part of our two-track policy .
A policy that does not withhold criticism , however severe it may be , but one that also sounds out and exploits constructive ideas .
It is very important to implement the various forms of policy in the action plan .
The European Union 's attitude will then be very balanced and multi-faceted , which will also be good for the development of neighbouring regions .
The way in which this is done is also naturally of great importance , and this is also mostly of a political and cultural nature .
Market participants as well as social organisations , for example , will have to play a major role .
Political integration must always go hand in hand with social integration ; this may entail a large number of independent organisations .
The action plan may therefore also be relevant to the social democratisation of the territories in question - with Russia first .
The Danish Presidency made great efforts with regard to the Northern Dimension issue .
Coming from a southern northern country , I appreciate this very much .
We are assuming that Greece will also feel a sense of responsibility towards the Northern Dimension .
The focus must be on the exploitation of energy sources , the transportation of energy , possibly including to the European Union , and nuclear waste .
The delegation to the Russian Duma recently went to the north , where we found out about the serious problems caused by nuclear waste .
The European Union is one of the major donors , possibly the biggest in fact , but cleaning up is taking place pretty slowly there .
They are not able to dismantle more than a small number of nuclear submarines each year .
It is very important for all of us that this is speeded up .
The territory there in the north is extremely vulnerable , and we will have to accept our responsibility , particularly with regard to Norway and other countries with interests there .
It is a very good thing - for the people who live there as well - that solutions are also being found for waste water , particularly in St. Petersburg and Kaliningrad .
In order to make it clear that we are concerned about people , we must also make sure that social questions linked to public health and the like are not forgotten .
We have seen that there are already numerous councils and forums dealing with the Northern Dimension .
I must therefore express the hope that their activities will be appropriately coordinated so that they do not overlap too much and hamper one another .
A budget line for the Northern Dimension has also already been discussed .
I understand that there are technical problems involved in setting up a budget line of this kind and I would like to know what the Commissioner thinks about this .
I welcome a new action plan for the Northern Dimension which will embrace three new Baltic states and Poland as EU members in 2004 , Russia , with which I support a privileged status in a common economic space one day , and the EEA states of Iceland and Norway .
I am concerned about the environmental hazards in the far north and I strongly urge the Russians to sign the MNEPR Agreement , as they have agreed to do , on joint action for decommissioning of their spent nuclear fuel rods and warheads rotting in their naval submarines which might contaminate the Murmansk area .
Negotiations on the accession of ten countries to the EEA were launched in Brussels just last week .
Enlargement of the EU entails simultaneous enlargement of the EEA in order to safeguard the homogeneity of the internal market .
There is no justification for the idea that the contributions of the EEA countries should be comparable to those of EU Member States and the Commission 's demand for a 22-fold increase for Norway is absurd .
Third countries do not enjoy the same rights and privileges as Member States ; in some cases there is reduced market access due to tariff imposition .
An example is Norway 's loss of free trade in fish with Poland .
The EEA Agreement is a good agreement but it has its limitations .
Recent opinion polls in Norway indicate that public perceptions of the Union are changing ; that support for membership is growing and will inevitably dominate the political agenda at the next elections .
I would like also to raise the issue of Belarus , which has borders with four of the Member States that are party to the action plan and , given its union with Russia , might one day become part of the group .
It is important for the EU to maintain its dual-track approach and pressure for democratic reforms there .
But notwithstanding our political differences with that country , we are still committed in areas of mutual interest such as the management of illegal immigration and cross-border crime .
To close this debate , I have received four motions for resolutions presented in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure
I was rapporteur for one of the reports on the Erika I package .
The Erika accident took place on 19 December 1999 .
I believe that the Commission did its work perfectly , because in March 2000 it presented us with this first package of measures .
Parliament worked on it and , with more delay than we would have liked , we finally achieved a proposal in December 2000 - a year after the Erika accident - on which we had reached consensus with the then representative of the Council , the French Transport Minister .
The day after that Council , in Parliament , as a result of the actions of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the whole agreement we had reached became deadlocked , and the first Erika package was not approved until a year later ( December 2001 ) .
And the worst thing of all is that it was not just the Group of the European People 's Party that held up this Erika I package , but also the Council , which delayed its common position with regard to double hulls until August 2001 .
While we are facing another disaster , which took place in November 2002 - three years after the Erika accident - the Council and the Member States have still not brought the measures in the Erika I and Erika II packages into force .
Hence my question : why are the appropriate decisions not taken so that we do not have to suffer another such disaster , and so that the adoption of measures is speeded up with the efficiency that this case demands ?
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have not answered my questions on the maritime areas located between the Canaries , Madeira , the Azores and the European Union .
70 000 ships pass through these areas , many of them large oil tankers , real monsters , of 100 000 , 200 000 or more tonnes , and at any time an accident involving one of these oil tankers could lead to the economic ruin of many of these islands which are dedicated exclusively to tourism .
You will understand better if we imagine this in the context of your own country .
Imagine the results of an accident in the Aegean , or an accident in the Eastern Mediterranean , even outside the territorial waters of Greece .
What would be the consequences for your islands ?
Do you not believe , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that the European Union must adopt rules to regulate the maritime areas which endanger its coasts ?
The United States and Canada have done so , outside their own territorial waters , and I believe that the European Union would have the power to do so .
I would like to make a brief comment to the President-in-Office of the Council , whom I wish all the luck in the world .
We need the Council to act more quickly .
As a result of 1 January and the Prestige disaster , the Spanish State has applied certain more restrictive rules for single-hull ships .
This has led to queues of single-hull ships entering Gibraltar in order to evade inspections .
The United Kingdom must not remain on the sidelines , and there must be no free ports , which to some extent are pirate ports , which receive ships in a manner which is contrary to the actions of the European Union .
For this reason , I would ask you to act more quickly and I would ask that nobody in the European Union should remain on the sidelines when these rules are so very necessary .
This is not a question , but an opinion which we take note of , but if the President-in-Office of the Council wishes to reply ...
Mr President , the President-in-Office of the Council has just called this problem a ' natural disaster ' .
I should like to ask him why he attributes natural causes to a disaster that has clearly occurred as the result of political and therefore preventable reasons ?
A natural disaster is clearly something quite different .
This is like calling a crash involving several cars or lorries on a motorway a natural disaster !
It is other types of causes that need to be cleared up .
I feel that the Greek Presidency is getting off to a bad start on this matter if it thinks that this is really a natural disaster .
I would ask : why are you calling this a natural disaster , which I believe is a complete misnomer ?
Mr President , I respected your authority at all times , since I did not know whether or not I could ask a supplementary question .
I wish the President-in-Office of the Council luck and success during this six-month Presidency , and I would like to raise the issue of the Prestige from a European point of view .
Do you believe that a disaster of this nature , which now affects more than one Member State , whose outcome nobody knows , since we still have a sunken wreck containing 55 000 tonnes of oil , with consequences which are truly tragic for areas of very great ecological value for the whole of the EU , for the heritage of the whole of Europe , and with repercussions for all aspects of maritime law etc . , should be dealt with from a European point of view , through the creation of a temporary committee or a committee of inquiry in this Parliament to examine all points of view and to coordinate all types of effort , so that events of this type can never happen again ?
Question No 3 by Camilo Nogueira Román ( H-0847 / 02 ) :
Subject : Erika legislative packages and the 1990 US Oil Pollution Act
In the wake of the accident involving the oil tanker the Erika and the series of accidents off the coast of Galicia such as those involving the Polycomander , the Aegean Sea , the Urquiola , and the Cason , why has the Council failed to provide in the two Erika legislative packages for the strict financial guarantees and safety measures required of shipowners and vessels under the 1990 Oil Pollution Act , which the United States was prompted to adopt following the Exxon Valdez accident ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , society as a whole is currently convinced that international maritime traffic is the domain of a predatory form of capitalism that does not have the interests of society at heart and which is even criminal .
Standards must be established to prevent this terrible situation continuing .
There are various approaches to solving this problem : one is that adopted by the United States in the wake of the Exxon Valdez accident in 1989 , by creating the Oil Pollution Act , in 1990 .
I would recall that the guarantee required of shipowners stands at USD one billion , that the liability required is unlimited and that , currently , Exxon Mobil is being asked to pay USD four billion in compensation .
Double hulls , coastguards , etc , etc , form part of this approach .
Another approach is that of the Erika , a piece of legislation that , although a step forwards , is not being properly applied by the Council and the Member States , which prefer to move in the sphere of international mafias .
On the other hand , there are countries , such as Galicia , which are suffering the consequences and whose populations , including fishermen and volunteers are having to fight the oil slick with their bare hands .
I believe that the only solution is for the EU to create its own legislation ( we could even call it the ' Prestige ' law , imitating , in this case , the United States .
Next , we should surely amend all international legislation .
I wish to ask whether you will be adopting initiatives to achieve this ?
Question No 4 by John Walls Cushnahan ( H-0871 / 02 ) :
Subject : Recent maritime disasters
In light of the series of maritime disasters that have occurred in European waters in November and December 2002 , namely the Prestige disaster which continues to produce yet more oil slicks which are devastating the coastline and marine life of Galicia , compounded with the recent collision between the freighter the Tricolor and the Kariba , and the second collision between the wreck of the Tricolor and the freighter the Nicola , will the Council recognise that there is a clear need for a coordinated EU response ?
Furthermore , given the severe consequences of such maritime accidents , what is the Council 's view of the submission that I made to the Convention on the Future of Europe in June 2002 ( reference Conv 150 / 02 ) , calling for the creation of an EU Coastguard ?

Mr President , I welcome the fact that you recognise the need for a coordinated EU response , but I put it to you that not only does it need to be coordinated , it needs to be comprehensive and backed up by sufficient resources .
Would you accept that the problem that we face in the seas of Europe is not only about maritime safety and environmental pollution ?
It is the way in which our seas are used , for example for illegal immigration , organised crime , human trafficking , and indeed the abuse of our fisheries law .
Would you not accept that we need an adequate response mechanism and that the only way to address the problem would be to establish an EU coastguard ?
Do you not think we could learn from the United States ' comprehensive approach to these problems ?
There has been much talk in the Council and elsewhere about the problems of dealing with terrorism , yet we forget that such a danger could exist on our seas just as easily as in the air .
If for example a terrorist attack using chemical , biological or nuclear weapons were to be launched at sea , a coastguard could be the first line of response .
I disagree with you that it is not within the Council 's remit .
It has always been in the Council 's remit to consider ways of addressing the public 's fears .
Citizens are sometimes disillusioned with the EU .
Would you not accept that dealing with problems that threaten their safety and wellbeing in a coordinated and comprehensive way will help convince them of the values of Europe ?
I would remind the honourable Members in general that during this Question Time , specific questions must be put for one minute .
It is not a general debate with more time for explaining positions , because if you speak beyond your allotted time , you will prevent other Members who are waiting from putting their questions .
I have a list of several who wish to ask supplementary questions .
In accordance with the order in which they have requested the floor , Mr Ortuondo and Mr Dhaene are before everybody else .

Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we have spoken here of the fact that the Council has decided to speed up the entry into force of ports of refuge - I believe that this is a correct and necessary measure - and that it has not taken a decision in relation to the European coastguard service .
I would like this service to be set up as soon as possible , as well as a compensation fund for pollution accidents similar to the one they have in the United States .
I would like to ask him specifically whether he believes that , for this type of disaster , we also need an emergency pilot plan at European level .
Do you not believe that we should have a European rapid reaction force for this type of incident , including volunteers ?
Do you not also believe that we should identify particularly sensitive corridors , so that we can have an emergency plan in each case ?
Mr President , I am somewhat surprised that the Council has replied that it is not authorised to set up a coastguard .
It will nevertheless have to make a decision about this .
Yesterday , Mrs de Palacio said that she would take the initiative on this point and I am still expecting an answer from the President-in-Office of the Council on this subject .
Will he defend this in the Council ?
Does he support it or not ?
I would like a clear answer on this point .
Mr President , thank you very much for your kind words .
I have one simple question : does the President-in-Office of the Council intend to visit Galicia ?
Yes , I am restricted by the Rules of Procedure .
I am obliged to comply with it , at least as much as you are .
Question No 5 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0837 / 02 ) :
Subject : Settlement in Cyprus and accession to the European Union
An EU working document drafted with a view to the decisions to be taken in Copenhagen has been published in an Athens newspaper ( TA NEA 3 December 2002 ) , causing great concern .
This document , which the newspaper claims is to be discussed in principle at COREPER level and by the Council of Foreign Ministers , refers to the accession of Cyprus and makes provision for two possible scenarios .
The first envisages accession of the island as a whole , provided a settlement in principle of the Cyprus problem , based on the Annan plan , is signed prior to Copenhagen .
The second envisages , in the event of Mr Clerides and Mr Denktash not having signed a settlement in principle prior to Copenhagen , the dissociation of the accession of Cyprus from that of the other countries and reconsideration in April 2003 .
The first observation to be made about these scenarios is that they directly link a settlement of the Cyprus problem to accession and , in any event , do not even address the commitment given at Helsinki that a settlement is not a condition of accession .
What steps will the Council take to implement the Helsinki decisions , which dissociated the accession of the Republic of Cyprus from a political solution to the problem , particularly when it is evident that the stalling tactics pursued by the Turkish Cypriot side have exhausted every time margin for negotiations of substance to achieve a just and viable settlement in Cyprus ?
Question No 6 by Sarah Ludford ( H-0842 / 02 ) :
Subject : Procedural safeguards for defendants in criminal proceedings
In the light of the recent events in Greece where the ' plane spotters ' ( 12 British and 2 Dutch ) were recently acquitted on appeal of spying charges , of which they had been wrongly convicted by a lower court , does the Council agree that this experience highlights the need for an EU-wide system of safeguards for defendants in criminal trials and more training for judges ?
Furthermore does the Council agree that , although the ECHR does indeed provide safeguards under Article 6 by providing for the right to a fair trial , the time it takes to remedy breaches by Member States is too long ?
Moreover will the Council commit to dealing expeditiously and favourably with the proposal for a Framework Decision on fixing common standards regarding procedural safeguards for persons accused in criminal proceedings throughout the EU as announced by the Commission in its legislative and work programme for 2003 ?
Question No 7 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0865 / 02 ) :
Subject : Police academy and EU border protection
When will the Council finally take a decision on the seat of the European Police Academy , and what stage has been reached in preparations for the creation of a common border police force at the EU 's external borders ?
Question No 8 by Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou ( H-0875 / 02 ) :
Subject : Initiatives in favour of SMEs
At the Barcelona European Council Member States were asked to speed up the implementation of the European Charter for SMEs and the Commission was asked to draw up a Green Paper on the entrepreneurial spirit and SMEs .
As part of the Greek Presidency , does the Council intend to adopt specific strategies and measures to give a new impetus to SMEs ?
Does it intend to urge the Commission to present this Green Paper before the end of the Greek Presidency together with a qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the participation of SMEs in existing Community support programmes for SMEs and of the results of such participation ?
Question No 10 by Konstantinos Alyssandrakis ( H-0880 / 02 ) :
Subject : Attempts to overthrow the legally elected President of Venezuela
Following the failed coup d 'etat in Venezuela , attempts by the economic and political establishment of the country , together with its international allies ( USA etc . ) to overthrow President Chavez are intensifying .
The media , which are controlled by the opposition , have mounted a campaign of disinformation , the banks are threatening to cut back their services even to the point of suspending withdrawals from accounts , and the country is threatened with huge fines if it does not deliver its contracted quantities of oil .
What initiatives will the Council take to thwart the attempt by the external forces supporting the Venezuelan economic oligarchy to overthrow the legally elected President Chavez with the aim of controlling the 5th most important oil-producing country , and to ensure that the verdict of the Venezuelan people is respected at international level ?
Question No 11 by Efstratios Korakas ( H-0881 / 02 ) :
Subject : Intensification of preparations for war against Iraq
The USA and the UK are stepping up preparations for an attack against Iraq , transporting soldiers and munitions to the region and preparing the way for civil war by arming all those inside and outside Iraq who might take their side .
It has been reported that at least six European countries will be used to train Iraqi opposition forces , and the Hungarian Government has confirmed the existence of an official American request to use the Taszar base for training 4 500 Iraqis ' as translators and administrators ' .
These actions are completely at odds with the UN resolutions and cast doubt on the work of the inspectors .
What initiatives does the Council intend to take to prevent acts by the USA and the UK which jeopardise world peace and to avert a decision by the UN Security Council legitimising the war , thereby meeting the demand by the international and European peace movement voiced at mass anti-war demonstrations ?
Question No 12 by Ioannis Patakis , which has been taken over by Mr Alyssandrakis ( H-0882 / 02 ) :
Subject : Withdrawal of USA from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and threats to world peace
Following its unilateral decision to withdraw from the Anti-Ballistic Missile ( ABM ) Treaty , the USA has announced its decision to continue developing a national missile defence system until 2004 , beginning with the stationing of missiles in Alaska .
What measures does the Council intend to take to put an end to this development which threatens world peace , especially since Member States of the EU , such as the UK and Denmark , have been asked to contribute to this programme , and the USA has already asked to use military bases and radar installations in these countries ?
Firstly I would like to wish the Greek minister much success with the Presidency over the next six months .
It is a big job , and I really wish you much success .
I would also like to thank you for your very detailed answer , Mr Yiannitsis .
You made a very long statement .
I cannot , however , help but feel that you did not write it yourself .
It is , of course , a statement that has been drawn up following consultation between the 15 , between diplomats .
And , if you will excuse me saying so , it is a statement that has nothing to do with the reality in situ .
All the reports that reach us - Mr Wuori has pointed this out - refer to a very serious human rights situation .
We all know that the problem in Chechnya can only be resolved with political consultation , with discussions between people and between representatives .
I would like to ask the Greek Presidency very specifically whether it believes that it is possible for the Council to take steps in a creative manner to bring about a political solution to the Chechen problem by means of negotiations between all the parties concerned .
Mr Yiannitsis , I am very grateful for your cooperation with us throughout this afternoon and we will see you for Question Time next month in Strasbourg .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was closed at 7 p.m. )
.
( EL ) This report by Mr Pirker , which the Communist Party of Greece voted against , has started the ball rolling for the European Parliament to implement racist and xenophobic resolutions to keep immigrants out of the ? U.
The Seville Council decided to create yet another repressive supranational mechanism , the European Corps of Border Guards .
However , the immediate creation of such a corps clashes with the Member States ' constitutions , which is why the Commission has decided on a hybrid solution which it refers to as ' common services to control external borders ' .
It has also been decided to incorporate the Common Manual for External Borders - yet another purely police manual - into Community legislation , once it has been revised and made even more anti-democratic .
Finally , there are even plans to use satellites and radar to monitor the EU 's borders , by making use of the Galileo satellite navigation system , while yet another service has been added to the repertoire of monitoring and policing services , the SCIFA + , which will operate as a steering body responsible for coordination .
What is worrying is that the report adopted by the European Parliament is even more autocratic than the Commission communication .
The report equates illegal immigration , which it quotes as an example of a current threat , with organised crime , accepts the propaganda about ' new risk scenarios ' , criticises the delay in setting up the Border Guard etc .
In the Presidency 's conclusions from the Seville European Council in June 2002 , the Council called upon the Commission to carry out a study into the apportionment of responsibilities between the Member States and the EU in the management of the external borders .
This was to take place before June 2003 , which is why the results of this study have still not been implemented .
In the resolution , the European Parliament chooses , in spite of this , to anticipate the study and to ask the Convention to look into the possibilities of finding a legal basis for a European Corps of Border Guards , and the Council to set up such a force .
We can see that there is a need for closer cooperation in this area but believe that , legally , democratically , financially and in terms of constitutional law , a proposal as far-reaching as this requires a proper study to be carried out as a basis for its being possible to deal with the matter at all .
A Corps of Border Guards , however temporary the mandate it is given , is , in spite of everything , a new institution and entails a new legal competence for the EU .
The Commission 's communication on the future of health care and care for the elderly , focusing on accessibility , quality and financial viability , provides a useful framework for policy exchange regarding the challenges that all Member States are facing in this area .
Several years ago we initiated the successful European Year for older people which acknowledged the contribution of older people in our society .
The Employment Committee 's report has considerably expanded this framework .
I am pleased that the communication is being debated so that the Member States and the public can learn more about the challenges involved .
The organisation of health care systems , their funding and planning are , of course , matters for the Member States .
The family , the role of community groups and volunteers who can provide support services and the introduction of a respite care grant for dependent older persons must form part of this health strategy .
I did not support amendments which failed to recognise the positive developments in relation to care for older people .
I support the Commission 's assessment that the EU has an overall health situation and health care system that are among the best in the world .
I supported the amendments aimed at promoting cooperation rather than the open method of cooperation .
.
( PT ) I congratulate Mr Mantovani on the report he has presented to us , which addresses an issue that should be of concern to us all , namely our citizens ' future with regard to healthcare and care for the elderly .
Because this is a communication that achieved the broad consensus of the various parties involved , I should like to reiterate my support for the Commission 's conclusions and for the aims proposed for developing practical policies to achieve active ageing and the involvement of all interested parties in defining policies in the field of social protection , inclusion and employment .
Bearing in mind the need to respond to the problem of ageing in a way that ensures not only economic growth but also financial sustainability , and in line with the strategy adopted by the Gothenburg Council of June 2001 , the Member States ' targets must be to achieve increased rates of employment , to reduce public debt in order to compensate for increased spending on pensions and healthcare and to reform pension schemes .
The Council has welcomed the Annan plan as a proposal which may well resolve the Cyprus problem .
It is waiting for the two sides to agree and , together with the European Commission , is looking to see what aspects of the acquis communautaire might clash with the plan .
Transitional periods , which are a standard occurrence , even during negotiations with candidate countries , and which are being accepted or may be accepted in this case , and marginal deviations of no particular significance to the acquis , which the European Commission has said it can cope with in order to facilitate a solution to the Cyprus problem , provided of course that both the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot sides agree , could be incorporated into the final solution without causing any particular problems to the dynamics and results of the final solution .
EBRD activities
The next item is the report ( A5-0421 / 2002 ) by Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the activities of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) ( 2002 / 2095 ( INI ) ) .

Mr President , Mr Lemierre , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by welcoming Mr Lemierre and his colleagues to the European Parliament , and take this opportunity to express my warm thanks to you and the Bank 's staff for the extraordinarily positive cooperation which we were able to establish during the preparation of this report .
The EBRD responded to me with great openness and willingness to cooperate , thus making my work on this report both interesting and informative .
I was able to hold numerous discussions with representatives of the Bank as well as with project agencies from various countries , which gave me a detailed picture of the Bank 's operations , its problems and successes , but also , and to a minor extent , its failures .
The EBRD is unique among development banks in having a political mandate .
According to this mandate , its purpose is to foster the transition towards open market-oriented economies and to promote private and entrepreneurial initiative in the Central and Eastern European countries and CIS states committed to the principles of multiparty democracy , pluralism and market economics .
It is also part of the Bank 's political mandate to promote , across the full range of its activities , environmentally sound and sustainable development .
In my view , political guidelines governing the activities of other development banks would be desirable as well .
Having scrutinised its operations , we can attest that the EBRD performs well in fulfilling its current mandate .
In selecting the projects to be funded , the EBRD prefers to be involved in small and medium-sized projects rather than promoting large-scale prestige projects .
It shows great willingness to take risks through its commitment to projects which other banks deem too risky , but it does not systematically seek the security of state guarantees .
A key focus of its activities is developing small and medium-sized businesses .
The EBRD 's micro-financing projects deserve particular mention in this context .
Yet its high willingness to take risks does not take place at the expense of sound business management , as is borne out by the fact that it has always received the highest rating ( triple A ) from international rating agencies .
In my capacity as rapporteur , I would like to make a number of recommendations to the Bank , notwithstanding the positive assessment of its work overall .
Although its activities focus primarily on the transitional promotion of private and public enterprise , its operations undoubtedly have macroeconomic effects .
For this reason , an analysis of its operations should include economic data , which has not been the case to date .
I am thinking especially of factors such as trends in employment , wages and salaries , productivity , company turnover , and so on .
This will allow comparisons to be drawn between regions where the EBRD operates and regions where it does not operate , so that the influence of EBRD activities on macroeconomic development can be assessed .
In this context , it should also be a stated aim of the EBRD 's operations to achieve synergy effects .
Pursuing an integrated approach designed to help entire value-added chains in a region can contribute to promoting regional economic and social flows , thus facilitating sustainable development , which - as already mentioned - is one of the tasks defined in the Bank 's mandate .
It is also , in my view , important to encourage the Bank to tailor its policies to local circumstances .
Each country in which it operates has taken different decisions on its economic structures throughout the transformation process , especially as regards the division between the public and private sectors .
The Bank therefore should not attempt to operate in the same way in every country .
It would be a misinterpretation of the Bank 's political mandate , were it to set itself up as the herald of ultra-liberalism and set itself the sole goal of promoting privatisation and uncontrolled liberalisation . It does not do so , but I want to point out that this risk must be controlled from the outset .
My report is a first for the European Parliament , since it is the first time that the operations of the EBRD have been subject to scrutiny and assessment by this House .
This closes a gap which marked the EBRD out from other banks , such as the EIB , which has been subject to assessment by the EP for years .
In future , a report on the EBRD will be presented to the European Parliament every two years .
I think that with this own-initiative report , the foundation stone has been laid for positive and continuous cooperation between the Bank and the European Parliament .
Mr President , I should first like to congratulate Mr Markov on his report on the activities of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) .
In our view , the report gives an accurate account of the nature of the Bank 's mandate and activities by identifying three features peculiar to it alone .
Firstly , the Bank has both a political and an economic mandate .
Secondly , it has implemented a policy of conditionality .
In particular , this has affected the Bank 's involvement in environmental issues , as Mr Markov mentioned .
Lastly , there is the commitment to both the additionality and profitability of the funds made available .
This requires the Bank to take on risks private operators would decline .
The pragmatic approach the EBRD brings to the interpretation of its mandate also features prominently in the report .
This pragmatism has allowed the Bank to resolve a number of potential contradictions by adapting its political and economic framework to suit the stage of economic , cultural and social development attained by each country .
It has also made it possible for the Bank to reassess its operational priorities and gradually build the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises or local financial institutions into these priorities .
In addition , support for strategic international investors has been enhanced .
This same pragmatic approach has enabled the Bank , with the support of its shareholders , to adjust some of the limits to its mandate .
For instance , within its general strategy , more importance is now attached to reform of the regulatory framework and to how efficiently it is implemented by local administrations and judicial authorities .
Mr Markov 's report also rightly suggests placing additional emphasis on certain aspects of this pragmatic approach .
One instance is more careful consideration of the social and political aspects of restructuring the productive sector .
Another example is the reference to a more active role in the sustainable development of the energy sector .
A further example is the reference to strengthening the Bank 's operations at municipal level .
I should now like to say a few words about the relationship between the Union and the Bank .
First , this is an entirely innovative relationship at the institutional level , since the EBRD is the only international institution of which the European Commission is a shareholder .
This is particularly evident in the Board of Governors .
The Member States and the Union 's institutions together represent a majority when a vote is to be taken .
Cooperation between the Community and the Bank is another significant feature , and has developed considerably .
I believe it is now extremely close , and takes many different forms .
In particular , cooperation was strengthened through the Bank 's active involvement in the pre-accession strategy .
A network of working relationships between the services of the Commission and the Bank in now firmly established .
This has resulted in a significant increase in that part of the Community budget devoted to supporting or cofinancing the Bank 's projects .
In the early 1990s it was estimated that this contribution amounted to approximately EUR 40 million .
In recent years , however , it has increased to an average annual sum of EUR 300 million .
Finally , from the point of view of political priorities , cooperation with the Bank is indeed cause for satisfaction .
It has allowed us to draw on two fundamental assets for which we are indebted to the Bank , or to make use of them so as to enhance European policies .
The first of these is the Bank 's competence in the region .
This is due to its extensive knowledge of the current situation in the countries in question .
The second is the Bank 's practice of conditionality , which has often made it possible for the Bank 's involvement to serve to promote compliance with European standards .
This has been the case with regard to the environment .
In conclusion , I should simply like to emphasise that on the basis of these findings , it appears that the relationship between the Union and the Bank is bound to become even closer in all countries .
Clearly , there is scope for further development of the Bank 's activities in Russia , in other CIS States , and in the Balkans .
It would also appear that there is scope for further involvement in the candidate countries following accession .
In this connection , we endorse the view expressed in Mr Markov 's report .
We certainly believe it would be wise to continue active cooperation with the EBRD following enlargement , whilst also working with the obvious partner , namely the European Investment Bank .
This will enable us to continue to benefit from the EBRD 's experience after enlargement .
It goes without saying that the degree of cooperation and the time periods involved will depend on the EBRD 's capacity to respond to the actual needs identified in this area .
I am particularly pleased today to be able to welcome the President of the EBRD on an occasion which , as the rapporteur has remarked , is the first such encounter and dialogue on these terms between the EBRD and Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lemierre , may I begin by congratulating Mr Markov on a sterling report .
The EBRD has been , and will be , of great importance to the development of former Communist Europe .
For many of the countries , the door is now open to membership of the EU .
This is obviously the best way for them to secure a better social and economic future .
There are , however , still many countries that are , and will be , outside the EU 's internal market .
If the gulfs between countries and peoples are not to increase further , the EBRD 's efforts are perhaps needed now more than ever .
It is not easy to transform Communist planned economies that have sucked the life out of societies and people and introduce a market economy philosophy .
We can now see the huge costs for the former GDR .
I am particularly pleased that the Markov report emphasises free competition and the opportunities provided by the market and highlights , for example , the great importance of small companies to an affluent society .
We Liberals have especially wanted to emphasise a matter also addressed by Mr Purvis , to the effect that the EBRD must step up its efforts in the EU 's new border countries , for example in Moldova and Ukraine .
Obviously , this must also be done in Russia where the trend is , in spite of everything , in the right direction .
That the former Soviet empire and its inhabitants should acquire a more secure economic foundation is , of course , of the greatest interest to us within the EU in terms of economics , security policy and also straightforward politics .
That is apparent from an interesting article in today 's Financial Times , quoting Mr Lemierre .
We also proposed more emphasis on projects that support democratic development .
When it comes to Belarus , which is perhaps the worst remnant of the old Soviet period and which is without democracy , the EBRD should seek cooperation partners within non-governmental organisations .
Human rights must always be guaranteed .
It is therefore good that the EBRD should freeze assets and investments when human rights are threatened .
Mr Purvis mentioned the Balkans and Serbia .
There too , I believe that the EBRD 's efforts are especially important in a situation in which democracy is very shaky and needs support .
I also believe it is important to emphasise that the EBRD should be managed in a professional and efficient way .
The way in which it is organised must therefore be continually monitored , and unnecessary and costly bureaucracy prevented .
We in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party support Amendments Nos 2 and 4 , just as Mr Purvis does , but also parts of Amendment No 5 .
I want to conclude by saying that a number of the amendments concern the development of nuclear power .
This is , in my opinion , a source of energy that is clean and reduces the increasing greenhouse effect .
It reduces the risks of climate change if it is safe and properly managed .
I wonder therefore what the Greens have against it .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lemierre , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot add my voice to the praise heaped on the Bank by the rapporteur and the previous speakers .
It is not the task of parliamentarians to pay tribute to banks ' investment successes but to check whether this Bank , which is funded from the public purse , complies with the political rules in force in the European Union , namely the rules of transparency , the rules of sustainable development , and the rules of environmental compatibility .
It is our task to demand that it does so .
This brings me to my points of criticism .
Point 1 : the support for investment in the BP pipeline for oil exploitation in the Caspian Sea . This , as everyone knows , is not necessarily intended to end hostilities in this region and bring peace .
On the contrary , more than one million people have become refugees here over the last ten years .
Admittedly , this is not an accusation that can be levelled at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development itself , but the Bank does have a commitment to political principles .
The fact is that this project will not produce a peace agreement , but will simply let the conflict in the region simmer on .
In effect , that means that the European Union will benefit substantially from the production of oil , but for local people , it will not create the desired peace or prosperity .
It is also unclear who bears the risk in the event of accidents .
There are certainly no opportunities for local economic development .
Transparency , too , must also be improved , especially transparency for the population .
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is supporting dubious nuclear projects in Rovno and Khmelnitsky .
We know that the European Parliament has spoken out against this , because it is not convinced that these reactors can be made safe .
We also know that they are being built solely to supply cheap electricity to Western Europe , not to resolve the problems in Ukraine .
This House has therefore opposed any such investment .
I would therefore like to ask the President how , in that case , the Development Bank has still transferred EUR two billion to EURATOM to make these projects possible .
Mr President , President of the EBRD , Commissioner , this first decade in the life of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has been marked by highs and lows .
The Markov report paints a very positive picture , particularly , of course , since it refers to the last few years .
This is , in many ways , understandable , but in the past , even the recent past - with the Russian crisis and so on - problems have emerged that have led to unsatisfactory or even downright disastrous results , as in the case I have just mentioned of the Russian crisis , which affected the EBRD as well as many other international financial institutions .
This is probably due to one of the major contradictions that exist in the EBRD 's institutional activities : the fact that it promotes market economics using a non-market instrument , that is a loan guaranteed by public funds , having the possibility - also mentioned in the Markov report - of taking risks that other institutions would not take .
This leads me on to a rather sensitive aspect of the EBRD 's activity - an aspect of which the institutions ' top echelons are aware , as I well know - which is the risk that EBRD funding may squeeze out private risk capital and the development of endogenous credit in these countries .
It is a difficult balance to strike , and one which I believe should be given careful attention .
It is important not to let EBRD intervention end up penalising the growth of a private credit sector .
Two more points before I close : I think that attention should be focused more and more in future on neighbouring countries and less and less on the countries joining the European Union , precisely because the risk of squeezing out a nascent private market economy in these countries is greater .
Lastly , I turn to the European Union as the majority EBRD shareholder .
We invest in the Ukraine , for instance , through the EBRD .
This is admirable , but we are giving with one hand and taking away with the other through trade restrictions which weigh very heavily on a country like the Ukraine .
Our two hands need to work in harmony .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lemierre , I would like to begin by thanking you and your staff for your work .
The balance-sheet is impressive .
We are pleased that the balance-sheet which you have delivered today gives no cause for criticism .
Secondly , I endorse your priorities .
Despite your specific role , I think it is very important , as you have said , that the Bank is also an agency for the implementation of the Commission 's priorities , as well as for cooperation with the Commission and the Parliament .
We must not spread ourselves too thinly .
We must set priorities in order to be able to fulfil our political and economic responsibilities in the world - for the Member States , the accession countries , and the surrounding countries .
We cannot adopt divergent priorities .
I believe that the following points are important . I hope that next time round , you will also report on the impact of your operations in the transformation countries , since it enhances awareness of the Bank 's strengths if we have not only a balance-sheet but also information about the macroeconomic effects of its activities .
Secondly , I think it is important to continue and intensify your work on boosting small and medium-sized enterprises .
We are all aware of the key role played by SMEs in creating and consolidating training places and jobs .
Our expectation is that you will increase this commitment , especially by strengthening the focus on equity investment for SMEs and supporting the development of an SME infrastructure .
I would simply point out that in Russia , only 10 % of the workforce is employed in SMEs .
It is also very important that in a week when we have spoken a great deal about the Lisbon process , you are keeping the Lisbon strategy in mind when evaluating projects and enterprises and making this one of your criteria .
Furthermore , of course , we need a priority headed ' accession countries ' .
However , EU enlargement will not be complete in 2004 .
The issue of the Balkans - i.e. the former Yugoslavia - is important for the European Union , as is the establishment of a security belt , and economic development on the European Union 's borders is integral to this process .
I therefore ask you to continue your policy course and to take Parliament 's ideas on board .
We will support you in this approach .
Mr President , the EBRD is funded by the taxpayer , which is why transparency must be established in respect of its activities .
As the European Parliament , we attempted this from the outset during the Bank 's start-up phase , and I must say it has not always been a success story ; the Bank has also been through some very difficult times .
Even in Parliament , opinions were divided as to whether we should indeed still have our own bank .
This too must play a part in today 's debate .
Mr Lemierre , you have described the Bank 's task as being a ' classical ' general interest service which , however , makes use of private-sector intervention instruments .
This is undoubtedly an apt description and we must test its activities to determine to what extent this is actually being realised .
You are undoubtedly in a difficult position because the development of the private sector , as an outcome of successful transformation processes in the states where you operate , fails above all because there is no fully functioning financial sector , which means that the financial conditions for business start-ups and operations are very difficult .
For this reason , I welcome the fact that you have concentrated 30 % of your resources on this sector .
I also recognise that your activities in the promotion of small and medium-sized businesses are important to a functioning market economy and to the development of democracy .
However , what is also important is to see how stability can be achieved in these countries .
How can we facilitate economic growth through investment ?
That is an issue which constantly occupies our minds in the European Union as well .
In my view , it is especially important that you can take risks which others cannot take , and that this willingness to take risks does not conflict with sound and reliable management .
This is reflected in the high rating the Bank has received from rating agencies .
The Bank is unique among multilateral development banks in having a political mandate .
Its task is to contribute to a social market economy , democracy , pluralism and the rule of law .
In this context , you should focus even more strongly on ensuring respect for human rights and democratic principles .
You should deny support , to an even greater extent than before , to states and companies which engage in unfair practices and in which there is corruption and mismanagement .
This should also apply to failure to comply with the objectives of environmentally sound , socially compatible and sustainable development .
The EBRD is still operational in Central and Eastern Europe .
These states ' accession to the EU will open up many investment opportunities , which will not be available to other states .
For this reason , it is worth considering whether the current division of responsibilities between the EBRD , the EIB and the World Bank should be reviewed , including in geographical terms , despite their clear mandates , for the future success of the transformations in the former CIS republics will contribute not only to economic and political stability in these countries , but will also have an impact on the European Union and other regions of the world .
The transformation processes in all countries require further joint efforts and financial support , and this includes the accession countries as well .
However , it is the most underdeveloped countries that pose the greatest risk of instability .
In my view , Mr President , this is a fresh challenge for the EBRD !
Mr President , Mr Markov 's excellent report creates the impression that the Bank really is a great success .
It has been successful at investing - in nuclear safety , for example - in the candidate countries and in the former Soviet republics .
As the President said , the Bank has done a great job of improving nuclear safety in these countries .
That is also something for which there is certainly a need .
The fact is that all these nuclear power stations are veritable time bombs .
Think of the Chernobyl disaster .
Safety is so appalling , it is a disgrace that all these power stations were not closed down long ago .
The Bank is responsible for the fund to be used for decommissioning the Ignalina power station in Lithuania .
It is a nuclear power station I have visited quite a few times , and safety is so poor there that , following these visits , I am glad that I shall not be having any more children .
At the Copenhagen Summit , Lithuania promised to shut down Ignalina in 2009 .
There is really something for the Bank to do in this connection .
A proposal has just been put forward for an investment package that would put some order into the method used for storing nuclear waste .
The present situation is completely unacceptable . It is a huge mess and , in the longer term , extremely dangerous .
I would therefore call for the package to be adopted as quickly as possible .
In the future , we should take a brief look at how the Bank 's funds are monitored .
I should like to call upon the Bank 's president to post something on its web site in this connection .
With regard to the Bank 's accounts , it should be noted that these are not audited by any external firm of auditors .
There is apparently no independent institution that scrutinises the Bank 's activities .
The Court of Auditors has not prepared a report for years .
The Bank has an evaluation unit that carries out some quite excellent evaluations , but what is missing is an external audit .
I should therefore like to hear the Commission say what it does to monitor the funds , and I should also like to hear the Bank 's president say whether the Bank is more willing to open its doors to external audits .
Mr President , Commissioner , President of the EBRD , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , allow me to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur on his careful analysis of the EBRD 's activities .
The choice of economic activities must combine the local dimension with the international and requires a supply of credit not only to encourage the emergence of initiatives that are well established within a country but also to help them spread to other markets .
It is certainly the job of the EBRD to do this , but it is even more important to try to do it in countries with little industrial development , which have a greater need for support and revitalisation .
If , in order to achieve this objective , it needs to take risks and , in some cases , accept unexpected losses , it must not then cut out initiatives and planned investments but rather benefit from new experiences so that it can manage lending more attentively and read the risks more carefully .
This bank takes an ethical approach to credit management .
Its institutional commitment is to invest in any country that is inspired by democratic principles and determined to promote a market economy .
The first time , the bank asks clients for valid projects , with current market prices ; it also requires that there should be no conflicts of interest or dominant positions in the operational area to be financed , and that the interests of the local community should always be respected .
In the public sector , the EBRD calls for the greatest transparency to be employed in order to ensure competition and equal treatment for the market players .
We welcome and support the rapporteur 's views when he urges the EBRD to support small local banks , which , in turn , should focus on small-scale lending .
At this point , Mr President , allow me to sound an alarm : small bank lending is disappearing or is being considerably cut back .
This is a matter for concern , because no economic or financial manoeuvre , however good it may be , could replace the support that small banks have always offered to small and medium-sized enterprises .
We must also note that small-scale lending in many Member States and particularly the accession states is being thoroughly neglected ; that leads to a daily increase in financial exclusion , which is the existence of serious gaps in the supply of small-scale credit services in the countries with the weakest economies , where a form of discrimination based on geographical criteria arises : red-lining .
It is up to the EBRD , which has already chosen to operate in countries such as Albania , Ukraine , Kazakhstan and Moldova , to help to integrate these disadvantaged economies fully into the international economic order .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lemierre , since its creation , the EBRD has been a shining and undeniable example of the solidarity shown by democratic and developed societies .
Indeed , this Bank came into being as a result of the fall of the Berlin Wall and its primary aim is to assist the economies of Eastern European countries , which have since opened up to international competition , to overcome the natural difficulties arising from their embryonic development .
Although it is not officially a Community institution , the Bank embodies the entire philosophy of action that characterises the EU 's cohesion and development policies .
The forthcoming enlargement of the Union to encompass a significant number of countries from the East will deepen and highlight the importance of the financial and technical aid that the Bank has provided and granted to the candidate countries in the pre-accession phase .
The EBRD 's actions must not , however , be cannibalised or cancelled out by the tasks determined and defined for the European Investment Bank .
What is needed instead is for these two financial institutions to coordinate and collaborate whilst respecting their autonomy and their different origins , despite the very close financial relationship they enjoy .
This should not , incidentally , be too difficult , given that many of their aims are common , as are the characteristics of the economic actors to which this aid must be directed .
The recommendations contained in this report , which are aimed at increasing financial and technical aid for small and medium-sized businesses and at prioritising the implementation of financial resources within partnerships , especially in the form of venture capital , and the call for an ongoing commitment to train staff in the bank which can help them better to perform their duties , are extremely positive aspects .
The European Parliament should , therefore , support the main conclusions offered by Mr Markov , who is responsible for this own-initiative report .
It is also significant that this debate is taking place in the presence of the President of the EBRD , to whom , ultimately , these recommendations are also addressed and on whose abilities the Bank 's success and policies largely depend .
Mr President , I will be very brief and will just make three comments .
The first is in response to Mr Blak .
Not only am I prepared for increased transparency , but I must also say that we are monitored by external auditors and that , of course , the results are made public .
We are not content with self-examination .
We seek an outside opinion , we have auditors , their opinions are made public and our accounts are published every year .
Also , the Bank 's Board of Directors is particularly vigilant about its accounts and maintains a dialogue with the external auditors .
I can also tell you that following various debates regarding certain private companies and the debates on the roles of auditors , we have tightened our rules and , I think , adopted the best practices in that area .
In particular we have divided the responsibilities properly between the auditors and consultants and improved the discussion between the specialist Committee within the Board of Directors responsible for the accounts and the external auditors .
My second comment is addressed to Mrs Schröder .
I think that the examples that were given , which concern two projects that pose extraordinary problems but also have positive aspects , about which the Bank has not yet made a decision , demonstrate quite well what the Bank can seek to contribute : more transparency , more impact on the population and , ultimately , a decision that must be made by the board of directors .
Once again , the decisions have not been made and I have noted the comments .
I would like to say that this is probably one of the measures that the Bank can operate : more nuclear safety , greater impact on the population , greater transparency , fighting corruption within projects .
I think that it is absolutely necessary , and it is also the price of public intervention and what it should achieve if it is determined .
My third comment will simply be that I have listened to all of the speeches with a great deal of interest .
I think that these speeches clearly reflect the depth and strength of the institution 's mandate , but also the challenges inherent in it .
Several of you have spoken , fundamentally , about the historical mandate and whether it is up to date .
My feeling is that it is entirely relevant today : it is very up to date , as long as it is kept going , and your comments will help us to further achieve this .
That leads me on to a point that is very important to us , the dialogue with all of the governments and authorities in the region .
We are engaged in high-level political dialogue in each of the states in region .
There is one challenge that I think is quite essential : applying the rule of law , not so much in expressing its legal regulations ( fortunately ) but rather in implementing them ; improving the legal system and its operation in all the countries in the region remains an absolutely essential challenge .
This leads me to recall a few of the EBRD 's convictions , which it has acquired over ten years of experience , that the market economy cannot work without democracy , that the market economy cannot work without social cohesion , that there cannot be social cohesion without a strong civil society and that there cannot be strong civil society without transparency and fighting corruption .
These are the messages that we are of course regularly developing at political level , when we assess the situations of the various states with regard to Article 1 of the institution 's mandate , but also in the dialogue that we maintain .
I would therefore like to offer Mr Markov and each of you my own most sincere thanks and those of the institution for your comments .
They will encourage us to be even more determined in implementing the mandate that we have and to come and explain to Mr Markov and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , in two years time , how we have progressed .
Mr President , I apologise for taking up more time , but I did not receive an answer to my question .
Has the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development transferred EUR two billion to EURATOM , yes or no ?
A simple yes or no will suffice .
No .
The answer is no .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0448 / 2002 ) by Hugues Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on aquaculture in the European Union : present and future ( 2002 / 2058 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes this report by Parliament .
It certainly presents an accurate account of the challenges currently facing European aquaculture .
The report is also consistent with guidelines contained in the communication from the Commission adopted last September .
This communication concerned a strategy for the sustainable development of aquaculture in Europe .
The Commission would first like to thank Parliament for its support of a range of new measures put forward as part of the Commission 's strategy .
I refer in particular to the initiatives planned concerning the review of legislation on food safety and health risks , environmental protection , animal welfare , the development of new farming techniques and of high quality species .
Other measures concern enhancing the governance and organisation of the industry and the development of aquaculture in general .
Parliament 's report highlights the importance that should be attached to research .
Mr Martin referred to this a moment ago , and the Commission 's proposal does so too .
It is to be hoped that when it comes to adopting the new decisions on framework programme budgetary allocations , Parliament will support the allocation of additional resources to research into aquaculture .
I shall deal next with the concerns expressed in Paragraphs 10 to 14 of the resolution .
These relate to the possible impact of genetically modified fish and poliploid molluscs .
I am pleased to inform the House that the Commission has recently concluded the selection process for a study on genetic engineering in aquaculture .
The study will encompass all these issues .
The Commission can confirm that in future initiatives , as requested in the resolution , it will take proper account of the economic importance of all the enterprises involved in aquaculture .
Due consideration will be given even to the smallest .
The Commission will also allow for the need to protect traditional practices .
We have noted Parliament 's suggestion , in Paragraph 7 , on the advisability of amending the regulations governing the financial instrument , the FIFG .
We have also noted Parliament 's view that the sector requires public financial support now and in the near future .
The Commission found that some of the amendments tabled do not fall within the scope of its strategy .
They will require detailed study .
Further , together with several Member States , the Commission is of the opinion that aquaculture is a new activity which can and must be independent and financially viable .
The introduction of measures aimed at financing its operational costs would not be consistent with this view .
Furthermore , we would be severely criticised within the WTO .
We have also noted Parliament 's request for a study on the viability of conserving stocks of wild fish to be undertaken .
In addition , Parliament has called for the Scientific Committee on Animal Health and Animal Welfare and to be charged with drawing up a report on the welfare of farmed fish .
Indeed , the Commission has already requested the Committee to rule on the slaughter and transport of farmed fish .
Further , within the framework of existing legislation , the Commission is launching initiatives to deal with problems affecting the market in specific species .
Sea bream and bass are two current examples .
The Commission 's services met with the Member States and representatives of the sector in December 2002 .
At that meeting we were able to come up with measures to be taken in the ensuing few months .
To quote some examples , the temporary suspension of public aid for the creation of new production capacity , the launch of a study on the market for bass and sea bream , and the effort to organise a campaign to promote international sales .
We do not believe that the request contained in Paragraph 15 calls for additional legislative measures .
There is widespread awareness of the difficulties involved in developing physicochemical and biological techniques to determine the concentration of toxins in shellfish .
This is also the case regarding licensing the sale of vaccines in Member States .
All this is dealt with in the communication .
Nonetheless , we have taken note of Parliament 's requests .
Paragraphs 20 and 29 refer chiefly to the Member States and to Parliament itself , and the Commission agrees with them .
There is , however , one proposal the Commission cannot support .
This is contained in Paragraph 28 .
It would involve creating an instrument designed to offer assistance to the sector when it is struck by natural or man-made disasters .
It is actually within the competence of the FIFG to authorise the temporary cessation of activity and other financial compensation .
When very serious accidents occur , such as that involving the Prestige , the ad hoc reaction of the European institutions can and must be swift .
The regulation providing compensation for Spanish fisheries and the Spanish shellfish and aquaculture sectors affected by fuel oil spillage from the aforementioned tanker was adopted on 20 December .
That was merely a month to the day after the vessel sank .
The Commission certainly endorses Parliament 's suggestion that the professional organisations need to make a greater effort to improve their image , establishing more effective channels of communication .
In our view , however , this is something the professionals should undertake for themselves , although they could be eligible for support from existing provisions for public aid .
We do not believe the Commission should be directly involved as requested in Paragraph 35 .
Lastly , the Commission has taken note of Paragraphs 27 and 32 of the resolution .
These concern the recognition of producers ' organisations and the guarantee of fair standards to be applied to European and third-country producers and products .
These issues call for more detailed consideration in the future .
Mr President , this report contains a number of contradictions .
On the one hand there are some very good things in it , to the extent that it addresses the whole issue of aquaculture and sustainable development and in particular its impact on the environment .
It is also positive in that it considers the very important issue of animal welfare and the question of overcrowding in fish farms , and calls for some sort of stocking densities to be set .
However , other parts of the report criticise EU environmental and health and food safety requirements .
It would appear to put business interests first , which is a very dangerous precedent because environmental and health and food safety requirements should come before any business interests .
It also questions the precautionary principle , on the grounds that this principle would seem to make it more difficult for aquaculture ventures .
The precautionary principle is something that we must adhere to within the European Union and it must be respected at all times .
If it makes things more difficult , that is because it is a precautionary approach , it is the way we should approach aquaculture .
The other questionable aspect of the report is the whole issue of wanting the Commission to promote aquaculture .
I do not think that this is a good idea .
There are many problems connected with aquaculture ; it seems that people within the aquaculture industry think that it will solve the problems of wild stocks and also those relating to sea fishing and the reduction of sea stocks .
But it will not .
Aquaculture gives rise to many problems .
GMOs are an issue that has been raised already .
Introducing genetically modified fish into aquaculture is something that is extremely dangerous and should be avoided .
We also have to address the use of industrial fishing to feed aquaculture .
It is quite clear that if this industry keeps growing as it is , it will soon outstrip the supply of resources from industrial fishing .
Whether we like it or not , that is what we are facing , plus the fact that aquaculture is an extremely dangerous industry in the impact it has on the environment .
Finally , on the matter of consumer confidence , I am very wary of the notion in the report that the Commission should promote consumer confidence in aquaculture .
The products of aquaculture speak for themselves , and it is wild fish stocks that we should be looking at and addressing here .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , aquaculture is daily achieving greater recognition within the wider context of the fisheries sector at global and Community level .
Aquaculture is a key adjunct to the extractive fisheries sector .
It is , however , abundantly clear that aquaculture is beset by a range of problems .
The latter relate for instance to its size , marketing , the environment and health .
It is essential to identify all these problems and tackle them at Community level .
It was therefore particularly appropriate for our Committee on Fisheries to prepare an own-initiative report on such an important and sensitive issue .
The appointment of Mr Martin as rapporteur was particularly appropriate too .
He has brought dedication and rigour to his hard work , managing to produce a report that obtained broad support within our committee .
I am confident it will receive the same support in plenary .
The report provides a comprehensive overview of the difficulties facing the broad and diverse European aquaculture sector .
I would like to congratulate Mr Martin publicly on this achievement .
This report should prove a godsend to the European Union and most certainly to Parliament .
It marks a watershed in the effort to deal with the many and complex issues impacting on aquaculture , and will prove a splendid work of reference to draw upon .
Thanks to this report and the earlier hearing with the sector , much light has been thrown on the specific problems .
Both the present situation and future prospects are clearly detailed in the document .
We are called upon to do our utmost to ensure that nightmares like the Erika and the Prestige disasters are consigned to oblivion , and that henceforth the protection of the environment and of marine ecosystems has priority .
The interests of sensitive European maritime and fishing areas must come first .
That is where fish and shellfish are produced , the ecosystem is preserved and thousands of families earn their living .
Many other jobs complement traditional fishing practices .
They are closely connected to the latter and dependent on them .
I therefore urge you to follow the course outlined in Mr Martin 's report so as to ensure that European aquaculture itself remains on the right course .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Martin on his own-initiative report , and on the quality of his work .
He deserves special congratulations because he has succeeded in achieving unanimity within the Committee on Fisheries , and because of the standard of the hearing he so skilfully arranged .
In particular , I would like to thank Mr Martin for the speed with which he incorporated into this report the request for ad hoc instrument to be resorted to when environmental disasters occur , regardless of whether they are due to natural causes .
The current situation in Galicia following the accident involving the Prestige is a case in point .
The aquaculture sector has been hit particularly hard .
Aquaculture is an emerging sector within Community fisheries .
Consequently , it faces many challenges and uncertainties .
It needs Community support to achieve excellence in production , to innovate , and to enable the ventures to become more competitive and to operate in an environmentally friendly manner .
Support is also needed to allow these enterprises to promote themselves to consumers and to create jobs in areas where they are most needed .
The Community must make progress on denominations of origin for high quality aquaculture products linked to specific localities .
A special section on the promotion of this type of product should be added to the FIFG regulations .
Amongst other places , members of the Committee on Fisheries visited Scotland and Andalusia .
Such visits enabled us to gain first-hand knowledge of the problems of the sector and of its potential .
We were in a position to appreciate the difficulties facing producers on site .
We met with salmon producers in Scotland and in Ireland , and learnt about their problems .
We marvelled at the skills displayed by sturgeon producers in Granada .
We realised the significance of the experimental farming of sea bream and bass in former Roman salt pans in the province of Cadiz .
We gained an understanding of the marketing problems too .
Hence our belief that one of the Community 's priorities must be to identify new high quality species , and add them to the list of preferential species .
The development of research at Community level , and the exchange of new practices related to these species and their farming must also be prioritised .
The Socialist Group would welcome a directive providing for the regulation of organic aquaculture , and taking account of the crucial factors in this type of production .
I have in mind the use of traditional methods , environmental factors , temperatures and the availability of water .
Special funding should be made available to assist organic production and the promotion and sale of such products .
We urge the Commission to take into account the fact that market saturation is not an issue in connection with the rearing of certain species such as turbot .
This is because the farming of this species is a recent innovation , and is only just being developed .
We therefore believe the Commission should continue to support the establishment of new facilities for farming such species , and that suitable provision should be made in the regulations governing the use of FIFG funds .
The Commission had indeed supported some new facilities for turbot farming .
Even so , given the rapid increase in demand and the relative growth of the industry we believe more assistance is called for .
Aquaculture is a fisheries sector with great potential .
It must receive Community support if it is to develop in an orderly fashion .
First of all I would like to congratulate Mr Martin on the excellent result .
The problems and challenges surrounding aquaculture were brought to the fore well in his report .
You can also tell that he did his own research and went to look at the places where this work is being done .
I do have a couple of comments , however .
One of aquaculture 's most significant problems is its poor image , which is the result of a lack of knowledge .
We will only be able to eliminate this lack of knowledge if we have clear test data at our disposal .
The European Union must therefore enable research to be carried out .
Clarity will result in a better image , and this will enable the sector to solve a major problem , which it must do by means of communication .
With regard to the finances , the economic viability of the sector is a significant concern in Europe .
If we want to offer opportunities for long-term economic viability , we must not allow the sector to become addicted to subsidies .
Self-help is better .
My starting point is : allow the market to go its own way , start up and drive itself onwards , and the sector should then be able to look after itself .
Apart from that , we do want to handle the frameworks responsibly , so we must define frameworks and preconditions ourselves .
This market must be put on the right track .
Regulation must be simple , clear and honest .
Removing regulatory barriers will make the market more consistent , more transparent and consequently more efficient .
This provides better opportunities for competitively priced products , which will also benefit European consumers .
Furthermore , consumers benefit from food safety and transparency , both of which are particularly important .
It must always be possible to guarantee food safety .
We must , however , remain rational in this regard and not make ridiculous demands .
If something is 100 % good , it does not need to be 150 % good .
Let us keep both feet on the ground .
Imposing excessive demands will pull the plug on small businesses , and they will not survive .
I therefore call for simple regulation .
Clear and workable on the one hand , and controllable and enforceable on the other .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party will endorse this report .
I think that aquaculture makes a positive contribution to the preservation of natural fish stocks .
Mr President , this report expresses a positive position towards aquaculture , which we support , because we believe this will always only be a complement to the fisheries sector and not a replacement for it .
The report places aquaculture in the context of sustainable development and the precautionary principle , which requires , in particular , full attention to be paid to environmental issues and the production of genetically modified fish to be rejected .
We agree with the rapporteur 's argument for maintaining aid under the FIFG and the participation of the main parties involved , the need for research to be promoted and for an economic instrument to be created to support possible crisis situations in the sector , such as natural disasters .
Nevertheless , we wish to draw attention to particular aspects and special needs that must be taken account of in this activity .
Aquaculture must not be compared with any industry other than farming and livestock breeding , given that it has direct consequences for the development of species and the environment , specifically coastlines and alternative land uses .
Furthermore , opportunities for the intensification and verticalisation of production can present major risks for human and animal health , which must be monitored so as to prevent any type of ' mad cow disease ' for fish .
Hence the need for greater support for research into this activity , for the use of production techniques , hygiene and safety standards , by making the application of the precautionary principle a priority , and for reducing environmental impacts , with specific assistance needing to be given to small and medium-sized enterprises .
Lastly , I wish to inform you that our group supports both this report on European aquaculture , by , Mr Martin , whom I congratulate , and the report by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , whom I also congratulate , on fishing in international waters , which we will be discussing here today .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to wish everyone here in the House a happy new year !
Secondly , Commissioner , I was very pleased to hear your constructive comments with regard to various studies , procedures and approaches .
It seems there are still positive movements in the fisheries sector after all .
For 30 years , we have failed to curb overfishing in any real way .
Demand , the local employment situation , sectoral interests , scientific evidence and national interests have proved to be irreconcilable .
Indeed , that is why the planned reform of the common fisheries policy turned out to be so limited in scope .
Stocks are continuing to decline .
For this reason , fish farming geared towards sustainability is the only sensible option for the future that I can see at present .
I would like to express my thanks to Hugues Martin .
His own-initiative report on aquaculture is a particularly good example of the pro-active approach adopted by members of the Committee on Fisheries when there are problems to be solved .
The relevant communication from the Commission underlines the fact that Parliament can certainly take the initiative on important issues .
Aquaculture is undoubtedly the alternative to overfishing , which has no future .
In recent years , as we have heard , it has developed very positively and has created countless jobs in the European Union as well .
It has become an important industry in coastal regions , offering further potential , which must be fully exploited .
However , it is not a panacea .
It is worth looking more closely .
Fish farming creates similar problems to intensive animal rearing on land .
Waste discharges , parasites , chemicals , fish feed : these are just some of the key words .
To cite only one example , the total annual discharge of waste from the Scottish fish farms is equivalent to that of a major city .
I greatly welcome the operations and success of aquaculture , but I call for sensible , high-quality and sustainable fish farming .
The focus on quantity at rock-bottom prices merely results in ecological and economic problems .
It would therefore be more sensible to work towards quality - and , I believe , also towards diversity of fish species , each of which needs specific attention , and that can be expensive , of course .
As the saying goes , the faster you climb , the harder you fall , and that will not benefit anyone , neither the coastal regions nor the consumers .
Mr President , Commissioner , aquaculture is the fastest growing sector of world food production .
There is cause for acknowledging the Commission 's proposed strategy for aquaculture and for commending the rapporteur , Mr Martin , for his work and his report .
In view of the outcome of the December European Council and the restrictions that , in future fisheries policy , it has been decided to impose upon catches , there is a need for vision and joint strategies for aquaculture in the EU .
The key term is sustainable aquaculture that puts the focus upon employment , consumers and the environment .
It is absolutely crucial to protect regions with strong fishing industries against job losses , creating more employment instead , just as it is to ensure that consumers have healthy and safe fisheries products of high quality and to ensure ecological balance and a sustainable environment .
Access to clean water is an essential , but also limiting , factor when we talk about freshwater fish farming .
This is a reason for stepping up research into increased recourse to recycling and re-use .
There is a need for the use of antibiotics and medicines to be more closely monitored , and also for a system to be established and data assembled for the purposes of health protection .
Investment in cleaner production and technology must be promoted and not be hampered by insufficient knowledge of environmental effects and by extensive use of the precautionary principle , the result of which would be differing conditions of production from one Member State to another , leading to a distortion of competition .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is able to support the rapporteur 's and the Commission 's proposals .
Mr President , the restrictive measures in the Green Paper on fisheries , vessel scrapping , quotas and so forth have put medium and - even more so - small fishing enterprises out of business .
I come from an area in Greece with a large number of small and medium-sized fishing enterprises and have seen this for myself .
At the same time , and this is not unrelated to what I have just said , there is a burgeoning aquaculture sector , which big business is invading in a big way .
I have nothing against aquaculture , but I am against this sort of unaccountable development , which flouts even basic hygiene and environmental standards and , unfortunately , the more aquaculture is taken over by big business , the greater this unaccountability will become .
This report reflects the growing importance of this sector .
It sets out the conditions needed in order for aquaculture to flourish , such as finding sites , applying principles of sustainable use , advertising products , fair terms of competition , introducing certain hygiene measures , protection against the introduction of genetically-modified fish , respect for the environment and so on .
However , these proposals relate mainly to technical matters .
They fail to get to the root of the problem and address the issues which will inevitably arise in the future as these enterprises expand , such as serious hygiene problems and anything from unfortunate to disastrous environmental repercussions .
The capitalist structure and expansion policies of these companies , in which the profit factor rules supreme , are already leading , where aquaculture is concentrated in the hands of big business , to rearing methods , livestock and fish farms which are bad both for public health and the environment .
By failing to address these major problems , the report leaves small producers , the public and the environment out on a limb .
Finally , as regards our rapporteur 's call on the Greek presidency to prevent Prestige-type disasters from reoccurring , I fear that this call will fall on deaf ears , given that the Greek presidency has never made any secret of its ties with the shipping industry .
Mr President , I wish to start by congratulating Mr Martin on his excellent initiative , because it presents a new view of creating aquatic breeding grounds and aquaculture .
As we all know , under the reform of the Common fisheries policy , the Commission has made thorough-going changes to management policies and to fishing fleet renewal policies .
In particular it has proposed eliminating support for fleet renewal , limiting aid for modernisation and adopting a fleet management policy that makes its restructuring process unviable , even for countries such as Portugal , which have not only reached their targets but have exceeded them .
This type of measure has drastically affected the size of fishing fleets and , consequently , has reduced their activity .
The consequences of this policy have represented and still represent a genuine sacrifice on the part of Portugal 's coastal communities , which have for decades lived from the sea and because of it .
It is therefore on their behalf and on the behalf of all Europeans who live from the sea that I am speaking in this plenary , and that I am trying to support solutions likely to keep the economic , social and cultural costs of these Community measures to a minimum .
These are measures that are extremely fish friendly but appear to hold both fishing and those who have always lived from this activity in contempt .
I believe that aquaculture can made into something complementary to traditional fishing , on the one hand benefiting from the experience gained by those who have always been involved in fishing activities and , on the other , providing these people with a full professional rehabilitation in the same sector of activity .
The increasing importance of this sector requires solid investment by the Union , not only in scientific research but also in training and in professional qualifications , in the installation and modernisation of structures and equipment and in health protection , particularly with regard to the use of high-quality meal and oils , to limiting the use of antibiotics and to rejecting genetically modified fish .
There are approximately 150 Community regulations on aquaculture .
It is not , however , the high number of regulations that provide guarantees of effective legal protection in this field , but improved quality in the production of Community legislation and in the definition of measures to be adopted .
This quality can be improved not only by correctly implementing and targeting Community investment , but also by simplifying legislation , making it more coherent and more comprehensible to those for whom it is intended and , consequently , making its implementation more effective .
These are , in my opinion , elements that are crucial for the necessary change of mentality and of image that even today damage the public perception , especially consumer perception , of this activity with regard to some species of fish .
Lastly , everyone would agree that we need to amend the regulation on the financial instrument for fisheries guidance under the CFSP , in to order make aquaculture eligible for subsidies for young people 's start-up , for small and medium-sized businesses , for promoting the quality of fishery products , for promotional campaigns for their consumption , for establishing environment-friendly practices , etc , etc .
This , then , is my appeal to the Commission , in the person of Commissioner Solbes Mira : - and I am sorry that Commissioner Franz Fischler is not here - please do not allow this matter to fall into oblivion and please adopt effective measures to promote the aquaculture sector even more and with an eye to the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , twenty years ago aquaculture was hailed as the solution for declining fish catches .
The dream was that it would also be able to provide a substantial proportion of the protein requirements of people living in the world 's famine areas .
Like many dreams , however , this one came to nothing .
The food conversion rate of farmed fish is low .
To produce one kilogram of fish you do not need four kilograms of feed , as you do for mammals , but only one-and-a-half to two kilograms .
Unfortunately , a large proportion of this feed has to be made up of animal protein .
Protein in fish feed comes from fishmeal , which in turn comes from industrial fish catches .
These are done with a kind of nylon stocking that denudes entire areas .
They not only catch adult fish but undersized fish as well ; they also process cod blood , amongst other things .
There is therefore little point in talking about cod replenishment plans if you do not restrain industrial fishery first .
This can be done by quotas , but also by compelling purchasers of fishmeal to look for alternative raw materials such as vegetable protein or zooplankton .
I appreciate that these alternative raw materials are not readily available .
It is therefore very important to provide a financial stimulus for research into these alternatives and where possible to encourage it .
This will be of benefit not only to cod stocks in the North Sea but also to the world 's hungry .
If science can tap these alternative sources of protein , the dream for aquaculture may yet come true .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rich Romans at the beginning of our era , between the first century BC and the first century AD , were the first to breed certain species of fish and molluscs .
This was practised more , however , as a costly and fashionable pastime than as an economic activity .
The sea-fish rearing ponds were then greatly admired for their beauty and as a symbol of the prestige that they represented .
Traces of at least 50 fish rearing ponds dating from the Roman period have been identified along the Mediterranean rim .
Later on , particularly in the nineteenth century , some countries developed beds of oysters , which were considered - quite rightly - to be a species of food for the refined palate .
Only in the latter decades of the twentieth century , however , did we see the rapid expansion of aquaculture , in response to the danger of fish resources being exploited to extinction .
In fact , in 40 years , world fish production has increased fourfold , and today stands at around of 100 million tonnes , and world demand is increasing inexorably , in line with demographic growth .
Although aquaculture cannot replace fishing in the environment , it is , nevertheless , designed to complement and enhance some much-loved and sought after species that today feature on our daily fish menus and that fishing cannot supply in sufficient quantities .
In future , aquaculture is bound to grow .
What is essentially required is bringing to fish production the same changes that farming and livestock breeding underwent , moving from simple hunting and gathering to the creation and production of animal and vegetable foods .
Such changes are not made , however , Mr President , without problems , particularly of an ecological nature , with regard to consumer health protection and even with regard to the well-being of the fish .
Mr Martin addresses all of this in a thorough , rigorous and intelligent way in his report , which should become the textbook for aquaculture in the European Union .
Mr President , I too am grateful to the rapporteur because I believe this report enables us to set down some definitive points : first of all aquaculture as a substantial source of supplementary income , especially for fishermen who live and work in marginal areas ; and secondly its capacity for reducing fishing and for preserving our resources .
A few problems remain , however , especially for small-scale fishing and traditional fishing .
Conversion to aquaculture should attract aid because it is expensive : financial resources are needed for the initial investment and to get through the first three years , which are almost always unproductive .
The Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance should include specific , targeted , fast credit facilities , or aquaculture will remain an option only for the well-off .
The Commission 's target of 8 000 to 10 000 more jobs is an ambitious challenge , and it will require a solid commitment to promote the economic profitability of aquaculture .
Another objective - one which Parliament is particularly concerned with - is food safety , environmental impact and animal health .
In this respect , there is a need for a code of conduct , with well-defined rules and parameters , and , above all , there is a need to ensure that all products from third countries comply with our standards of hygiene , food safety and animal welfare .
This is not just to prevent unfair competition , as one might imagine , but principally to make an effective improvement to the quality of our sustainable development .
Mr President , Commissioner Solbes Mira - who has previously been a Minister for Fisheries and is therefore not insensitive to this debate , despite not currently being responsible for the sector - I wish to address my first words of congratulation to Mr Martin , who has proved once again that he is an excellent MEP by producing this magnificent report , which is entirely appropriate to the current situation .
Congratulations , Mr Martin .
This report gives us an excellent analysis of the current state of aquaculture in the European Union and also provides us with important guidelines for the future .
Amongst these I should like to emphasise the need to draw up integrated environmental management plans for both coastal and inland areas , since the need for such environmental plans has become evident following the recent Erika and Prestige disasters .
Secondly , the need to increase food safety in order to ensure the health and confidence of Europe 's citizens , promoting research and adequate funding of the sector , both for new units and for modernising existing ones .
It is clear , therefore , that aquaculture has a great future .
Nevertheless , as a consequence of recent food crises that have beset Europe , consumers have become suspicious of aquaculture .
It must be stated , however , that intensive production is not necessarily synonymous with the absence of hygienic conditions .
This is why we in the European Union have a set of standards for technical requirements that do not exist in other parts of the world .
This means that there is a high degree of monitoring of these hygiene conditions .
Nevertheless , these rules must be reinforced and improved so that our citizens view aquaculture-produced fish with complete confidence .
Mr President , when we were discussing the compromise version of this text , all of the groups felt that the step change in the Northern dimension that will take place on enlargement will entail alterations to regional policy .
Therefore we would like to insert an overarching paragraph at the beginning of point 3 , which reads as follows : ' adapting the general approach to the changing situation where partner countries become Members in the EU , noting the specific needs this creates for regional development and cross-border cooperation . '
Mr President , the idea is an excellent one and is already incorporated in the jointly adopted motion for a resolution , and thus no longer needs to be added here .
We therefore do not support this verbal amendment .
You are against it , Mrs Myller , but if there are not 32 Members of the European Parliament who are against it , the amendment will be put to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0421 / 2002 ) by Mr Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the activities of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) [ 2002 / 2095 ( INI ) ]
Regarding Amendment No 6 :
Mr President , in agreement with my colleagues , I would like to table an oral amendment to Amendment No 6 .
We wish to add something to the second line , namely that as regards the things we do not want the Bank to finance , this relates only to the expansion of the nuclear sector . We would like to insert the following words : expressly excludes any expansion of the nuclear sector from .....
That is the oral amendment .
Mr Posselt , on the matter of the location for the next European Parliamentary assembly , I think it is still too early .
We should wait a little before taking a specific line or making decisions on this .
This report has the merit of reminding us of the important purpose of the EBRD , which is to create a market economy likely to strengthen democracy in the countries in transition , which often leads it to run risks and not to systematically seek State guarantees .
Consequently , it invests where other banks fear to tread .
The EBRD has been largely concentrating its activities on developing small and medium-sized businesses , developing , on the one hand , aid programmes for local banks , and , on the other , promoting the establishment of banks specialising in providing loans to small and medium-sized enterprises and micro-loans .
We are pleased that the rapporteur considers the activity of the EBRD to be broadly satisfactory , despite his opinions and warnings about the supposed dogmas of ' ultraliberalism ' or of uncontrolled liberalisation , which no one wants to guide the activity of this institution .
These are , in short , the reasons that have led me to support this report .
I have voted for this report , because I agree in particular with the views it expresses on the ' positive effect ' that the EBRD 's activity has had on the economies of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
These economies are extremely weak and lack the mechanisms , habits and culture of the market and of competition .
In fact , the widespread opening up to capital and the institutions ' acceptance of private initiative as a dynamic source of development have had some perverse and worrying effects - which the rapporteur details : a government of kleptocrats and the impoverishment of the population - which must be countered .
I therefore agree with the suggested response , which is to develop the entrepreneurial fabric of these countries , especially by promoting mechanisms for granting industrial and commercial credit to small and medium-sized enterprises and microcredit for which , as we are shown , there is enormous demand and which enjoys a very high level of return flows .
In general , I would underline the emphasis that has been put on aims for social cohesion , stability policy , job creation and for effectively improving people 's living standards .
Indeed , despite being a banking institution , the EBRD has some unique characteristics , being bound to fulfil a mandate that goes far beyond merely managing money or making a profit .
The EBRD must continue to function as an institution that shares the spirit of solidarity and cohesion that are a collective aim of the European Union .
Hugues Martin report ( A5-0448 / 2002 )
The current scale of aquaculture in Europe is demonstrated by the 1.8 million tonnes of fish , shellfish and molluscs that it produces , and by the 57 000 jobs that it provides .
In order to guarantee the sector 's future , as the rapporteur proposes , we must take account of aspects such as the following : the drawing up and management of integrated environmental management plans , for both coastal and inland waters ; increasing food safety in order to guarantee animal health and consumer confidence , stepping up research in technological , environmental , and health terms in order to find new solutions , and adequate funding of the sector , both for new units and for modernising existing ones .
This is why , given the evidence of the difficult situation facing many species of wild fish , aquaculture can be seen as a complementary alternative to fishing with a certain future .
We must , however , overcome the crisis of confidence in aquaculture products , promoting food safety measures and modernising production technologies .
It is against this backdrop that I support the Martin report .
- ( NL ) In the past , the farming of sea fish seemed to be an absurd measure thought up by companies who were looking for new opportunities to tap into a market that would make them big profits .
As the world population continues to grow apace and the seas are being emptied of fish at an alarming rate , it looks as if the farming of sea fish will probably be inevitable .
Not in order to tap into a market but as an essential contribution to food supplies .
Fishing villages on the coast that have lost their old source of income will probably be happy to join in .
This change is not without risks .
If we do go down this road , we will need guarantees to prevent accidents and unacceptable situations .
Sick and deformed fish in overcrowded cages in coastal zones , in other words a new type of bio-industry , is something we do not want .
Genetically modified fish in such cages can escape and irreversibly change all the life in the sea , for example , by wiping out any natural fish that are left .
Adding substances that have never been used before to encourage fish to grow fast and thus increase the yield may contribute to further contamination of the sea .
It is therefore a good thing that we are paying more attention to information about the consequences , protection of the marine environment and animal welfare which is threatened by this industry .
- ( DA ) We are abstaining from voting on the overall report by the Committee on Fisheries because , even though the committee 's report is an improvement upon the Commission 's proposals , we are of the view that , in general , the committee 's report is in favour of the further development of the aquaculture sector in the EU .
Since there continue to be many problems associated with this sector , including pollution , we choose to abstain from voting , even though we acknowledge the sterling work done by the committee .
The next item is a report ( A5-0446 / 2002 ) by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on fishing in international waters within the framework of the common fisheries policy 's external measures [ 2002 / 2024 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , there are many endangered stocks world-wide .
We in Scotland know how painful it is for the fishing industry when crisis conditions are reached , but we cannot solve problems in the EU by exporting them .
We must seek responsible and sustainable fisheries everywhere .
The ELDR would like to thank Mrs Miguélez Ramos for her hard work on the dossier ; we find particularly valuable the stress that is placed on the need to secure greater compliance with international law and for improved measures against illegal and unreported fishing .
In this context we agree that the Commission must be resourced in a way that allows it to play a fuller role in regional fisheries organisation .
We have , however , regularly expressed our concern on two issues .
First , our fisheries activity at international level , and in particular any agreements reached directly with third countries , must be made compatible with our development policy .
Secondly , the cost of the external dimension of the CFP is already approaching a third of its total budget .
This cost is likely to increase if we are serious about fuller participation in regional fisheries organisations and about securing greater compliance with international law .
It has already been said that each euro invested from public funds generates another three in business terms .
In these circumstances it seems only appropriate that those vessel owners who benefit from third-country agreements should take on a fairer share of the financial burden involved .
The ELDR amendments address these developmental and financial concerns .
We hope that the House will support them and that such issues will be given much fuller consideration in the debate on the recent Commission communication on fisheries agreements with third countries .
Madam President , as regards fishing in international waters we need a responsible and non-exploitative approach .
We cannot continue to export our problems .
I would like this House to support Mrs Attwooll 's amendments , which go some way towards improving the report , and my group will definitely be voting for these amendments .
However , we cannot vote for the report itself , even if - as we hope - those amendments are adopted , because of the underlying policy and belief that we in the European Union can export our over-capacity , and that we have some historic right to exploit developing countries .
It is true that down the centuries many Member States have colonised other countries and unjustly exploited the weaker and poorer countries of the world , but in the 21st century we should realise that the imperialist approach is wrong .
We need to look at the social and economic contribution we make to developing countries , and in relation to fishing agreements this leaves a lot to be desired .
This is not just a Spanish problem .
To my own shame my own country , Ireland , has the Atlantic Dawn , which is an exploitative vessel .
Like many other huge vessels - in fact it is worse than other vessels because it is one of the largest there is - it goes to developing countries , acting as if it had some right to exploit the resources of other countries without any checks .
Despite what has been said about European Union agreements , at least there is a certain amount of control , though they leave a lot to be desired .
However , when it comes to private agreements , there is no control whatsoever .
We need to look at our position as regards developing countries .
I support what Mrs Attwooll has said .
We cannot say one thing , and then do another .
Madam President , this report comes before the European Parliament at a time of growing concern around the world about the effects of the European Union 's deals with third world countries .
Not least , the World Wildlife Fund has been very vocal in its condemnation of these deals .
I am encouraged that even in this Parliament , just one month ago , over 100 Members voted against the Senegal deal .
To my astonishment I even agree with my own Foreign Office , for the first time ever .
Even they recognise that these deals are just not working .
The report is very defensive in tone .
It claims that EU fishermen ' are not pirates ' .
As to compliance with all the rules , that claim is distinctly at variance with the current report from the Court of Auditors .
What is most disturbing is that the rapporteur and the Commissioner seem to be arguing that if we did not take up these fishing rights some other nation would and that somehow that might be even worse .
Even if that were true - and I would not expect to see such a puerile argument - the fact must be that two wrongs do not make a right .
Let us remind ourselves of what those wrongs are .
These deals are causing environmental devastation to less developed countries which , in biological terms , is like setting fire to the Serengeti .
This is a form of European Union imperialism and it is denying development to these third world countries which otherwise could benefit their own economies .
Furthermore these deals are morally repugnant , in that they directly and indirectly cause the deaths of hundreds of indigenous black African fishermen every year .
What this report asks us to do is to close our eyes , when in fact people are increasingly beginning to open their eyes .
That is why we should reject this report .
I suspect that there will still be a majority in favour , but be aware that people are waking up and will not tolerate these deals for very much longer .
Madam President , Commissioner , the great interest which you have witnessed in this House today - even though you yourself are not responsible for fisheries - has , I hope , made it clear how much our ideas deserve support , both in the Committee on Fisheries and in the Commission .
We have made one thing clear today : we do not want fish out of a test-tube .
We do not want fish only from aquaculture or a standardised packet off a supermarket shelf .
We want more , even though the facts about our seas are bleak .
The fish on our plates comes more and more rarely from European Union waters .
The indigenous supply cannot meet European demand .
This indigenous supply does not offer an adequate prospect for the future .
We are therefore reliant on fishing in foreign waters , both in international waters and in the coastal zones of other states .
I would like to thank you , Mrs Miguélez Ramos , as rapporteur , for taking up this issue in a detailed own-initiative report and clearly identifying the key problems .
The European Union 's fisheries agreements are an important factor both for supply and employment , especially in the regions which depend on fishing .
Simply rejecting a report , as has just been demanded , cannot be our objective , for we must examine these issues seriously despite all the potential contradictions .
Nor must we lose sight of the fact that we have exploited our own waters to the point where the stocks are exhausted .
We need only think of the reform of the common fisheries policy .
It would be fatal - as one of the previous speakers has said - simply to export these problems elsewhere .
I call for a sustainable approach to the fisheries agreements and a balanced distribution of use , but naturally also for an economically profitable approach , for I do not want to lose sight of reality . However , long-term public subsidies conflict with this goal .
It is absurd to justify the irresponsible exploitation of stocks in other waters with arguments based on fleet reductions and market supply in the European Union .
Ultimately , our key goal must be to safeguard the sustainability of resources , both in European and foreign waters .
However , in this context , we must genuinely accept responsibility , rather than simply seeking plaudits in the short term .
This applies especially to international waters .
Here , prompt action is needed to combat illegal fishing effectively .
Controls alone are not sufficient .
What we need is harmonisation of sanctions at international level .
This can only take place jointly and in a global framework .
The sanctions must not simply be tokenist .
I know that the international community 's mills - and our mills too - grind slowly , but we will continue to give them grist , and we will keep the wheels turning .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place once the afternoon debates have been concluded .
The next item is a statement by the Commission on the effect of low-frequency active sonar on marine life .
Madam President , on behalf of the Commission I should first like to thank the House for the invitation to make a statement on this matter .
The Commission welcomes this opportunity to emphasise once again how much importance the Community attaches to conservation of the marine environment and the protection of its biodiversity .
This importance has already been highlighted by Parliament and by the Council in the Sixth Community Environment Programme .
One of the aims of this programme is to ensure that no further biodiversity is lost after 2010 .
The protection and conservation of wild flora and fauna are also two of the objectives defined in the communication from the European Commission on a strategy for the protection and conservation of the marine environment .
Cetaceans are a sensitive part of marine life .
They are certainly at risk from a range of human activity , but it is not always easy to establish a link between such activity and the condition of these animals .
The Commission is keeping abreast of the current debate on the possible effects of the use of low frequency active sonar on some species of cetaceans .
It may well be that intense tones transmitted at low frequency do disturb these creatures .
More detailed research is however called for to establish just how seriously the transmissions affect them .
Nonetheless , the current uncertainty as to the effects of these transmissions cannot be used as an excuse to avoid taking steps to deal with the matter .
The Commission is of the opinion that extreme caution should be exercised in the use of this technology in view of the possible repercussions for the marine environment .
Ideally , the potential repercussions should be assessed in advance .
Allow me to remind you that cetaceans are protected under Directive 92 / 43 , the Habitats Directive .
One of the obligations it places on Member States is that the latter should take the necessary measures to prevent these species being disturbed .
For these reasons and following recent events in the Canary Islands , at the Habitats Committee meeting on 20 November the Commission requested the national authorities of Member States where similar incidents may have taken place to provide further details on the subject .
We shall now send the Member States a reminder to ensure they respond to our request .
All the information received further to this appeal will be forwarded to the House by the Commission .
Furthermore , the Commission is to ask independent scientific bodies such as the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea to assess the current situation together with available knowledge on the subject .
It is hoped that more information on the possible consequences of the use of low frequency active sonar for the marine environment can be obtained .
Only when sound scientific information is available will it be possible to decide on the nature of the measures needed to supplement those already in place .
Madam President , I wish to thank the Council of Presidents for having included this important issue in the debate , and I would also like to thank the Commissioner .
It has to be said right at the start that it is completely justified to try and develop a defence system to monitor submarines that use new technology , which are difficult to see using conventional passive radar .
It is obvious that submarines that cannot be detected with radar are only used by those with hostile intentions .
We therefore have to keep abreast of developments .
This is a question , however , of what sort of technology we choose and what its price is in ecological terms .
The low frequency active radar system developed by NATO known as LFAS can cause whales to stray onto shores and can damage their internal organs , leading to death .
High decibel and low frequency noise produced by radar can carry for thousands of kilometres in the sea .
There have been whale deaths in the areas where the United States of America has tested the system .
In March 2000 , 17 whales were beached on the shores of the Bahamas Islands and eight of them died whilst the navy 's radar system was being tested in the sea .
Autopsies carried out on the dead whales revealed haematomas in the brain and inner ear cause by extremely loud noise .
The US navy itself stated in its report on the whale deaths in the Bahamas that LFAS had been the most likely cause of death .
In September 2002 in the Canary Islands , and so within the EU area , whale deaths occurred on a scale hardly seen for 20 years , when 15 whales of different species died from haematomas .
NATO was conducting military manoeuvres in the area involving 58 warships and six submarines from different member states of the alliance .
The LFAS equipment produces low frequency noise at 1 000 hertz and an average of 250 decibels to comb the seabed from hundreds of kilometres away .
The effects of loud but low frequency noise on the behaviour of whales and their internal organs are wide-ranging .
The din can cause permanent damage to the ear bones , and brain and lung haemorrhage .
The system can muddle the communication system of whales even a long way off from the sound source as it operates on the same low frequencies that the whales themselves use .
The noise makes it difficult for the whales to orient themselves , form herds , mate and find food .
The link between radar and whale deaths is actually hard to prove because it is very difficult to track whales and study changes in their behaviour over a long period of time .
The US navy has carried out an evaluation of the effects of the system on the environment , but reputable American environmental organisations regard it as flawed .
A federal judge last November prohibited the navy from testing the system in US territorial waters until further notice with reference to the Marine Mammal Protection Act .
Nevertheless , the navy has a permit from a national authority to test the system for a total of 432 hours in other seawaters until August this year .
Until now the navy has agreed to test their equipment a long way off from the coast , and away too from known marine mammal breeding grounds and migratory routes .
Researchers have said , however , that testing is not safe even in the middle of the Pacific Ocean because no one can be absolutely certain as to what the whales ' routes will be .
The system can be used to cover up to 75 % of the world 's seas .
It remains totally unclear as to what effect the system would have in the Mediterranean and Baltic Seas , where the radar range is from shore to shore and animals would not be able to escape the noise .
The EU clearly has an obligation to act and ask for information on the system .
Economic interests are clearly linked to the issue .
Fishermen active in the EU have been concerned over the last year of the effects of radar systems on fish stocks in their fishing grounds .
Although fish might be less prone than marine mammals to the harmful effects of the system , obviously the noise of the radar could drive them away and thus harm people 's livelihoods .
Madam President , I want to thank the Commission for its statement .
On the basis of all I have said we should try to obtain a ban on the use of this radar system until further notice and swiftly discover its effects on marine life .
It would be best if the European Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy would debate the issue and draft a report on it , on the basis of the Commission 's statement we have heard here today and any other data obtained from elsewhere .
This issue is of growing concern both to the public and to this Parliament , and I think the fact that we were able to attract 60 signatures to our oral question on the subject is a clear testimony to that .
As my colleague Mrs Korhola has said , there is more and more evidence that suggests that these highly intensive active sonars pose a very major threat to marine mammals and to fish .
The frightening fact is that this technology exposes them to noise pollution at levels 200 billion times greater than that which we know already disturbs them , and so it is not really surprising that we are already seeing deaths from lung haemorrhages , from hearing loss and disruption of feeding , breeding and communication .
But this technology also constitutes a breach of the United Nations Law of the Sea Convention which requires states to take all measures that are necessary to prevent , reduce and control pollution in the marine environment from any source .
The time has come , accordingly , for NATO and its members to act , and since European Union Member States make up over half of the 19 members of NATO , the EU has a special responsibility to promote action .
For the Commission to respond to a written question of mine on 29 November 2002 simply by saying this type of technology needs to be used with caution is not good enough .
The fact is that this type of technology cannot be used with caution when you consider that , at a hundred miles from the ship which is the source of the noise , this noise can still cause a tearing of the tissues in the air sac , for example , behind whales ' and dolphins ' brains .
That is why we want to see an immediate moratorium on any deployment of LFAS by navies of any NATO country and we want a comprehensive and independent impact assessment to take place .
We also want the US and NATO countries to prepare and make public the studies on the potentially adverse effects of LFAS which are required by law under Article 206 of the Law of the Sea .
We had hoped too that the Council might have been prepared to make a statement on LFAS here this afternoon as well and I am disappointed that it is not here , but there is a clear role for the Commission as well and I have two specific questions for it : will it agree to conduct a study on the impact of LFAS on the marine environment , and will it ensure that the subject is raised in the transatlantic dialogue ?
I look forward very much to your response .
The debate is closed .
The next item is debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( Rule 50 ) .
The next item is a joint debate on the following six motions for resolutions on the humanitarian crisis in North Korea :
B5-0036 / 2003 by Mr Ford and Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists : the humanitarian situation in the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ;
B5-0039 / 2003 by Dr Tannock , Mr Gawronski , Mr Perry and Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats : the humanitarian crisis in North Korea ;
B5-0043 / 2003 by Mr Watson , Mrs Malmström and Mr Andreasen , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party : famine in North Korea ;
B5-0045 / 2003 by Mr Lagendijk , Mr Turmes , Mrs Ahern , Mr Gahrton , Mrs Schroedter , Mr Wuori and Mrs Maes , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance : North Korea ;
B5-0048 / 2003 by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities : the humanitarian crisis in North Korea ;
B5-0051 / 2003 by Mr Vinci , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left : the humanitarian situation in the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea .
Madam President , as North Korean dictator , Kim Jong-Il sips his specially imported French brandy and savours his freshly cooked pizzas cooked by two Italian chefs , as he mulls over what he will say to the UN envoy , many thousands of his oppressed subjects , including babies , are literally starving to death as his disastrous Stalinist economic policies have brought the country to its knees .
Even worse is that many of his people are rotting as political prisoners in re-education camps where they are being tortured and beaten .
The country outrageously styles itself ' the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ' , and yet the people have never been consulted , as Mr Kim inherited his mandate from his late dictator father .
Not only has that country , which is a brutal , secretive , communist dictatorship , repeatedly violated international agreements such as the 1994 one to end its bomb-making uranium enrichment programme , it has also in the past violated every standard of civilised behaviour , from kidnapping Japanese civilians - which the government justified , almost unbelievably , on the grounds of needing language instructors for its spies - to engaging in political assassinations such as blowing up the South Korean cabinet in Rangoon a few years ago .
It was also responsible for blowing up a South Korean airliner .
More recently - and this is the reason for my motion for resolution - it has starved many thousands of its people to death due to its disastrous isolationist economic policies and the fact that it has chosen to maintain one million men under arms with an immoral diversion of food and resources to the military , irrespective of the deprivation suffered by its civilian population .
It remains a failing and rogue state and a very dangerous one at that .
It could wreak havoc on South Korea with which it technically remains at war .
Consequently , the EU must tread carefully and concentrate on delivering humanitarian aid to its long-suffering people .
Nevertheless , aid donors must still insist on verification procedures to ensure that the food gets through to those it is intended for and is not given to the army or , worse still , resold to raise cash for more armaments or luxuries for its political and military elite .
North Korea is the biggest humanitarian scandal of our time .
While the ' Great Leader ' lives in the lap of luxury he is literally allowing his own people to die .
More than two million people are said to have starved to death over the past few years and more than 13 million are suffering from malnutrition .
Communist misrule has ensured that the malnourished people are left out in the cold and are deprived of proper medical care .
In this workers ' paradise , about 200 000 people are kept imprisoned in re-education camps for political reasons .
What is more , China is systematically returning North Korean political refugees , knowing full well that inhumane punishment awaits the returnees .
An appropriate response from the world community is seriously hindered by the nuclear game with which Kim Jong-Il is challenging the world .
It is not clear whether it is possible to talk to Kim in a reasonable way .
America 's attitude towards North Korea is a model of caution compared with her stance towards Iraq .
As far as this nuclear threat is concerned , the European Union must fall in line with the United States - insofar as she does have a line .
Weapons of mass destruction in the hands of an unpredictable dictator are a permanent threat to world peace , and this cannot therefore be tolerated .
We must also focus on humanitarian aid in order to prevent human suffering from taking on even greater proportions .
It is a good thing that the Commission is intending to earmark another EUR 9.5 million for women and children over and above the 50 million already spent .
The question is whether this is enough .
I assume the Commission is willing to do more should it be necessary .
I would appreciate confirmation of this from the Commission .
North Korea has gone from bad to worse as a result of her self-imposed isolation .
We must look for ways of breaking through this and putting an end to the biggest humanitarian scandal of our time .
Madam President , there is currently a serious humanitarian crisis in North Korea .
In bitter winter conditions , the combination of few or no energy sources and lack of food is crippling .
So the Verts / ALE Group welcomes the Commission 's decision to provide EUR 9.5 million in food aid to North Korea .
But there is a need to reconsider fundamentally our approach to ensuring energy supplies .
The Korean Energy Development Organisation , KEDO , was unsuited to meeting the country 's needs and infrastructure , and this situation cannot be allowed to continue .
We condemned it and the European Union 's approach to the energy crisis needs to be completely overhauled .
I was pleased to hear Commissioner Patten declare that the European Union will have to develop an alternative energy programme for North Korea .
We welcome the Commission 's position on this , and we look forward to the development of a suitable programme .
We need to look again at our policy of cooperation with North Korea in terms of a poverty alleviation programme to offset the effects of introducing a market economy , democratic reforms and respect for human rights , and official diplomatic recognition for North Korea by other states as well as the European Union .
This would open up opportunities for North Korea to access funds from the IMF , the Asian Development Bank and others .
The key , as Mr Swoboda said earlier in this debate , is to continue to talk , to continue with the negotiations and , above all , to work for a peaceful solution to this crisis .
Madam President , this afternoon we will be descending into one of the last dark dungeons of the Cold War .
On the 38th parallel there hangs an ' iron curtain ' that is more hermetically sealed than the Berlin Wall ever was .
Behind it , after the ' Great Leader ' Kim Il-Sung , the ' Dear Leader ' Kim Jong-Il is now playing the depressing game of the ' Great Lie ' .
In what is virtually dynastic succession , father and son have been sacrificing the people of North Korea to their megalomaniac self-glorification and personal dictatorship for more than half a century .
Pyongyang has long tried to deny this awful reality .
The testimony of those North Koreans who have managed to escape has been rejected as lies .
Satellite pictures provide incontrovertible evidence , however : there really are slave camps for political prisoners .
Our eyes have been opened very late to the acute danger that the North Korean regime poses - to the international community as well .
The immediate cause of this was Pyongyang 's recent unilateral withdrawal from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty .
The possible development of North Korean nuclear weapons and the clandestine sale of these weapons , including missile systems , now requires a quick response from the international community .
I therefore call on the Council and the Commission to make a case for a regional diplomatic approach to the North Korean crisis .
Incidentally , the international community should emphatically reject Pyongyang 's diktat - a non-aggression pact with the USA enforced by the threat of nuclear weapons - out of compassion for the citizens of North Korea behind Kim 's ' iron curtain ' who have to spend their lives in conditions that are almost impossible to imagine , and also for the sake of their safety .

Madam President , various breaches of human rights in North Korea have been mentioned here , breaches which offend our moral sense and our concept of civilisation .
After visiting that country three times , however , I believe the most aberrant , most monstrous kind of breach of human rights is the fact that , if today North Korea held free , democratic elections as we do , the current leader , Kim Jong-Il , would win them .
This shows , first , the terrible ability of the North Korean leadership to keep their country isolated from any external interference - and in today 's globalised world that is not easy - and , secondly , the degree of capitulation and humiliation to which the population has been reduced .
The violations and violence not only affect their bodies , through hunger and the concentration camps , but also their minds , for they have been brainwashed and left unable to think , as in the Soviet gulags ; the North Koreans have been reduced to sheep that follow their leader blindly .
This barbarous and , at the same time , grotesque regime must be contained .
I am one of those that believe that the United States ' policy is right , especially in the last few days : they have moderated their demands , they have avoided a crisis with South Korea and they have made overtures to China , a key country for resolving the crisis in the area .
The contribution that Europe can make , that we can make , is only minor on the political front , I am sorry to say .
We can and must do more on a humanitarian level : we must send aid , certainly , but we must also make sure ( as has been said so many times ) that it gets into the right hands , the hands of those that need it .
Despite all the declarations and personal statements given on this , I am not at all certain that there is any guarantee of this today .
I would very much like there to be , and I would very much like the Commission to be able to give us this assurance .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place once the afternoon debates have been concluded .
The next item is a joint debate on the following five motions for resolutions on Equatorial Guinea :
B5-0038 / 2003 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco , Mrs Carlotti , Mr Martínez Martínez , Mr Obiols i Germà and Mr Carnero González , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists : presidential elections and lack of respect for human rights in Equatorial Guinea ;
B5-0040 / 2003 by Mrs Ferrer and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats : Equatorial Guinea ;
B5-0044 / 2003 by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , Mr Sánchez García and Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party : the human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea ;
B5-0046 / 2003 by Mr Rod , Mrs Isler Béguin and Mrs Maes , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance : presidential elections in Equatorial Guinea ;
B5-0050 / 2003 by Mr Marset Campos and Mrs González Álvarez , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left : presidential elections and lack of respect for human rights in Equatorial Guinea .
Madam President , Commissioner , we are very concerned about the human rights situation and also by the slow progress of democracy in Equatorial Guinea .
The trial held last spring , which ended in the conviction of 68 people , showed that there are no legal guarantees that can be backed up internationally , as was clear in the declaration made by this House in June .
The trial broke off what was slow but positive progress , which is reprehensible .
However , it should not be forgotten that it is not always the best solution to shut off channels of communication with a country that is in deficit when it comes to respecting human rights .
We think that we should maintain a critical dialogue , seeking to make gradual progress .
We need to strongly condemn abuses , but we should also acknowledge steps forward when they are made , for example , the freeing of 120 people who had been in prison for some time on 12 October in honour of the 34th anniversary of the independence of Guinea .
I am of course aware that this is not enough , but we must recognise that it took place .
With regard to the slow pace of the democratisation process , it should be criticised that four opposition candidates had to withdraw on the day of the presidential elections due to irregularities in the votes , even though the electoral campaign had run without any serious incidents .
Of course we cannot forget that members of significant parties are being detained or are in exile , such as Severo Moto , the president of the banned Progress Party , who is in exile in Madrid .
We trust that the next elections , the legislative elections planned in a few months ' time , will be held with more guarantees and freedom .
Therefore , in the Resolution being debated today the Guinean Government should be invited to take measures to give credibility to its will to make the system democratic , establishing a serious dialogue with absolutely all of the political movements .
At the same time , the political movements should avoid making speeches like those made by the four candidates who withdrew , which could lead to violence .
We need to criticise what there is to criticise , but help progress to continue .
We cannot therefore support this Resolution , because it is simply a head-on attack on the Guinean Government , which could have counterproductive results and not benefit the people of Guinea or lead towards a democratisation process .
The abuse of power at the expense of the people is the order of the day in Africa .
When a president is elected with 97 % of the votes , the elections are unsound .
The so-called struggle at the ballot box , which resulted in President Obiang holding on to power , was a farce .
This is exactly what we would expect from a government that for years has failed to comply with international recommendations to introduce a democratic order .
The United Nations and European Union missions to observe the elections were not welcome .
The secretary-general of the largest opposition party was arrested .
The opposition leaders were subjected to unfair trials in the spring .
Not surprisingly , all the other candidates apart from the sitting president withdrew from the elections .
Equatorial Guinea is the umpteenth poverty-stricken African country in which someone is clinging on to power , enriching himself , violating human rights and completely ignoring the international community .
The European Union must engage vigorously in the political dialogue .
Any pledge under the ninth European Development Fund is completely out of the question unless the situation improves dramatically .
Even if this situation does improve , in the context of democratisation or capacity building , this regime will claim that this gives them legitimacy .
This political abuse cannot be tolerated .
The opposition leaders and all other political prisoners must be released immediately .
The elections must be declared null and void , and new ones therefore need to be organised .
There must be an international investigation into the way the oil companies operate and the president 's role in them .
Democratisation is a necessary precondition for effectively counteracting poverty .
Poverty in African countries is not only caused by globalisation , restricted access to markets or inadequate aid .
Many African countries mess things up themselves .
Equatorial Guinea is one of those countries in which development is stagnating because of the abuse of power .
Those poor people .
Madam President , Equatorial Guinea has unfortunately been a negative example of an African country for decades , but sadly it is not an isolated case .
We must recognise quite clearly that we have a very substantial responsibility here .
Of course , there are abuses of power , corruption , and dictatorial violations of any attempt at the rule of law in that country .
That is absolutely correct and we must vigorously condemn them .
Yet on the other hand , we ourselves have a responsibility , because this country - like many other African countries - has become a pawn in the international competition for resources , and unfortunately , this involves European interests as well .
The major role played by the oil companies in Equatorial Guinea , but also the diamond trade - and illegal trades such as human trafficking play a part there too - unfortunately destabilise the country as well .
Ethnic and political conflicts - although these are generally rooted in ethnic conflicts - are exploited in a cynical policy designed to safeguard resource supplies .
For this reason , I think that paragraph 7 of the resolution is extremely important , for we have a responsibility here , and we also have opportunities to exert influence .
We genuinely need the proposed report on the oil companies ' role .
I do not endorse the call for an outright boycott and the cessation of all financial assistance .
As a rule , such measures impact not on the dictators , but - if they have any impact at all - on the people of this already benighted country .
I completely agree with my Spanish colleague on this point .
I believe that we must vigorously condemn the abuse of power .
Nonetheless , we must also seek dialogue with President Obiang in order to achieve a situation in which the opposition can gradually resume its work and the exiled politicians can return home . We must also work to ensure that the planned conference on reforming the judicial system can take place .
Unless we start with very basic institution-building in this country - as we sought to do in European countries , as in Kosovo and Bosnia-Herzegovina , where conditions are far more straightforward and stable - we will never achieve any success .
We cannot apply European standards overnight in Equatorial Guinea ; this will take decades of development , which have yet to commence .
This is why , as I have already said , the next steps are dialogue with President Obiang , supporting the conference on the judicial system , the release of the opposition , legalising opposition parties , and fresh elections with international supervision . These are the next steps we must take , but it would be disastrous if we now tried to run before we could walk .
I therefore recommend a measured approach .
Simply imposing sanctions is not a solution .
Above all , we should not point the finger at others ; we should accept our own responsibility first , and that means examining the role played by our oil companies in what is sadly a very dirty game .
Madam President , my colleague and friend Mr Ojeda used the term ' in deficit ' when referring to the Government of Equatorial Guinea in terms of democracy and human rights .
In terms that are sure to please Commissioner Solbes , who deals with economic and monetary affairs , the deficit is such that the Government of Guinea is simply bankrupt in this respect .
Not only is it bankrupt , but it is also continually failing to comply with each and every one of the commitments made , first of all to the European Union and , in general , to the international community in terms of moving towards the rule of law .
The recent elections were a clear example of the fact that Mr Obiang does not want democracy or human rights in his country .
An even more dramatic example was the trial of the opposition which resulted not only in political prisoners but also in deaths due to torture at Black Beach prison , which we have condemned in this House on several occasions .
The European Union has a responsibility towards democracy and human rights in Equatorial Guinea and some of its Member States have a twofold responsibility .
Two of them are currently sitting on the Security Council : France and Spain .
I therefore feel that it is essential that the European Union - why not at the suggestion of those countries ? - approve a joint action to commit itself to democracy and human rights , and also that it talk to another country that is extraordinarily interested in Guinea , not due to these matters , but because of oil , that is the United States .
It is therefore highly important that we retain the paragraph of the Resolution regarding a code of conduct for the oil companies , as we cannot allow them to act without one .
Oil , the great resource that is draining the citizens of Equatorial Guinea , is now the crux of the matter and the source of the strength of President Obiang Nguema 's regime .
The European Union therefore needs to act firmly ; let us adopt this common action , let us talk with the United States , let us make an agreement with Washington and let us also call on the oil companies to fulfil their obligations , quite simply to comply with their obligations towards people .
The Commission needs to assess what is happening with oil in Equatorial Guinea .
I would even ask for more , I would ask the Commission to consider reopening its office in Malabo .
The United States are going to reopen their Embassy .
Why ?
For oil .
Let us reopen our office .
Why ?
For human rights and democracy .
The European Socialists therefore entirely support this Resolution , because it will be well received by those who , like Celestino Bacale , the CPDS presidential candidate , who brought thousands of supporters together at campaign meetings , will be able to say : the European Union is with us , like President Cox , who in his time spoke clearly and firmly in favour of democracy and human rights in Guinea .
Thank you , Commissioner Solbes Mira .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place once the afternoon debates have been concluded .
The next item is a joint debate on the following five motions for resolutions on Chechnya :
B5-0037 / 2003 by Mr Paasilinna and Mr Sakellariou , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists : non-extension of the OSCE mandate in Chechnya ;
B5-0041 / 2003 by Mr Suominen , Mr Oostlander and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats : non-extension of the OSCE mandate in Chechnya ;
B5-0042 / 2003 by Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party : Chechnya ;
B5-0047 / 2003 by Mr Staes , Mr Wuori , Mrs Schroedter , Mr Cohn-Bendit , Mrs Isler Béguin and Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance : the situation in Chechnya ;
B5-0049 / 2003 by Mrs Ainardi and Mr Vinci , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left : the situation in Chechnya .
Madam President , unfortunately , the situation in Chechnya really has not improved , despite the efforts to persuade Russia to adopt a rational course .
We have repeatedly stressed that the fight against terrorism is an entirely justified , indeed necessary , fight .
However , in the case of Chechnya - and this applies to similar situations in the context of Iraq and other regions as well - we have always stressed that bombs , military aggression and military measures are unsuitable as a means of resolving the issue of terrorism .
For this reason , we also need to make it very clear to Russia that we are profoundly disappointed that Russia - which is and should be a partner of the European Union - has failed to pursue a rational policy aimed at combating the causes of terrorism as well as terrorism itself .
We are deeply disappointed that people are being forced to return to this unsafe country and that even the expellees are being forcibly repatriated .
We believe that every option must be exhausted to achieve a peaceful solution here .
One such option could be the referendum if it takes place under objective conditions .
The people themselves should have a chance to express their views , and I believe that it would do Putin 's and indeed Russia 's reputation good if Russia could revert to , or basically establish for the first time , a rational and peaceful policy on Chechnya .
Reports from Chechnya are still extremely shocking to us all .
Russian troops ride roughshod over the people in their fight against the rebel troops of the Republic of Chechnya .
There are people there living in extraordinarily wretched conditions , both within Chechnya and outside .
Those who have managed to flee are then forced to return to an area that is really impossible to live in .
Crimes by the military are inadequately prosecuted , and by bringing this resolution we want to protest against this .
Grozny is still extremely unsafe , which indicates that the fight against the so-called rebels in Chechnya has not yet come to an end by a long chalk .
Buildings are being blown up and the people the European Parliament delegation went there to open discussions with are all lying in hospital .
In that context , the best the Russians could do was to postpone the visit of the European Parliament delegation to Chechnya .
The official reason for this is perhaps odd , but we hear through diplomatic channels that this is on account of the fact that security there absolutely cannot be guaranteed , something which the Russian state naturally views as a scandal , which it is .
In that context the OSCE is regarded as a busybody whose mandate should rather not be renewed .
We also protest against that .
We definitely want the OSCE 's mandate to continue , as the OSCE is absolutely necessary for the provision of aid and for political initiatives later on when observing a possible referendum .
Another busybody , Mr Erkel , who was the head of Médecins sans Frontières in Dagestan , the territory bordering on Chechnya , has been kidnapped .
We do not know by whom .
No ransom has been demanded .
It is therefore entirely possible that this man has been captured by the authorities themselves , as has happened in the past .
I have asked the Commission and the Council about this .
Fellow MEPs in various other parties have highlighted this and are completely behind it .
We want the Commission to make efforts to find out what has happened to Mr Erkel and to see whether it would be possible to obtain his release .
Anyway , the European Union must do whatever is possible from a political and community point of view , and the resolution bears witness to this .
A white list for Chechen leaders , as has been proposed in an amendment , seems to us to be counterproductive , however .
It is restrictive , and our group is inclined to think that the Danish government pursued a very good policy on this point . They did not need a white list .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is , I believe , the third or fourth debate on Chechnya in one year .
It shows how determined Parliament is not to remain silent about this war .
According to reports , our Russian friends are not impressed by this type of debate and are also not impressed by the resolutions we are adopting here .
I have always been taught that you must always tell your friends the truth , that you must not withhold anything .
If friends keep quiet in front of each other , they are doing the wrong thing .
I would like to send this message to our Russian friends .
The situation in Chechnya is bad . Let us acknowledge that .
We all know that , and the Russians must also have the courage to acknowledge it .
Various fellow MEPs have already pointed this out .
People disappear , people are tortured and relief workers are kidnapped .
There is a real guerrilla war in progress .
A dirty war on the part of the Russians , but also on the part of the Chechen rebels .
The situation in the refugee camps in Ingushetia is terrible .
Yet the Russians are now trying to force these people to return to Chechnya .
We all know that this is not a good thing to do during the winter months and is in fact impossible .
The OSCE is being removed from Chechnya .
The Russians evidently do not want any busybodies there .
Just as they are actually preventing us from going there with a delegation .
They use what I believe to be specious arguments for this in a letter to our President .
The truth is that they do not have the situation in Chechnya under control at the moment and they cannot guarantee our safety .
We all know that our Russian colleagues are very dissatisfied with the resolutions we are adopting .
Nevertheless , the present resolution is very balanced .
It is a resolution that shows that we in Parliament want a solution and that we really want to make a positive contribution to this .
I therefore call on our Russian colleagues to resume the dialogue with our Parliament in order to engage with us in an honest and proper way and to ensure that we can ultimately bring the two parties together with a view to reaching a political solution .
Madam President , please allow me , at the start of today 's debate , to express my sympathy for the relatives of the victims of the terrorist attack on Grozny .
These crimes , which show utter contempt for human life , can never be justified and the perpetrators must be brought to justice .
Nonetheless , I appeal to those affected and the Russian Government not to retaliate with similar means but to seek a peaceful solution .
This attack 