Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 16 January 1998 .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for your comments regarding the terrible tragedy that plunged the French mountainside into mourning following the avalanche which took the lives of students from the Saint Francis of Assisi secondary school in Montigny-le Bretonneux , along with their teacher and an assistant .
I am sure that , through you , Parliament will be unanimous in expressing its condolences to the families of the victims and in assuring the survivors , their families and the teaching profession of our sorrow and our solidarity .
Thank you , Mr Bernard-Reymond .
I think the applause speaks for itself .
Mr President , I would like Parliament to thank His Holiness the Pope for the visit he made to Cuba , to thank this man whose ideal it has been to unite all the peoples of the world to give them the dignity which is their due .
In addition , Mr President , I would like people to stop talking about Italy in terms of " pizza ' .
It is because of Italy that people are eating and enjoying it throughout the world !
Mr Mezzaroma , as I am sure you will understand , Parliament cannot make a statement on each and every one of the Pope 's visits .
That is not what we are here for .
Mr President , I wish to draw the attention of yourself and Parliament to a recent episode which I consider to be extremely serious .
A delegation made up of a number of European parliamentarians , including myself , from different political groups - although not an official parliamentary delegation , it arose out of the resolution unanimously approved last Thursday in Strasbourg concerning Mrs Karla Tucker who had been condemned to death and was in prison in Texas - was denied access to death row in Gatesville prison in Austin by the governor and prison authorities in Texas .
They barred the way to a delegation which had arrived there on a purely humanitarian mission .
Mr President , I am reporting this fact to the House as a very serious matter which demonstrates contempt , not just for the individual parliamentarians who decided to go on this mission , but for Parliament itself .
Mr Caccavale , I have made a note of your remarks , and I will find out what happened so that appropriate measures can be taken , if necessary .
Ladies and gentlemen , at the invitation of the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , on 19 and 20 January I paid a visit to Northern Ireland .
I had the opportunity of seeing for myself how the European Union is helping to bring new life to run-down areas of Belfast and , through the International Fund for Ireland , providing employment in some of the most sensitive areas of the city .
I was also able to meet some of the families of the victims of the Troubles , who are receiving much-needed support under the European Union special partnership programme .
At a time of great sensitivity for the peace process my visit provided the opportunity for the European Parliament , representing the people of Europe , to show its solidarity with all those in Northern Ireland , who are working for peace and reconciliation .
I would like to take this opportunity of informing the House of the very real appreciation felt in Northern Ireland for the support of the European Union and , on your behalf , to show our support for the British and Irish Governments in their continuous search for peace .
Mr President , I raise a point of order pursuant to Rules 127 and 52 .
You will recall that in September last year , this House decided to refer the whole issue of press intrusion and protection of personal privacy to committee .
At that time it was felt too delicate a matter to be debated on the floor of the House .
This is a serious European problem .
It is now some five months from the date of the death of Diana , Princess of Wales and nearly five months from the time Parliament referred it to committee .
As far as I know , no committee of this House as yet has brought that to the floor .
Could you give me an assurance that this important item will be debated by those committees with the utmost despatch ?
Mr Perry , I cannot give you an assurance on behalf of the committee .
What I can and will do immediately is remind the relevant committee chairmen of the matter which was referred to them and urge them to take the necessary measures and , if necessary , submit proposals to the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , you might write a letter to the relevant committee chairman on this point , but does this mean that the relevant committee chairman , or the relevant committee is sanctioned by the Conference of Presidents to submit an initiative ?
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , since you leapt in so quickly with your comment on the matter , you did not hear my last remark to Mr Perry , which was in fact that , in his case , authorization could be sought from the Conference of Presidents .
So I can confirm what you have just asked .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Friday 16 January 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to mention that my name is not in the Minutes of the Strasbourg session on Friday , and I should like this to be corrected , as I added my name to the list and also took part in the voting that day , which can , of course , be checked .
This is a big problem because the press has been handed a copy of the Minutes , unchecked and with my name missing from them .
In Finland there has been a lot of controversy surrounding this issue .
I would like to ask how the Minutes are matched with the names on the list , who is responsible for this , and how we are going to make sure that all the names down on the list also get into the Minutes , which are distributed to the public and the press .
Mrs Matikainen-Kallström , your comment will be taken into account and included in the Minutes .
Mr President , I too have a comment to make on the Minutes , but I am sorry to say that it is a criticism .
On Friday , the last day of the sitting in Strasbourg , I again referred to speakers ' contributions on the subject of transalpine traffic , and at that point I introduced a clarification .
Unfortunately , this has failed to appear . It is not because the comment I made is of special historic significance , but more for reasons of correctness , that I therefore repeat that , after the contributions of two German PPE Members , I was regrettably forced to say that there seems to me to be a race under way for the stupidest armchair tactician .
I pointed this out again on Friday because I know that a large number of PPE Members and German Members - perhaps even the majority - can see further than the end of their noses when it comes to traffic policy and in this respect support a common approach to the problem .
I am pleased to be able to say today that in the latest agreement with Switzerland the European caravan has also been pulled clear of these trivialities .
I would ask that this be placed in the Minutes .
Mr Rehder , in the first place , I have to tell you that what you are referring to is not a resolution .
The Minutes record resolutions and incidents which need to be recorded there , not what the Members say .
That appears in the verbatim report of proceedings , where you will be able to find your speech .
Secondly , I would remind you that when Members of this House express themselves here they should observe the necessary levels of respect and politeness towards other Members .
They can be critical if they feel that is appropriate , but always in accordance with the courtesy which should be maintained here .
So of course , some of the words you used , at least as they were translated to me , are totally unacceptable .
I want to make that absolutely clear .
Mr President , I am sorry , but if my colleague here and in the Neue Züricher Zeitung has been trying to ridicule two honorable Members of the PPE by referring to them as " armchair tacticians ' , then I can only say firstly , that the remark has made no impression , and secondly , that what matters is not armchair tactics but the interests of employees and businesses in the European Union - and in this respect he has got it wrong .
If he is taking the Swiss side , then he fails to appreciate that many employees and many companies in the European Union have also been placed in a very difficult situation by the present compromise and it is high time that this was said .
( Heckling : But no armchair tactics , please ! )
That is not something which should be included in the Minutes .
It will appear in the verbatim report of proceedings .
( The Minutes were approved )
Financial crisis in South-East Asia
The next item is the Commission communication on the financial crisis in South-East Asia and its potential repercussions on economic and monetary union , followed by questions .
- Thank you for the information , Mr Commissioner , although I do not know whether I should be thanking you or the crisis for having arisen and having been so positive .
One of the concerns which is now increasing in intensity as we prepare for the introduction of the euro is that of inequality of impact and national or sector capacities for response .
In some ways the so-called Asian crisis has proved the relevance of that concern in advance .
For the various Member States , of course , the repercussions are and will be very different .
And they will illustrate the difficulties that arise from the imposition of an artificial form of financial stability against a background of potential and existing unstable situations .
At the sectorial level , I would quite specifically ask the Commissioner what he has to say about the present public reaction in Portugal to the effects already being suffered , and likely to be suffered more severely , by a significant sector of our economy , the textile industry , as a result of the Asian crisis , and the measures being recommended and put into practice ?
Mr Commissioner , as you have just stated , not all European countries are affected in the same way by the Asian crisis , that is , neither the same industries , nor to the same extent .
This crisis confronts those responsible for the economic policy of the Union with a choice in the face of the two possible consequences of the interdependence of flexibility and growth - one negative consequence combining Eurosclerosis with mediocre growth and one positive consequence combining liberalization of the economy with sustained growth .
Given these conditions , do you not think that the time has come to consider the possibility of examining the criteria defined at Maastricht and consolidated in Amsterdam , through a global index which would allow each national policy the capacity for rapid adjustment in the case of a new crisis after 1st January 1999 ?
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , EU-Russian relations are rapidly growing stronger .
Relations with the Russian Federation are extremely important for the European Union , especially now that the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement has come into effect .
It is our pleasure today to welcome Mr Gennady Zyuganov , the leader of the Russian Communist Party , to the House . This is his first visit to the European Parliament and the other institutions of the European Union and he is seated in the official gallery .
Financial crisis in South-East Asia ( continuation )
Mr President , I speak as a Member of Parliament 's ASEAN and Korean Delegation returning from Malaysia and Singapore last week .
Are we aware that we need a wake-up call here in Europe to understand that the conflagration and contagion that is talked about in South East Asia could well come to Europe and elsewhere in the world ?
I believe the Commission is showing complacency in this area .
Secondly , I believe we are punching below our weight as the European Union .
Let me give you two very quick examples : Mr Santer 's visit to Singapore sank without trace compared to the visits by American personnel concerned with the financial crisis to that part of the world .
As Mr de Silguy has pointed out , it is little recognized that 30 % of the IMF support comes from the European Union and only 18 % from the United States of America .
When you are over there , all you would understand is that the United States of America is helping that part of the world to resolve this global crisis , not Europe .
When are we going to get off of our backsides and do something about it ?
Mr President , I am in agreement with half of what Mr Harrison says .
I agree with him when he says that the European Union is punching below its weight .
On the other hand , I do not agree when he says that the Commission is showing complacency .
I could have great fun with you here , going through all the possible and imaginable nightmare scenarios .
When I was young , I was told , if wishes were horses beggars would ride .
Well , if there were more horses and fewer beggars , maybe beggars would ride .
But I refuse to devote myself to these types of nightmare scenarios .
I prefer to react , to act and to analyse the facts .
On a business level there will be cross-sectorial impacts but with the current state of things these cannot be considered as having a major effect on the European economy of the susceptible industrial sectors as a whole .
Exports from these sectors towards Asia , in total , represent less than 1 % of Community GNP .
A second source of propagation : the financial sector .
Indeed , I spoke earlier about the involvement of the European banks in Asia .
It is clear that those banks are today in the middle of a process of renegotiating and scheduling the debts of these countries and , in any case , most of them , the vast majority even , have the financial muscle to enable them to withstand a certain number of shocks .
Consequently , when I consider that the main part of our banking involvement is in Hong Kong , Singapore and China , that is , the countries least affected by the crisis and which are the soundest and the best managed , and that the other countries , Thailand , Indonesia and South Korea , are precisely those which have received conditional aid packages from the International Monetary Fund , I do consider that the crisis is ' manageable ' , as you would say in your mother tongue , but I do not want to make ambitious plans .
Mr President , I too agree absolutely with all that the Commissioner said about the magnitude of the impact of the crisis on the European Union .
We ought not to exaggerate so far as the facts are concerned , and he is absolutely right to analyse the issue as he has .
I would like to ask him to tell me something else since we are talking about South-East Asia , if I may .
What is happening in Japan ?
There , matters could develop in ways that might surprise us .
I would like to ask the Commissioner if any moves have been made towards coordinated action by European and American financing bodies and by the central banks , of course , to deal in a coordinated way with the eventuality that Japan might start liquidating its investments , particularly those in the form of government or other bonds , especially on the American market ?
Is that currently the subject of any discussion by the European Commission ?
Has any initiative been adopted in that area , in the event that developments might possibly create problems for us ?
Thank you for having asked a question regarding Japan , Mr Christodoulou , because it is today the country in the system which should be followed the most closely .
I note that Japan continues determinedly to play its role in the Asian crisis , since it is holding on to its existing credit in the countries it is involved in , it is maintaining its lines of credit open to its main business partners and it is also assuring bilateral assistance and participating in multilateral aid efforts .
Consequently , Japan is not about to withdraw or to shut itself off from the rest of the world , which is a positive factor .
Secondly , and this is a point on which we greatly insist in our contacts with them , the Japanese have undertaken a series of measures concerning deregulation of their markets , restructuring , tax relief , as well as different measures to guarantee the banking system in order to prevent bankruptcy .
At the end of last year , a reduction in income tax , valid until March 1998 , was even announced .
To me , this assumes that , first and foremost , on a structural level they are determined to resolve the problems in their financial and banking systems , with our help should they need it .
And secondly , that if they need to , they will not hesitate to take the necessary measures to revive growth through - and I insist on this point - domestic demand .
We must make sure that they do not try to turn the countries of America and Europe into their lifeline and way out , that is to say , by passing their incapacity to sort out their own problems on to Europe .
We must be vigilant as regards our methods , failing a presence and voice on the international scene .
Mr President , I would like to take up the last remark made by the Commissioner and put it into the context of his initial analysis .
He introduced an analysis of the effects of the Asian crisis on the European economy through the medium of European export shares to Asia as a proportion of our GNP .
Could I ask him to focus some attention on the import side .
There is the question of Asia 's exports to Europe and Asia competing with European products in third countries with devalued exchange rates .
His macro-analysis is too partial if he simply sticks to exports or refers to sectoral aspects of imports .
This is a critical issue in respect of the effect on the European economy .
I regret to say I do not share the presumed optimism of the Commissioner 's response to the last question .
He said that he hopes the Asian economies will not seek to trade their way out of this crisis on our markets and that they will instead develop domestic demand .
Their quickest fix is to use their lower exchange rates to flood our markets .
He has left that out of the equation and should put it in .
Mr Harrison raised the point that we are punching below our weight .
We have thirty per cent IMF Mr President , zero per cent profile .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the tiger economies have always been presented misleadingly as the sacred cow of neoliberalism .
Now they are proving to be speculative casino economies which have also failed to exorcize the ghost of deflation .
This brings us to the problem of bank supervision as a public responsibility .
All previous talk has focused exclusively on the wrongs committed by public bodies .
But this crisis is all about the private sector .
Should it not give us real cause for concern that in the future area of currency unification , responsibility for monetary policy and responsibility for bank supervision are to be kept separate ?
The European Central Bank is responsible for monetary policy .
The national central banks , if at all , will continue to be responsible for bank supervision .
Is this not a fundamental weakness in the system and one which much be addressed before we start ?
Should we not be coordinating our policy of bank supervision and bringing about greater coordination in our economic policy in general , so that we can resolve the problems being posed by currency union ?
Mr President , I find it difficult to reply to Mr Wolf .
People will again say that my efforts are being put to things other than my work .
It is really a question for the European Central Bank and the European Monetary Institute .
I would not want to do something other than that which is requested of me as Commissioner in terms of launching the euro .
Your question poses , after all , a much wider problem .
For in Europe , whether control and monitoring is exercised by the Central Bank or by national banks , it is done according to criteria , standards and norms which are satisfactory and very protective .
The problem is to see how these norms and standards can be extended to the countries of South-East Asia and how entities such as the Bank for International Settlements or other mechanisms can be put in place to ensure that the current crisis will end in the adoption , in these countries , of regulatory and supervisory rules which are sufficient to ensure the security of the whole world .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the Asian financial crisis affects us in Europe .
If we look at exchange rate turmoil and monetary speculation as a sign of the liberalization of capital transactions , then under such circumstances should we in the European Union not be considering , within the framework of the International Monetary Fund , the establishment of a better system of international credit transparency and the possible need for an international credit insurance system ? This would ensure that events of the kind we are now witnessing could not happen in economies like the tiger states , which , according to macro-economic figures , are in a healthy state .
Is every part of the world really safe from such events ?
We await the Commission 's answer to this question .
I myself am waiting for the Commission to show greater initiative in the current situation so that we can begin to take this part of the world seriously .
Why , for example , is there no EU delegation in Singapore or Malaysia ?
Such a body would certainly help raise the EU 's low profile in this region .
And would it not also serve to enhance our credibility if the European Union could send a special envoy to South-East Asia , as the US President has done ?
Mrs Randzio-Plath , I note your suggestion regarding Singapore and Malaysia .
I will bring it to the attention of my colleagues who are directly responsible for this issue .
I would like to reply to your question regarding the IMF : should an international insurance system be put in place ?
This really seems to me to be the role of the International Monetary Fund .
You may consider that it acts too slowly , or that it acts too fast ; that there is not enough conditionality , that there is too much conditionality .
That is another question .
And this role which it fulfils , moreover , is truly a role of assistance , I was going to say the role of a fireman , in the case of disaster or fire .
I think that the real solution in these countries lies , firstly , in breaking the overtight link that exists between governments and banks .
Secondly , the solution lies in defining ad-hoc standards of financial and institutional supervision which must be the same in these countries as they are in ours .
Thirdly , the solution lies in the recapitalization of their banks , an action which must at the same time be complemented by cleaning up their assets .
Fourthly , and this is essential , the issue must be solved independently of any insurance , to make the system more transparent , in the accounts of these banks .
And finally , it is appropriate - and is , in fact , the path which is being taken , for a lot is said about crisis but little about the plans currently being implemented - to liberalize the financial sectors of these countries , in order to give foreign institutions the possibility of operating there .
Madam President , the Commission 's account of the economic crisis in South-East Asia was indeed very interesting , as the replies have been , but I think it is too optimistic as far as long-term effects are concerned .
Why is this ?
Firstly , their wounded international competitiveness will grow considerably whether their currencies are devalued or devalue automatically .
This is also taking place with other Eastern countries .
Secondly , the East has already cancelled orders from certain European countries , including Finland , which might have some considerable effect on their economies .
Thirdly , prices on the stock exchange are jumping up and down , reflecting the general concern .
All these effects may be experienced differently in the various Member States .
That is why I would like to ask whether , if the worst comes to the worst , the Commission intends to plan a course of increased latitude , economically speaking , towards these countries which might well be plunged into crisis .
I would like to be completely clear on this point , Mr Ilaskivi .
I repeat , I am not ignoring the consequences of - to simplify the matter - low cost imports coming from these countries on our economies .
But , contrary to what you think , the devaluation of their exchange rates is not only an advantage for them , far from it .
Firstly , they will pay more for imported goods , such as the need , for example in Korea , for scrap iron or iron ore or coal in order to make steel .
They have to import this .
And if you have devalued , you are going to pay more .
You will therefore lose out in terms of competitiveness .
Secondly , they will lose in inflationary terms , because their inflation rates will rise .
Thirdly , they will perhaps be driven to produce less .
Indeed , what guarantee do we have today that they will be able to continue to export at the same level if the financial ties and the credit which they have with their own banks , due to the situation of their financial system , disappears and the possibility of credit dries up .
I could continue to give you more such examples .
This is why we must not dramatise the situation and we must remain confident .
We are undertaking a sector by sector study , and in the time left to me I cannot specify the eight or ten sectors in detail .
But when this study is finished , I will be happy to ask for it to be passed on to you .
You will see in detail that , sector by sector , there are of course some areas which will be more affected than others , but , I already note that , particularly in the financial field , the overseas branches of certain large European companies have already provided for what they consider to be a loss .
Consequently , this will perhaps affect their profitability a little , but it will not challenge their existence in Europe .
Madam President , we note with satisfaction that the Commission is following the developments very closely , but we cannot escape the impression that the big absentee in Asia today is Europe , and more specifically , the European Union .
This contrasts sharply with the United States ' efforts in that part of the world .
We stand noticeably aloof , but I also have the impression that the individual Member States , or at least some of them , obviously the biggest ones , are trying to protect their own interests in the Asian crisis .
Nevertheless , major financial and economic interests are at stake for Europe , to say nothing of the political aspects , because no one will dispute that the divided attitude amongst the European countries and the absence of the European Union as such will hardly reinforce the impression in Asia that Europe is a strong unit and that Europe is a homogeneous entity .
That is not really the impression they have , and we should regret this .
Madam President , I totally agree with Mr De Clercq .
I am in complete agreement with his analysis , and I will even go further by quoting another example which seems to me to be particularly revealing of the situation described .
Last December , at the time of the emergency package for Korea , on Christmas Eve , in the hours before the Nativity , four Member States of the Union , the four members of the G7 , were called on to provide bilateral aid to the country in question , which was essential to enable Korea to complete the year .
As far as one can judge , this contribution was probably as important as that of the Americans .
However , the impression is given that it was the Americans who sorted out the crisis .
This is the reason why I said to Mr De Clercq earlier on , Madam President , that inasmuch as the euro offered us some protection even before its existence , when it comes into use , we will need to be strong and capable enough to express ourselves with one voice , in order not only to play a constructive role - not only to be a funder - but to have a role of real influence , which lives up , firstly , to our significant financial contribution , which will continue , and secondly , which lives up to our importance in economic , financial and commercial circles throughout the world .
It seems to me that from next year this will be the major challenge for the euro , for Europe and for Europeans .
Madam President , I would like to ask two questions .
You just said , Mr Commissioner , that it is essential for Europe to speak with one voice when the euro comes into effect .
Does this mean that the Member States linked to the euro will lose their representation in the IMF in favour of one " European Union ' representation or one " euro countries ' representation ?
My second question is the following : last week , in the Committee on Development and Cooperation , we heard the Director General of the IMF speak of his solution which , in macroeconomic terms , would probably give tangible results .
But the President of the World Bank told us that in human terms , in terms of unemployment and in terms of an increase in poverty , there will also be catastrophic results .
I would like to ask if the Commission is going to examine this problem and if we are ready to participate in the social and human programmes of the World Bank ?
Mr Commissioner , I have clearly understood the relative optimism that you demonstrate with regard to the consequences of the Asian crisis on the European economy .
You have already mentioned it several times .
Nevertheless , I sense some variations which leave me somewhat mindful of the balance between autosuggestion and deep conviction .
However , my question is more industrial and related more to international competition .
Competition in textiles was mentioned earlier .
I would like to raise a question regarding shipbuilding .
Do you know that we are currently in a period of extension of a European Directive on aid to the shipbuilding industry , to take into account the non-ratification of an international agreement ?
Do you not think that the current crisis will also have important consequences for this problem of agreements not being ratified , and that we should protect ourselves at the level of our own texts and our own decisions on aid to our European industries ?
I repeat , it would seem completely unacceptable to allow the situation to deteriorate in Korea but also unacceptable that our shipyards should have to suffer the direct consequences .
This said , with particular regard to shipbuilding , it is now likely that the Korean industry will have to reduce its capacity , because some shipyards may find themselves in difficult financial circumstances if they do not get the required financing .
Indeed , in the IMF agreement certain , rather vague preconditions exist whose terms state that no sectoral governmental agreement on the transfer of financing for such and such an industrial sector is possible .
It furthermore explicitly anticipates that , for Chaebol in particular , the standards , accounts , norms and financial year of that company should be put in order .
A number of preconditions are therefore foreseen , certainly perhaps not enough in your eyes , but ones which move towards both a greater liberalization of the financial markets in these countries , and also the suppression of specific advantages which the Korean shipyards have in relation to other yards .
It will be seen that one of the consequences of the crisis in Korea will be precisely the challenging of the personal , financial , structural and even political links which exist between the industrial and the banking sectors .
This will be the end of the large conglomerates , which must effectively embark upon a process of dismantling , of which we will have to take advantage .
Let me furthermore add that today many owners or shipowners seem , for obvious reasons , rather hesitant to place orders with Korea .
But , in this respect , we are also following the situation closely and it is one of the susceptible sectors on which our current studies are particularly concentrating .
Madam President , the one thing that has come across this afternoon is how the Commission is largely a disinterested observer .
We have had a very cosmetic exercise by Commissioner de Silguy.I would like to ask him several questions .
Is there any risk of dumping in the European economy from the devaluation of these currencies in the Far East ?
Are any specific industries at risk , for example the micro-electronics industry and the microchip industry ?
Has there been any representation made to the Commission by any specific European industry about the devaluation ?
Has the European Commission made any representation to the Chinese regarding the devaluation of their currency which sparked this crisis ?
Is there a risk of a further devaluation ?
Exactly what special arrangements are the European Commission and the European Union making to act quickly in the event of a domino effect in the US markets and indeed in the European markets ?
Mr Commissioner , we thank you for the answers you have given to our colleagues ' questions .
The debate is now closed .
Compatibility of political mandate and office of Commissioner
The next item is a declaration from the Commission on the compatibility of political mandate and the office of Commissioner .
Madam President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I would like to make a very clear political statement that in our view it is completely incompatible for a Member of the Commission to hold any party political post whichever part of the political spectrum a particular Commissioner may come from .
That is our position .
Mr Santer has said in his statement that Commissioners have a political function ; we agree with him .
We do not deny and fully understand that the Commission has an eminently political role .
We believe however that it is entirely incompatible with the impartiality with which we expect Commissioners to carry out their functions that they should take part in party political campaigns for personal election .
Since we requested this statement , the specific issue which caused all of us in this House great concern has been solved .
We welcome the fact that Commissioner de Silguy has withdrawn as a potential candidate from the French regional elections .
We believe that it is entirely right and we hope that in so doing he has enabled the Commission to deal with this very sensitive and important issue once and for all .
In that context I welcome very much President Santer 's statement on behalf of the Commission today .
It demonstrates at least some ambiguity in the concept of independence which we all expect from the Commission that any Commissioner should have considered it possible to stand for election in this way .
I hope President Santer that you will use this incident to get complete agreement within the College of Commissioners .
We are looking for a code of conduct along the lines of your interpretation .
Certainly the interpretation that you have expressed here today is completely in tune with the great majority of this House .
I must say that in this Parliament we have learned an important lesson that perhaps we could have well done with when we had the public hearing before we ratified this Commission .
Certainly we have learned important lessons for the public hearing before the ratification of the next Commission .
We will all be asking very important questions of all Commissioners when they come before us for ratification next time around .
We need to be absolutely sure that there is a commitment from them to ensure independence and impartiality in the performance of their work on behalf of European citizens .
In view of the withdrawal of Mr de Silguy from potential candidature in the French regional elections and the statement by Mr Santer this afternoon , my group felt it important to say clearly that we have withdrawn the motion for a resolution which we tabled and we give notice that we will not support any resolutions that come before the House tomorrow .
We very much value the statement you have made Mr Santer ; we hope that there will be complete agreement from the College of Commissioners to the interpretation which you have put here today .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I totally approve of the terms of the declaration which the President of the Commission has just made .
I will thus limit myself to three brief observations and comments .
My first observation : I would like to congratulate Mr de Silguy for his honourable decision not to stand in the local elections since , effectively , as President Santer has noted , no text formally obliges him to renounce this .
Mr de Silguy has put his European responsibilities , and in particular the essential role he is currently playing in the implementation of the euro , before his political ambition .
And I think we should pay special tribute to him for his behaviour .
This is all the more so given that some people , previously , given the same choice , did not have the same attitude , nor the same honour .
The situation of another French Commissioner was earlier mentioned , who remained Mayor of Châtellerault , Councillor for the department of Vienne , which is extremely similar to that of the role of a regional councillor , a role which that Commissioner has just resigned from after a very short period of time .
There is another case , perhaps less well known , but which is even more worrying , which is that of your predecessor , Mr President of the Commission .
At a time when he was exercising the distinguished role which is today yours , he did not hesitate to head the list of candidates for the local elections of Clichy , which is an important town close to Paris , only to be elected Mayor . He later resigned , of course .
But he was a candidate and he was heavily involved in the electoral campaign , with all the power bestowed upon him through his role as President of the Commission .
I note that on this point I am in agreement with Mrs Green who considers that if Commissioners have the right to continue political activity , if they had it in the first place , they should not involve themselves too overtly in national and electoral campaigns .
I note that , in fact , the behaviour I have just described is not in line with what we should expect .
My third observation is that I am indeed happy that , following Mr de Silguy 's gesture and this debate - although I would have liked to have had the same debate regarding the previous cases - we may now come up with a clear rule .
You have expressed it clearly , Mr President , and I hope that from now on , this clear rule will be imposed on all , not only on a Commissioner who is at the origin of this new ethical rule , but that it is a uniform rule which from now on will be followed by all Commissioners .
Madam President , this debate creates an important constitutional precedent .
As President Santer has recalled , European Commissioners fulfil a political function and are not technocrats , since they are politically responsible to our directly-elected Parliament .
For that reason , it is also important that increasingly politicians and not technocrats are nominated .
This Commission only has two Commissioners who have never held a political office ; one of them was Mr de Silguy .
Article 157 of the Treaty states - and we all recognise now - that we must have clear independence and that Commissioners cannot accept any instructions , nor should Member States or even Heads of States of Member States give any instructions to this body .
All this is very important because during their term in office that is the only guarantee that they are independent .
For my group the text of the Treaty is abundantly clear .
A political function exercised in the general interest is incompatible with any party political function , whether at national , regional or local level and I am very glad that the President has confirmed it in such clear terms .
The only query one might have is : was it not possible for the Commission to have done this before ?
It is very clear that this Parliament , and the pressure from this Parliament , was the main reason why Commissioner de Silguy had to withdraw and not pursue this issue , rather than perhaps debate in the Commission .
But let us leave that aside .
I would now like to look towards the future and as President Santer has said , it is important also for future Commissions to take this attitude .
Indeed Madam Cresson accepted this principle rather belatedly , which we may regret .
But it is now more important that we in this House establish this as a firm rule for the future with the agreement of the President of the Commission .
Mr Santer , could you perhaps , in preparation for the investiture of the new Commission , draw up a code of conduct as was suggested so that in the future no doubts remain about the composition of the body ?
Then there would be clarity and that in turn would strengthen the Commission .
One final point : it would be very welcome if Parliament at some stage looked at its own situation .
We should also look at the various aspects of dual mandates in this Parliament for the future .
As the European Union gains strength , as the representative character of the Community gains strength , not only the Commission but also the Parliament must , in certain respects , clarify the position for the future .
So we should not be too hypocritical about the past of this Commission and I hope that this debate has served as an important precedent for us also .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , to us this is very clearly a question of principles , and most definitely not individuals .
In that sense we are satisfied with the statement made by Commissioner Santer , and we fully support its general direction .
It is rather obvious that the mandate of European Commissioner cannot be linked to national , regional or even local mandates , because loyalties are created which lead to regional , local or national loyalties clashing with the European mandate they were given here .
I have to say , totally in line with what Mr Brinkhorst declared here a few moments ago , that we are also the party asking the questions , so that the Commission might give itself a code of conduct which is interpreted specifically enough , because Mr Santer was very explicit in relation to the national and regional mandates , but much less so as regards the local ones .
Yet the precedent was set .
A mandate at the level of mayorship of an important city is in our opinion incompatible with the function of European Commissioner .
As far as that is concerned we are the party asking the questions .
I have one last point , ladies and gentlemen .
I think it is great pity that all groups , apart from ours here , have decided to withdraw their resolutions .
Surely it is not because now that the individual question is off the boil , the fundamental opinion of this Parliament ceases to have any significance ?
All demands which have been made in the various speeches I have heard have been perfectly reflected in our motion for a resolution .
We would very much like to urge support , and we are openly in favour of oral amendments , should one or two details not be right .
It is important that Parliament not only speaks , but decides on the basis of a text .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the question of the exercise of a political mandate by a Commissioner , or more correctly one Commissioner 's desire to solicit a political mandate has been raised .
Mr de Silguy has abandoned his ambition towards the mandate in question , for reasons which he explained with loyalty and frankness .
You could be forgiven for thinking that this solves the problem .
In reality , the question raised is that of the exercise , by Commissioners , of functions other than those for which they were appointed , whether it be a question of a political mandate or a professional activity .
In this respect it seems to me that the past or current activities of Commissioners other than Mr de Silguy do , however , pose a serious problem .
Indeed , Commissioners are civil servants , whose duty it is to watch over the implementation of the Treaty . They are chosen by virtue of their overall competence and should offer every guarantee of independence .
This is stated in paragraph 1 of Article 157 of the Treaty .
Paragraph 2 states that Members of the Commission are fully independent in the exercise of their role , in the general interest of the Community ; that they neither request nor accept instructions from any government nor body and that they refrain from any deed incompatible with the character of their role .
Do you think , Mr President , that these measures are really respected ?
Your predecessor , Mr Delors , was a local councillor .
Mr Pasty mentioned it earlier on .
During his mandated period as President of the Commission he actively participated in French political life to the point where it was rumoured that he aspired to become President of France in 1995 .
Mrs Cresson was a candidate for a third term as Mayor in 1995 .
She has always been very active within the leadership of the French Socialist party .
It is said that one of your Commissioners participates in certain meetings of his government , that many Commissioners participate in meetings of the Group of the European People 's Party and the Group of the Party of European Socialists , outside of those which take place at the European Parliament , that another is Vice-Chancellor of a university in his country , which leads him to go home several times each month .
Recently , I was offended that Mrs Bonino was able to participate in a Pacific Forum , where the independence of New Caledonia was an issue , which is an integral part of one of the Member States , France .
I would therefore like to ask , Mr President , for a careful examination of the personal situation of each and every one of the Commissioners , to make sure they are fully respecting the Treaty .
Paid out of the Community budget , and therefore out of the taxes of every Member State , the Commissioners must exercise their functions on a full-time basis , as you said yourself , without having any other political activities beyond those of an ordinary citizen , and with no other professional activity .
Madam President , I too welcome Mr Santer 's statement .
He has clarified it in the right way , not in the way that Mr Fabre-Aubrespy has just said .
He is wrong to say the Commissioners are simply officials .
Mr FabreAubrespy should read the Treaty and the Statutes .
It makes a clear distinction between officials of the institutions and the Members of the institution .
The 20 Commissioners form a political executive .
They are politicians and , indeed , the title of the debates and statement today to that extent is wrong .
It says that it is a statement on the compatibility of political office with the duties of Member of the Commission .
But membership of the Commission is a political office .
Like Ministers , they are appointed by Prime Ministers .
To take office they need the confidence of this House in a vote of confidence .
When they are in office they have to answer questions before this House and they can be dismissed by a vote of no confidence of Parliament - and only by a vote of no confidence of the European Parliament .
Thus , the Commission forms a political executive accountable to this House and it is important for this House that it is recognized as such .
They are not officials working for the Council as some Eurosceptics would have us believe .
They are politically answerable in their own right .
The debate then is not one of them being politicians but one of what other political offices they may hold .
It is a question of double mandates .
It is a question of cumul de mandats .
There we need to look very carefully , as has been done in the debate .
Nobody quibbles that Commissioners are members of political parties .
They participate in political parties and come to our group meetings .
That is very welcome .
There is some debate as to whether they should be mayors of small towns .
There are precedents on that .
It is debatable and I think the debate is moving against that in modern times .
But there are certainly major questions of them holding the presidency of a major European region which receives funds from the European Union .
And I am astonished that Mr De Silguy even considered that possibility .
I congratulate Mr Santer on having brought order within his team in the Commission and having made a very clear statement today .
Madam President , I also wish to express a personal view .
It seems to me that half the problem has been that each Commissioner has made up his own mind on a personal basis and we now need a set of rules .
You might contrast President Santer 's welcoming of Mr de Silguy 's decision to stand down as a candidate for the Breton Regional Council which he said ' did him credit ' with the position of Sir Leon Brittan , for example , who presented himself by letter to every British citizen in Brussels before the last election asking them to vote Conservative and to contribute money to the Conservative Party .
Perhaps one should give him credit for attempting the impossible but , nevertheless , it calls into question his judgment .
We cannot leave it to Commissioners to decide what they are going to do , and what is acceptable , on a mix-and-match basis .
We have had statements from a number of political groups .
The Socialists say it is incompatible to hold any party-political post or take part in partypolitical campaigns although apparently - we hear from Mr Corbett - it is okay to attend group meetings .
Mr Méndez de Vigo said that the Commission is political but that the Commissioners are not party political .
Mr Brinkhorst for the Liberals said that no party-political role is permissible .
So we have a range of options and it is about time that the Commission got its act together .
The Commission we vote in needs to have the confidence of this House but , more importantly , Europe needs to be confident that these are not part-time politicians being a Commissioner for a few years but people who put Europe at the heart of their job and are prepared to renounce everything else in the meantime .
Mr Macartney was our last speaker in this debate and I give the floor to President Santer to conclude .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would simply like to thank those who have spoken and say how pleased I am with the manner in which this declaration has been discussed .
Indeed , a certain number of questions can be raised , but I believe that the members of the Commission must be independent .
What I do dispute the validity of is the idea that members of the Commission must be senior civil servants .
No , these are politicians , with a political mandate , who are responsible to the European Parliament ...
... and so themselves assume political responsibilities .
Furthermore , if after 25 years as a member of a government and 11 years as Prime Minister , I was told that from now on I would be a civil servant , the idea would not occur to me to agree to this , even as President of the Commission .
I would never have agreed to this .
Therefore , according to the unanimous wishes of the European Council who appointed me President of the Commission , I perform my duties as a political representative before a responsible parliament , the European Parliament .
I believe that this is essential .
Furthermore , I also clearly dispute the validity of those tendencies which want to deny members of the Commission even the most basic rights which are reserved for citizens .
Citizens themselves have a right to political convictions , to belong to a political party , to stand as candidates in elections .
Why could civil servants , or even politicians or members of the Commission not do this in the same capacity as any citizen ?
We do not live in an ivory tower .
I have never considered the Breydel as a palace , as some have suggested .
I have always considered it more like a hospital .
Nor would I like it to become an ivory tower where the Commissioners hide themselves away , out of touch with political reality .
I believe we have a political mandate and we must carry out this political mandate according to our convictions , while exercising our fundamental rights as citizens .
I believe that it is in this spirit that my declaration must be looked at .
On the one hand , there is the duty of the Commissioners and the President of the Commission to be independent , as recognized by Article 157 of the Treaty , but on the other hand , there is the possibility for a Commissioner , or the President of the Commission , to reveal his political opinions and to be answerable for them before you .
Racism
The next item is the submission of oral questions , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , to the Council ( B4-1010 / 97-0-0112 / 97 ) and to the Commission ( B4-1011 / 97-0-0113 / 97 ) concerning the annual debate on racism .
Madam President , thank you for that kind introduction .
It is a great pleasure for me to have the opportunity of addressing Parliament today on this particular subject .
Having been a Member of this Parliament for ten years , I count myself a keen supporter of Parliament 's work and , in particular , I am aware of Parliament 's long-standing interest in tackling the problems of racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism .
Indeed , I should like to take the opportunity of congratulating Members for all they have done to get this issue firmly onto the European agenda .
In addition to the essential role which national governments must play in combating racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism within their borders , I am in no doubt that there is also a crucial role for European action .
The Council - and , indeed , the presidency - will continue to work energetically and enthusiastically with you for positive policies in this field at European level .
One of the first tasks is to evaluate the effect of the joint action of 15 July 1996 concerning measures to combat racism and xenophobia .
By the end of June this year the Council will need to assess the fulfilment by Member States of their obligations under the joint action .
You will recall that Member States have undertaken to ensure effective judicial cooperation in respect of offences based on racist behaviour .
The Council which will be held on 28 and 29 May will therefore examine a report on the measures taken or planned by the Member States in the fight against racism .
As you will know , our two institutions took the opportunity to confirm our common concern about racism at the opening and closing conferences of the European Year against Racism in The Hague and in Luxembourg .
We believe that the European Year was an important step forward .
It made a valuable contribution to raising awareness of the problems of racism across the Union and to encouraging work to tackle those problems and to highlighting the benefits of our diverse societies .
I know that in my own country , the UK , events were held on an almost daily basis by a wide range of organizations up and down the country .
When we made government funding available to support projects marking the European Year we received a large number of applications .
The Public Information Unit set up by the Commission for Racial Equality in the UK was inundated with inquiries .
This showed clear evidence of the interest , the enthusiasm and the commitment at grassroots level .
I know that this was also in evidence in other Member States .
Governments must take note of the strength of feeling that the European Year showed .
The Year must not be seen as a one-off .
Its momentum must not be lost .
I agree with what Mr Mohammed Ali just said that we are not interested in just indulging in rhetoric .
We need to make sure that the momentum is maintained over the coming months and years .
Continuity has been well prepared by the Council and by the European Council during 1997 .
There have been two declarations by the Council on the fight against racism in the fields of youth and education .
The Council Regulation of 2 June established a European monitoring centre on racism and xenophobia and the Amsterdam Treaty contains measures which are important in this respect .
All are important steps which provide a foundation for further initiatives to combat the different forms of discrimination .
The two declarations which were adopted by the Council and by representatives of the governments of the Member States dealt with the importance of measures in the youth field and in the field of education .
They also stressed the need to build upon the achievements of the European Year .
We will all agree that one of the most significant achievements of the European Year was the agreement to establish a European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia in Vienna .
I know that this Parliament has long supported the idea of such a centre and that your representative Glyn Ford was a key figure on the Consultative Commission on Racism and Xenophobia which did so much of the groundwork .
I know too , and welcome the fact , that Parliament 's involvement with the Centre will continue .
The Centre has the potential to make a real practical difference .
Working closely with the Council of Europe it will contribute to the necessary exchange of information and pooling of experience .
I am sure that it will prove invaluable to the Member States and to the Community institutions .
The Centre has now started its work .
The management board met last week and elected Mr Jean Kahn as its chairman .
This is very appropriate given the enormous efforts of Mr Kahn to bring the monitoring centre into being and I am sure that Members of this Parliament will wish to join me in congratulating Mr Kahn on this appointment and in wishing him a speedy and full recovery from his current illness .
In looking ahead to the future , we have to consider the impact of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
There are two key elements to the Treaty which are of particular relevance to this debate , .
The Treaty introduced into the text of the Treaty on European Union the task of preventing and suppressing racism and xenophobia in the new Article 29 .
The new Article 13 provides a legal base for Community action to combat racial discrimination .
These new provisions will facilitate our work to step up the fight against discrimination based on race or ethnic origin .
When the ratification procedures for the Amsterdam Treaty are concluded , the Council will give priority to rapid implementation of that Treaty .
I know that Commissioner Flynn has already announced that the Commission is preparing an action plan to combat racism and xenophobia .
The Council looks forward to the Commission 's proposals for building on the advances made in the Year and we look forward to working with the Commission on them .
The UK presidency , in particular , wants to maintain the momentum in this area .
We need to build upon achievements to date and look ahead to the potential of the new provisions of the Treaty .
We need to consider there both legislative and non-legislative options .
The UK will be holding a seminar towards the end of our presidency which will provide an opportunity to focus on these important issues and to look at the way ahead .
We have come some considerable way already but there is still a great deal to do .
The Council is determined not to shirk its responsibilities and looks forward to working with you and with the Commission , not just to tackle the evils which still blight our countries but also to find ways of celebrating the diversity from which we all draw so many benefits .
. Mr President , the honourable Member refers to the efforts of the Commission to combat racism in 1997 and to what has been done to comply with the recommendations put forward by the European Parliament in its resolution of 30 January 1997 .
The Commission worked intensively in 1997 to implement the European Year against Racism and to promote non-discrimination .
The official closing conference of the European Year in Luxembourg last December underlined the success of the Year in terms of the political impact it had and the momentum it created , and also its achievements in raising awareness and in forging new partnerships and new networks throughout the Union .
One of the key political achievements during 1997 was the inclusion of the general anti-discrimination clause within the Amsterdam Treaty in Article 13 .
Following the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty and building upon what was accomplished during the European Year and subsequently , I can say to you today that it is my firm intention to come forward with proposals for anti-discrimination legislation before the end of this Commission .
Another lasting result from 1997 was the adoption of the regulation governing the establishment of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia which was referred to by the Minister , Mrs Quin .
The first meeting of the management board took place in Vienna on 20 and 21 January and it is expected that the centre will be fully operational in the autumn of this year .
Finally , the closing conference highlighted one of the key results of the European Year which has been the joint action and cooperation between the European institutions .
The presence of the President-in-Office of the Council , the President of the Commission and the VicePresident of the European Parliament as speakers at that event is good testimony to this .
In this context the Commission welcomes the fact that the European Parliament continues to recognize the importance of the fight against racism , including its annual debate as part of this mini-session .
The European Year against Racism had two main strands . It focused firstly on information and communication , and secondly on the exchange of experience .
In this way a broad range of activities were promoted as recommended by the European Parliament , ranging from essentially local and regional projects to high-profile events with television coverage right across the world .
In total some 177 projects received grant support .
Every effort was made to ensure that funding was provided for projects that reached citizens at grassroots level and involved ethnic minority and immigration groups in defining needs and in developing appropriate action .
Following the Year against Racism the Commission will continue to build on the partnerships that were established or strengthened during the year , including those with anti-racism nongovernmental organizations , with the social partners , the media , sports bodies and political parties .
In particular , 1997 saw the emergence of a European platform of anti-racism non-governmental organizations .
I would like to think that we can work together on this important development in the years to come .
The European Year was just the beginning - a good beginning but just the beginning .
It has shown not only what needs to be done but also what can be done .
It is my firm intention to continue to drive forward the European fight against racism .
I intend very shortly to present an action plan against racism which will build upon the achievements and lessons learned during the European Year of 1997 and pave the way for legislative proposals once the Amsterdam Treaty has been ratified .
I look forward to receiving your continued support in this issue which is of such importance to all Europe 's citizens .
Mr President , firstly I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mohamed Ali on his report .
Secondly , I congratulate the Commission for the European Year against Racism which in our opinion was an outstanding success .
From Madrid to Manchester and from Barcelona to Berlin there were thousands of different events , some funded by the Commission , some by Member States and some by no one at all .
Some people were so keen to get involved they found the money and organized events for themselves .
I also , in particular , thank Commissioner Flynn for his dedication and commitment to pushing this issue up the agenda .
The promise he made first in Marseilles and now again today to introduce anti-discrimination legislation before the end of 1999 is extremely welcome .
Thirdly , I congratulate the Council for its acceptance in Amsterdam of the amendments which make it unambiguously clear that the European Community has a role in the fight against racism .
I also congratulate the Council on the agreement to establish the European Observatory which , as Commissioner Flynn says , was established eight days ago in Vienna and will be up and running in August this year .
I welcome very much the appointment of Jean Kahn as the President of the Management Board because of the work he did on the Consultative Commission on Racism and Xenophobia .
I hope the European Parliament will send its best wishes to Mr Kahn for a swift recovery from the stroke he has suffered .
We in the Socialist Group have shown a firm commitment behind the Year against Racism .
In fact we are continuing it - in our case it is a sort of Year and a Bit against Racism .
On Friday we have a Europe Football and Racism Conference to be held at Old Trafford in Manchester sponsored amongst others by the football team .
We have a closing conference for the Socialist Group coming up on 2 and 3 March here in Brussels .
So , our Year against Racism continues .
We will be supporting the Mohamed Ali report .
We support the idea that there should be a Code of Conduct .
We believe that democratic parties in this Parliament should sign it .
We ask for the Commission , to quote the Commissioner 's own words : ' to see the Year against Racism as a foundation and not a monument ' .
We therefore welcome this year 's budget lines for the fight against racism and the proposed action plan .
More importantly , we believe it is necessary to avoid a hiatus developing between the work already done and that which is to follow .
As Mrs Quin says , the momentum must not be lost , in particular as the problem continues to get worse with the Front National in its heartlands in southern France stripping the libraries , victimizing the minorities and engaging in chequebook eugenics , as we speak .
We know it will take some time for Amsterdam to be ratified .
However , in the meantime we hope the Commission will prepare itself for swift and urgent action .
What has been indicated today leads us to believe that will be happening .
The presidency of the Council can serve the people of Europe well by helping to encourage and assist the Commission in this task .
I thank them all for what we have received but , to paraphrase Oliver Twist , I have to say that we want more !
Mr President , I would like to start by warmly congratulating the person who has taken the lead in this yearly debate , Mr Ali , on his dedication .
I would also like to congratulate the Commissioner and his entire staff , who made so much effort recently to make true progress in the field of anti-racism , and to combat xenophobia and anti-Semitism .
I am delighted that the Council representative is also here , because we are discussing a policy which is still principally in the hands of the Council .
The resolution we drafted in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs has been the subject of very intense debate .
I think at the moment we have come a long way towards reaching a joint opinion .
A few points are still unresolved , however .
Mr Ford has already mentioned one with regard to the code of conduct for political parties .
In fact I am pleased with the way he formulated his own amendments .
The amendment does not refer to tightening up this Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , because everyone , terrible as this may be , should be allowed to express his political opinion ; but it refers very expressly to the parties .
In the future we might have parties which will underwrite this code of conduct and parties which will not .
We will have politicians who are approachable , you will know where you are , and you will be able to keep people to it .
I believe that this is one of the most important results of the Year against Racism .
It has had a very good effect on politicians .
Politicians , in the Netherlands in particular , have declared that they will not play xenophobic games during the next elections around issues such as refugee policies and so on .
This is very important , because this kind of thing used to happen in the past .
I think it is very good that politics is cleaned up in this way .
I myself have two urgent requests , particularly related to the point which was originally in Mr Ali 's motion for a resolution : the reference to the report on ethic cleansing .
This is , I think , of great significance for us .
It is a piece of self-criticism on the policy which was made in our own departments of Foreign Affairs .
I recently read about a new event in this context , namely that , according to the French press , a highly placed French politician had expressed the view that the genocide in Rwanda was less important since it happened in Africa then if it had happened in Europe .
This is actually a typically racist comment , even though one might not be aware of it .
That is why it is very important that we still include this point in our resolution , in accordance with the original intentions of Mr Ali .
I would like to make one remark about the question of the sans papiers .
There is a text in the resolution before us which I can only describe as messy .
In it the NGOs are praised for their commitment to emigrants without documents .
This is a widely held view .
In the Netherlands it is the case that , in particular , large numbers of those who turn out to be illegal , or who do not have a convincing refugee story , have mislaid their documents .
I know of no NGOs which concern themselves with this category , but I do know of NGOs which concern themselves with the special category of emigrants called sans papiers .
I have in fact met delegations of sans papiers .
This is a special state of affairs in the country in which they are staying .
I am indeed glad that some NGOs have made efforts on their behalf , because sometimes it is an omission which should be highlighted in legislation .
In general we cannot say that we , as a legislative body , should be pleased that we can be overruled by a NGO .
Broadly speaking this cannot be said .
I have therefore submitted an amendment for the category of sans papiers which I consider to be clearer than the other amendment on the subject .
I think it is right to talk specifically about this group , and I hope it will be adopted .
For that matter , I hope that the Council will be willing in the future to subject the issue of racism , xenophobia , and antiSemitism to increased democratic control , so that it does not remain solely in the hands of a Council which responds unanimously , as this provides a weak basis for policy .
- Madam President , I would like to welcome the Commissioner 's proposal to have a follow-up action to the European Year against Racism .
May I recommend to him that perhaps he looks at the state of racism and xenophobia in my own country .
Particularly in my own city of Dublin there is an extraordinary manifestation of fear at the gypsies and at the other people coming from Eastern Europe and elsewhere , such as North Africa .
We have a very small number of refugees coming into the country , compared to Germany or to Britain and other countries .
Frankly , the Irish people have no reason to be proud about the manner in which we deal with these refugees .
I want to make that point very clearly .
I thank the Commissioner for the excellent work he has done in this area .
He has done a tremendous deal of extraordinarily good work .
He has made people more and more aware of the need for cultural diversity and the richness of cultural diversity in our country .
Mr Mohamed Ali , in my view , is one of the most extraordinary people in this Parliament .
He has been at the forefront of bringing a greater respect and understanding for Islam within the European Union .
It is of vital importance that we do not equate Islam with the Taliban and other fundamentalists .
After all , all religious sects and all official religions have their fundamentalists .
Tolerance of diversity enriches our individual societies .
Mr Mohamed Ali is to be congratulated for his report which I support in its entirety .
For the first time in any Treaty agreed at the level of the European Union , the Treaty of Amsterdam expressly lays down the prevention and combatting of racism and xenophobia as an objective of the European Union .
This is no throwaway objective , it is significant .
It is clearly a fundamental step forward .
It is not only important that the European Union and the Member States are committed to providing our citizens with a high level of safety and an area of freedom , security and justice .
It is important that the commitment is clearly linked to the objective of preventing and combating racism and xenophobia .
It is an objective which must be backed up by countries ' actions .
History lays bare the terrible truths of racism .
If we have learned anything it must be that we must use all our powers and strengths to halt racist attacks and abuse .
The Amsterdam Treaty has many other fine qualities but the inclusion of this objective must be the one to which every citizen can rally around .
I would like to see the report from Mr Mohamed Ali circulated to all our schools and colleges throughout the European Union because it is there we must tackle , through education , xenophobic and racist attitudes within the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the annual debate on racism must be an opportunity to take some specific steps forward in the fight against racism , xenophobia and all forms of discrimination .
Mr Mohamed Ali has tried to make his report such an opportunity , and I congratulate him on his work .
When that report also refers to the balance-sheet of a European Year against Racism , which 1997 was , it is important to emphasize the significance of the new Treaty of the European Union , which was negotiated and signed in the same year , for that struggle .
As the rapporteur mentions in point 4 , we also regret that , in spite of a few statements of good intentions , non-discrimination has not been incorporated into the Treaty as a fundamental principle of the so-called Community Law with immediate effect .
As we see in Article 13 , ' the necessary measures to combat discrimination on grounds of sex , race and ethnic origin , religion or creed , disablement , age or sexual orientation , on a proposal by the Commission with the unanimous decision of the Council after consulting Parliament ' , are fine words and might look like a step forward .
But that step can also be viewed as a step taken in a minefield , because any number of people have laid booby-traps , and the social situation is an absolute cauldron of racism .
In addition , the area of freedom , safety and justice which is essential to the fight against racism and xenophobia , as Article 29 makes clear , is not going to be created by fine words and timid actions .
Time is short , but even so I would not like to finish without underlining the proposal for the establishment of a European Charter of Emigrants ' Rights in the context of a policy of integration designed to promote mutual understanding between ethnic groups .
The title itself is attractive .
And particularly encouraging for anyone who comes from and lives in a country of emigrants and immigrants .
This is one of the good proposals in this report which we heartily approve .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Flynn , racism means exclusion .
The fight against racism is therefore the fight against and the control of exclusion .
This is something which Commissioner Flynn has always maintained and we fully support him in his stance .
This means integration rather than forced assimilation , equality of rights rather than legal inequality and equal rights rather than adherence to the misconceived legal division of our society into nationals , EU citizens and non-EU citizens .
This ranking of people into first , second and third class citizens is the cause of racial violence in the European Union , something which is increasingly becoming the norm and which , in this Year against Racism , is terrifyingly demonstrated in a Eurostat survey which has indicated that 30 % of the citizens of the European Union admit to being racist or antisemitic .
Democracy is based on participation and on all citizens having an equal share in their society .
Democratic rights cannot be made contingent upon ethnic origin , skin colour , religion or age .
Democracy in the European Union is in a bad way when I look at the amount of racism and exclusion which we encounter daily .
The way in which we deal with minority groups and refuse to accept integration is a disgrace .
All the solemn declarations made in this Year against Racism are of little use when our policies are achieving just the opposite .
We have to overcome the problem of legal alienation and raise the legal rights of citizenship throughout the EU to the level of a democratically constituted society .
This society is to include the new minorities and those who have been invited to join our workforce , for they too are human beings .
These people are fully entitled to normal human rights .
The situation is not helped by the fact that our legal and political systems are unwilling to take notice of these minority groups .
They exist , they are here to stay and they should be allowed to do so .
Let me close by quoting the words of a rather nice song , which we could possibly take as our slogan : " My mother is black , my father is white , my sister is yellow , my brothers are red and as for me , I am ten thousand years old and my name is man . '
Mr President , the fact that the European Year against Racism is nearly over , should not mean , I think , that the fight against racism is over .
I saw a copy of the euro barometer opinion polls recently which were submitted at the conclusion of the European Year against Racism , Mr Commissioner , and I have to tell you I find the results disconcerting .
No less than one third of the interviewees admit to being very or somewhat racist .
In Belgium that group even comprised over half the interviewees .
The opinion poll also showed very clearly that xenophobia thrives best on feelings of insecurity , but above all , and this is important , on fear of the future and lack of faith in democratic institutions .
One conclusion I would like draw from this , colleagues , is that the new study must spur on every democratic party in Europe all the more to continue to create convincing and honest policies and confidence in the institutions which give people faith in the future .
But there are political parties which have made a real breeding ground out of engendering fear , xenophobia , racism , who abuse their mandates to spew freely their spiteful thoughts on all fronts at once , who speak of ' foreign scum , own people first ' , and if possible , in all languages at once .
In Brussels racist pamphlets are pushed though every letter box , including those of Italians and Turkish people , and of people who work in this Parliament , and of colleagues .
I would like to give Mr Oostlander a message .
One thing should be clear to us .
The excuse of political freedom , of freedom of speech should never be used or abused to foster racist objectives or discrimination on the basis of colour or origin , whether inside or outside Parliament .
Because that is manifestly contrary to human rights .
A short while ago a reference was made to the charter drafted for political parties in which they commit themselves to combat racism in their own midst , as well as outside it , and in which they vow not to cooperate with groups which incite racist acts .
I hope that all democratic parties will sign this charter very soon , but also implement it , please .
But I still believe , Mr Oostlander , that as a democratic institution of the citizens of the European Union , the European Parliament should also incorporate the charter as one of its principles into its own operations .
It should not be the case that in the name of free speech racist language is uttered in this Chamber .
It will not wash that the European Parliament gives grants to those who spread xenophobia .
What has proved possible in the Belgian Parliament and does not appear to be contrary to fundamental freedoms , should , in my view , also be possible in this House .
I would like to ask the Bureau to make a proposal to the European Parliament with regards to Rules of Procedure or a way of operating whereby we no longer contribute to the hate- stirring messages of some of our colleagues .
Mr President , the phenomenon of racism and xenophobia currently affecting the entire European Union is a matter of real concern to us all .
The greater protection from racial , ethnic and religious discrimination afforded by the Amsterdam Treaty is therefore to be welcomed .
Nevertheless , I am of the opinion that the most effective solution still lies in the power of the mind .
I think that this is more readily understood when one translates the term " xenophobia ' not by " animosity towards ' or " hatred of ' foreigners , which is a common mistake sadly made all too often nowadays , but more correctly by " fear of foreigners ' .
This fear , which is felt mainly by older persons , can only be reduced by each of us acting personally as we go about our daily business .
Here it is necessary to convey to our citizens a sense of security which enables them to overcome their fear .
The results of the Year against Racism , which in committee the rapporteur himself has described as the search for an alibi , will not alone be enough to achieve this objective .
The additional measures announced by the Commissioner will therefore still be needed .
Mr President , I should like to start off by saying to the last two speakers that they should be a little careful .
Every one of us is the potential victim of someone else 's racist attitudes .
If we are not prepared to stand up and defend the rights of others , the day may come when our rights are challenged and there will be nobody around to defend them .
So , be careful .
I want to congratulate Mr Mohamed Ali on his excellent report and to pick out one or two points .
Paragraph 6 is very important and I am delighted to say that the new government in Britain will be enacting legislation which will make any criminal activity which is racially motivated a justification for more severe penalties .
This is absolutely right .
It is also important that in paragraph 14 we condemn unwise and inflammatory statements , sometimes made by certain politicians who should know better , to provoke racial dislike and racial animosity .
We have heard comments about communities being swamped and that sort of remark does no good at all .
People who have influence in society should not incite racial attitudes .
On paragraph 15 it is important that in the ongoing negotiations for accession of the central and eastern European countries , we make it absolutely clear - and I am not condemning or criticizing any particular country - that respect for human rights and for the whole concept of anti-discrimination contained in Article 13 of the Treaties agreed at Amsterdam is a crucial part of what they will accept when they become members of the European Union .
The way in which certain minority groups , in particular the travelling communities , have traditionally been treated in some of these countries is shocking and disgraceful and must be brought to an end .
I support very much the introduction of a code of conduct .
I hope this will be in operation for the next European elections and will ensure - as happened at the last general election in Britain - that none of the major political parties are tempted to use the race card to their advantage and that those who are not prepared to sign a code of conduct outlawing racial and xenophobic sentiments are marginalized totally .
Finally , not only must we condemn racism in all its forms but we must extol the positive benefits of a pluralistic multiracial society .
I am proud to represent such a society in West London , where a third of the community or their parents are of non-English ethnic origin and who by and large live together happily and harmoniously together and positively benefit the community .
These multi-racial communities are not only culturally enriching but economically stimulating .
I leave you with this thought .
The 1.5 million people of Asian origin in Britain last year contributed £ 5 billion through Asian-owned businesses to the economic vitality of my country .
That is a positive aspect which is too often ignored .
Mr President , just one year ago , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media organized a public hearing on the theme of , " Points of convergence between Europe and Islam ' , during which one of the guests , Jean Yaya-Michot , Director of the Centre for Arab Philosophy at the Catholic University of Louvain , took pleasure in monopolizing the debate and addressing me in insulting terms of a racist nature .
Several months later , the same Mr Yaya-Michot published in Beirut a short work justifying , on the basis of theological works , the assassination of the seven monks in Tibehirine .
I dare to hope that , within the framework of a new Year against Racism , the European Parliament will do its best to spare its Members from verbal aggression by foreign agents , who advocate the extermination , in its most barbarous form , of born and bred Europeans , because they are white and often Christian .
With regard to Professor Yaya-Michot , we will not have to suffer his insults for much longer , but it will have required my intervention at Vatican level for this recently naturalised Belgian to be made to shut up or to leave my country .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Flynn for his support and for all his endeavours and also to express my particular thanks to all Commission personnel for what they achieved in 1997 as part of the Year against Racism and Xenophobia .
I would like to congratulate Mr Mohamed Ali on his excellent report .
Nevertheless , at the end of this year against racism and xenophobia I wish to focus on three aspects which still have to be worked on .
The first of these is the need to continue with the fight against racism and xenophobia , which commenced in 1997 .
In view of the comments which we have just heard from three Members on the right of the House , it is apparent that we still have a long way to go before Parliament is able to take a different approach to this issue .
My second point concerns politicians , the media and the scholastic establishment . These groups must become far more aware of their educational role and should be adopting an anti-racist and anti-xenophobic stance .
Thirdly , the European Union has always been a focus for immigration and emigration , and this is increasingly true today .
Those migrants who have settled within our boundaries have helped shape our society , and in most cases they have integrated successfully .
If in recent years this integration has been less successful , that should be blamed not on the migrants themselves but rather on the shortcomings of our political strategy .
We will have to work much harder to ensure that these new settlers can be better integrated within the boundaries of the Union so that we can build up a real sense of community .
In this context I have to point out that female migrants are a particularly vulnerable group .
They suffer from discrimination not only because of their nationality and appearance , but because of their gender .
The UNHCR has developed strategies for protecting female refugees from human rights violations .
I therefore call upon Member States to apply the same measures .
Of special importance to me is a point which we have already discussed in committee and on which we are fundamentally agreed : I consider it to be an error of judgement , and this has been confirmed to us time and time again in various discussions with different organizations , to speak of discrimination on the basis of race .
As Mrs Roth has also pointed out , there is only one race - the human race .
There is no such thing as racial difference .
In order to emphasize this , we ourselves should avoid referring to racial discrimination in any positive context .
I therefore propose that in future we should reconsider our choice of words and perhaps use a different term - such as harmonization .
Mr President , let me use my own area of Essex in the UK to demonstrate the success of the European Year .
In the last 12 months I have personally taken part in a 200-strong business conference on the case for racial equality , a seminar for personnel officers on racial discrimination in employment , a special conference for our county 's seven multi-agency racial incident panels and as a judge for an anti-racist poetry competition with entries from over 300 local schoolchildren .
Yet the number of racially motivated crimes in Essex has remained constant at over 100 this year .
Research from the community safety department of Essex Police confirms that racist attitudes held in the Community generally help perpetrators to legitimize their racist crimes .
So I am asking the Commissioner to make sure that he works with us to ensure that every year is the Year against Racism .
It is why the Essex Race Equality Council will this year start a new anti-racist project with young people in Thurrock , host a national exhibition on racial diversity and this very week convenes a first meeting of local women 's groups on questions facing minority ethnic women .
It is why the Essex Returners Unit with Essex Tech has launched an action plan following on from the Year which includes new recruitment procedures for local police , race awareness for local training organizations and new support for local minority ethnic associations .
Congratulations to them all .
For us in the European Parliament , let this one local example serve as an example to us all , and let us remember that Europe 's fight against racism needs to reach communities at the local level in Essex and in every part of Europe .
Unless it does so , it means nothing .
Mr President , I want very briefly to make one or two remarks in response to the debate .
I very much welcome the positive tone that the debate has generally adopted and the welcome that has been given to the work of the rapporteur on this particular issue .
I will briefly pick up on one or two specific points .
Education was referred to by one or two speakers and I would like to say that the Council fully recognizes the importance of education and work with young people in fostering a society of equality of opportunity .
As Parliament will know , 21 March has been proclaimed as the day when cultural differences will be celebrated and tolerance promoted among young people and in educational establishments .
I know that Mr Goerens who spoke earlier has done a great deal to remind young people today of the dangers of Nazism and anti-Semitism of the past .
I agree with him that remembering the victims of the Holocaust remains very important .
Both Mr Mohamed Ali and Mr Andrews mentioned specifically the risks of Islamophobia .
I very much agree with the comments they made .
It is the responsibility of all of us to reject such unthinking prejudice against any one group .
So , on behalf of the Council , I would like to say that I have taken careful note of the various points that have been raised during the course of this debate .
It certainly seems to me that this is clearly an area where the three institutions - Parliament , Commission and Council - can work closely together to promote practical and effective action for the future .
Thank you , Mrs Quin .
I confirm that I have received a motion for a resolution , submitted under the terms of Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place at 11.00 a.m. tomorrow .

Asylum policy
The next item is the group discussion on the following oral questions :
B4-1012 / 97-0-0136 / 97 , put to the Council , and B4-1013 / 97-0-0137 / 97 , put to the Commission , by Mrs Lindeperg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on rights of asylum ; -B4-1017 / 97-0-0166 / 97 , put to the Commission by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the observance of rights of asylum ; -B4-1018 / 97-0-0174 / 97 , put to the Council , and B4-1019 / 97-0-0175 / 97 , put to the Commission , by Mr Nassauer and Mr Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , relating to the Dublin Convention on asylum processes ; -B4-1020 / 97-0-0176 / 97 , put to the Council by Mr Schaffner and Mr Caccavale , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on asylum policy ; -B4-1021 / 97-0-0178 / 97 , put to the Commission , and B4-1104 / 97-0-0179 / 97 , put to the Council , by Mr Wiebenger , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on rights of asylum ; -B4-0002 / 98-0-0162 / 97 , put to the Council , and B4-0003 / 98-0-0163 / 97 , put to the Commission , by Mrs Roth , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the protection of persons suffering persecution from nonState agents ; -B4-0004 / 98-0-0167 / 97 , put to the Council , and B4-0005 / 98-0-0168 / 97 , put to the Commission , by Mr Pradier , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on justice and internal affairs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for giving me time to speak at such short notice .
I have asked to be permitted to speak again because I believe that the opportunity must be given to respond to some of the remarks made by the extreme Right in this House .
If we are debating racism in Europe and the fact that racism in its extreme form is actually spreading in Europe at the present time , and if we then see that in its extreme form ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Schulz , you requested leave to speak on a point of order .
The debate you are trying to start up again has already been closed .
I am unable to re-open it .
If you are asking for leave to speak on a point of order then you may speak , but not if you want to continue the debate .
Mr President , thank you for finding me out .
Nevertheless , I should like to take the opportunity to finish my sentence .
It is outrageous that those who are claiming for themselves an anti-racism debate are in fact those who represent racism in Europe .
I would ask you , Mr President , in accordance with Rule 131 of the Rules of Procedure , to defer the present debate on the oral questions submitted by the various Groups , to the next plenary session in Strasbourg to be held on Monday at 5.00 p.m.
Up to just a few minutes before this debate began , we in the European Socialist Party tried , along with a number of other parliamentary Groups , to agree a compromise text which would as far as possible incorporate the different political positions .
Five minutes before this plenary sitting began , and for reasons which I do not wish to comment on , the Liberal Group withdrew its signature from that document .
The result is that there will certainly be no majority in favour of our compromise text tomorrow .
But neither do we think that any other compromise can be found which would command a majority in this House .
As a result we are now holding a debate without any hope of a tangible outcome tomorrow .
But because asylum is such an important issue , we as Social Democrats will continue to search for a broad-based resolution and therefore intend renewing our efforts to reach a compromise with the other Groups .
For this reason we ask that the debate be deferred as requested .
Mr Schulz has requested on behalf of the Socialist Group that the debate on the oral questions relating to rights of asylum be deferred .
May I ask whether anyone is willing to vote in favour or against ?
Is anyone in favour ?
Mr President , I would like to comment on the report , just as Mr Schulz just requested .
Indeed , the problem of asylum is a subject of great importance and the joint resolution , as it came out of the debate yesterday , concerned such a limited point , such a precise point , a point which , furthermore , was part of the Council 's programme and therefore not at all controversial , that it would be a shame to make an ideological division out of it .
Consequently , as Martin Schulz said , I would prefer some time to be given to see how it would be possible to come to an agreement on this subject .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
I oppose the motion to defer this debate .
Negotiations have taken place on the basis of motions from many individual Groups .
As far as I know , no Group has insisted that its own text should be taken as the yardstick for all .
The Group of the European People 's Party , for example , had proposed that the Liberals ' motion for resolution be taken as a basis for negotiation .
This was rejected .
The outcome of the negotiations is that from the outset we , in the European People 's Party did not sign the motion for resolution .
The resolution proposed by the Liberals and also that proposed by the PPE are at least still available for voting on .
We therefore see no reason , even though the Socialist Group believes that there will not be a majority for their proposal , to delete an item from the agenda and to refer it back to committee .
We want to see the agenda worked through in its original form .
Mr Nassauer , the motion is that this debate be deferred , leaving it to the discretion of the Conference of Presidents to fix a date for it .
( Parliament agreed to the request that the debate be deferred ) The debate is therefore deferred to a date to be notified by the Presidents ' Conference .
Mr President , I will be voting against .
I am against deferment , because the reasons given by those who are calling for it do not hold up in any way .
These are various manoeuvres unrelated to the need for urgent debate of the issue and for there to be yet another decision by the European Parliament to create as much pressure as possible against extending the conditions and prerequisites for the granting of asylum .
Mr President , I have a question . When the bell goes , how long do we have to get to the Hemicycle ?
Because we ran out of the office , leaving people in mid-sentence , but we still did not get here in time .
Could you please tell us how much time we have , so we know whether to gallop , trot or walk ?
Mrs Díez de Rivera , according to the Rules of this House I can only have the bells rung when I become aware that the rule for the tabling of a motion has been invoked .
Until then I am unable to do so .
And the time available is the interval between the time of making the announcement and the time at which I have to put the motion to the vote , after inviting Members to speak for or against it .
A procedural vote of this type can take place at any time .
Application of Community law - CELEX
The next item is Report A4-0008 / 98 , by Mrs Thors , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Matters and Citizens ' Rights , relating to the fourteenth Annual Report of the Commission on the monitoring of Community Law application ( 1996 ) and the working document on the Commission 's CELEX 1996 services ( relating to the interinstitutional computerised documentation system on Community Law ) ; 1996 Management Report ( COM ( 97 ) 0299 - C4-0312 / 97 - SEC ( 97 ) 1082 - C4-0313 / 97 ) .
Mr President , every one of our Parliament 's rapporteurs who examines the European Commission 's annual report on the application of Community Law aspires to display his own method and attitude .
The same has happened this year with our esteemed colleague Mrs Astrid Thors .
And I will not disagree with her , because there is perhaps nothing worse , both for the European Parliament 's image and in substance , than a boring restatement for the umpteenth time of views expressed many times before in this Chamber .
In that respect the rapporteur chose not to deal with the great and more general problems which influence the interpretation and application of Community Law , but to concentrate her attention more on more practical matters which perhaps have a more direct bearing on Europe 's citizens .
So she highlighted two basic elements : greater participation by Europe 's citizens themselves in the application of Community Law , and the European Ombudsman 's interventions , which tend towards the same direction .
And Mrs Thors has formulated practical proposals to deal with several problems , with which - naturally - I think most of us can agree .
The European People 's Party will therefore vote in favour of her report , which also comprises three amendments that I had the honour to table and which the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights was kind enough to accept .
I think it might be necessary for me to comment , in order to reinforce those views , on just two or three subjects : it is indicative that out of 1 076 cases initiated by the Commission in 1996 , 819 were set in motion following complaints by European citizens .
And it is just as characteristic that 36 % of the complaints made to the European Ombudsman concerning infringements of Community Law again came from European citizens .
There are several other positive elements , Mr President , during the period we are considering .
I will point indicatively to the fact that the Commission initiated many more cases , to the possibility of access to Community Law via the Internet and the institution of more proceedings , and if you will , to the establishment of the possibility of imposing financial penalties upon Member States which fail to implement the decisions of the European Court of Justice .
On the other hand , however , we must note that , as I fear , the major problems persist and little progress has been made with them .
The process of seeking justice is always very lengthy , time-consuming and very costly .
The teaching of Community Law has not yet even become established in the law schools of the top Educational Institutions in the 15 Member States .
There are still problems with the tendency of certain constitutional courts to wish to dispute with the Court of the European Communities the jurisdiction of annulment for Community regulatory acts without entitlement to any such jurisdiction , a trend which began in the German Supreme Constitutional Court , and one which , for all we know , may be imitated by the Danish Supreme Court which is due to pronounce in a few weeks .
So there are both positive and negative elements .
A much greater effort must be made , and I believe that the report by Mrs Thors will assist that effort .
Madam Rapporteur , Mr President , it seems to be a hobby of some of our colleagues to pillory the Member States , who are the cause , according to them , of all the evils which affect the European Union .
Thus , Mrs Thors ' report highlights that the average rate of notification - and I quote - " for transposition measures taken by the Member States as a whole is 92.8 % ' .
This is truly what legislators dream of and in particular , French legislators who , far too often vote in laws and then wait months , even years , for the regulatory rules to enable them to implement them .
So rather than always complaining about Member States , I personally prefer to commend the zeal with which Community law is being implemented .
The rapporteur also highlights the difficulties of the practical and concrete application of community law and the lack of knowledge of the law on the part of our citizens .
This is a question of training , of legal training and of university training .
This obviously is the role of the Member States and not the European Union which , in this area , can only limit itself to giving encouragement .
Finally , the rapporteur highlighted the delicate question of the powers exercised by Member States ' Constitutional Courts on the validity of prescriptive acts in relation to constitutions .
This is a particularly serious question , basic laws being , in a way , the founding basis of the social and political contract of the Member States .
And the French Constitutional Court , by demanding the amendment of our constitution when the measures of draft treaties do not conform to it , indicates that , on the contrary , the Supreme Court recognises the impossibility of applying a European standard which is contrary to our constitution .
This seems to me indeed normal and desirable , our constitutions being the supreme act of our sovereignty .
Mr President , it seems that we do not have " the same procedure as last year ' , to coin a phrase .
The rapporteur has done very well and for that I offer her my sincere thanks .
The motion for resolution includes an early mention of the national constitutional courts .
I would like - and I hope that I am proceeding along the same lines as you here - to say something about the Federal Constitutional Court , which has a constitutional appeal pending in respect of the euro .
The Federal Constitutional Court must know what it is doing .
It may be plunging the European Union into a deep political crisis from which the EU may never recover .
But it must know what it is doing .
Let me just single out one of the many practical examples mentioned by the rapporteur , namely the control procedure and the role of the citizen .
I wholeheartedly support the initiative of the citizens ' representative and of the rapporteur that , should this control procedure result in a negative decision by the Commission , then this decision must be substantiated .
This has something to do with democracy .
I have followed the midday debate on whether Commissioners or officials are now politicians , civil servants or whatever , with a certain amusement .
From the outside the situation looks somewhat different .
Allow me to quote from a recent edition of the Süddeutsche Zeitung , which states : " It is certainly true that without the expert knowledge and diligence of the civil servants in Brussels a century project like the euro would never materialize , because it would be talked to death for years .
It is not true that one of these civil servants will have to take some sort of responsibility if the experiment fails .
One obviously hopes that they have the sense of responsibility which Max Weber demands from politicians , but they are not responsible for their work , they just have to carry it out . '
The western inventors of democracy certainly did not conceive it thus .
It matters that we should establish this public openness between the Commission and its citizens , and for that reason I am particularly thankful for this part of the report .
While I am talking about the basics , let me quote from a very old text which , though penned more than 200 years ago , is still relevant today .
It was written in 1795 by Imanuel Kant on the subject of eternal peace and goes as follows : " All deeds which relate to the rights of other men , and whose maxim is not compatible with publicity , are wrongful . '
This maxim , Kant goes on to say , is one which I may not divulge without at the same time thwarting my own intention , which itself must be kept absolutely secret if it is to succeed and to which I cannot publicly admit , without provoking inevitable opposition from everyone to my design ; such a maxim can only have its origins in injustice and therefore constitutes a threat to us all .
My appeal to the Commission is therefore as follows : Please take this matter very seriously .
Something which is not founded on injustice can be made public , can be made accessible to public discussion , can be opened up to public debate .
This establishes trust rather than secrecy .
Mr President , I am grateful to Madam Torres for bringing forward this extremely good report .
The conclusions reached in the Social Affairs Committee were developed as an insight into the citizens ' interface with the institutions and the methodology with which we bring about this application of law across the European Union , particularly in the social arena .
We listed many faults .
The conclusions from the Committee dealt with , for example , equal opportunities and the use of structural funds and the inadequate addressing of this point ; the free movement of people ; the testing of collectively-agreed directives separately and differently from Community law in general ; the judicial and legal customs of Members States around the European Union .
We should not just test the letter of the law but the effect of the law as well .
The implication that so much law can apply in such a non-uniform way , should prompt the Commission to respond urgently to the issues Madam Torres accepts .
She accepts only some of the issues raised in the Social Affairs Committee and I regret this .
Particularly the technical / legal customs and traditions which exist in all countries across the European Union should be considered in terms of their effect and not just their letter .
Settlement finality
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0005 / 98 ) by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the common position established by the Council ( C4-0534 / 97-96 / 0126 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on settlement finality in payment and securities settlement systems .
Mr President , as the rapporteur has already stated , we in the Christian Democrat and Social Democrat Groups have agreed a common position in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
We support this position .
The rapporteur has done an excellent job .
The fact that we have not restricted the proposal to payment systems alone , but have managed to include securities and settlement systems , is a real achievement .
This was a very important point .
What I also consider to be of great significance is the principle that all creditors be treated equally in the event of insolvency .
Here we have now created a substantial legal framework against a background of maximum publicity and we have done this within the scope of that which can be politically achieved at the present time .
This is all down to Mr Lehne and for this I wish to express to him my heartfelt thanks .
We shall be supporting this common position here in Parliament .
Mr President , I would like to add my congratulations to the paeans of praise that have been heaped on the rapporteur for his wisdom , and particularly to speak in support of his Amendment No 5 which has been co-signed by Mr Rothley on behalf of the Socialist Group .
That amendment goes to the heart of what is a very important problem in this proposal .
This proposal , incidentally , is a major part of the single market programme .
It concerns the dangers of what might happen if a bank , for example , were to be declared bankrupt at the beginning of a payment transaction and the message about that bankruptcy were not transmitted to the rest of Europe until too late .
Amendment No 5 anticipates the difficulties that might arise under that situation , though , as has been pointed out by other speakers , it shifts the burden of proof .
I would just add in parenthesis here that the drafting of the original directive was perhaps not as good as it might have been .
I am not sure that the common position as it has emerged from the Council is necessarily perfect but I hope that we will be taking one step further towards an improved text when we vote tomorrow .
I would support what the rapporteur said in suggesting that the Parliament should accept all of the amendments which have been proposed by my group and the Group of the Party of European Socialists , particularly in the all-important Amendment No 5 which relates to Article 3 ( 1 ) .The whole purpose , of course , is to ensure that the settlement systems operate properly within a single market .

But it is also to make sure that there is an adequate settlement system without too much risk of people being deprived of their due payments under the European Monetary Union settlement system .
This is an important measure from every point of view and to that extent we should , perhaps , congratulate both the Commission and the rapporteur and hopefully the Council - though sadly the British presidency is not present this evening - because this is a very important issue for Europe 's principal financial centre which is , of course , London .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive concerning settlement finality in payment and securities settlement systems is born out of the incontestable fact that a few cases where large banks have been declared bankrupt have severely tested the financial system , both at national and international level .
The aim of the Commission 's proposal is to establish a privilege for institutions that are party to multilateral agreements on netting , collateral security or credit guarantee systems , thereby making all the creditors in the multilateral circuit immune from any insolvency proceedings opened against one of the signatory institutions .
To summarize , the intention is to remove the financial system from the principle of par in par creditorum and give it an advantage over all other creditors in the event of its involvement in insolvency proceedings against banks or other financial institutions .
In fact , a payment made by a credit institution to any third party would continue to be revoked if the credit institution went bankrupt under the common rules currently in force in individual Member States . However , this payment would no longer be subject to revocation if another credit institution benefited from it , even if this happened the day before the insolvency proceedings were opened and , under certain conditions , even if it happened on the actual day that the proceedings were opened .
The reasoning behind this preferential treatment , it is maintained , stems from the need to introduce safeguards within a system which , although subject to few controls , manages enormous amounts of capital obtained , as we know , from millions of savers .
Although these considerations are no doubt worthy of attention , the consequences of the new directive must , nonetheless , be properly evaluated .
Are we sure , for example , that it will not have negative repercussions on the fabric of small and medium-sized enterprises which , as everyone knows , form the backbone of the European economy ? They are also the only means of creating new jobs but will obviously be excluded from this system which we can certainly describe as privileged .
As always , our debate is taking place amid the indifference of public opinion which is not informed , until it is too late , of what is being planned in this Chamber .
Perhaps the glare of public opinion would force us to be more cautious .
To conclude my brief speech , while fully appreciating the hard work done both by the Commissioner , Mr Monti , and the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , I feel I must emphasize that creating an insolvency-proof financial zone may also be risky and increase the gulf that separates the Europe of Institutions from the Europe of citizens , all the more so as , at the present time , the Union is not yet engaged in harmonizing bankruptcy law as a whole , despite repeated requests from the European Parliament in many of its resolutions .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his usual , very thoughtful work .
The object of this proposal is to protect the banking settlement systems from the insolvency of the participants .
The reasoning behind this proposal is to prevent creditors from claiming payments already made into the banking system when the insolvency of a bank is opened .
If this were not the case the banking system would suffer from a lack of certainty .
Creditors will still be able to claim against an insolvent bank but without undermining the banking system of payments .
The main issue of concern is at which time should the insolvency proceedings be deemed to have started .
In my view , payments made in good faith on the day of insolvency proceedings being opened should still be protected .
Although the number of time zones in the European Union is fairly limited compared with , say , the United States , nevertheless there is some divergency and certainty is essential in insolvency proceedings .
Consequently , I note Article 3 of the proposal and support compromise Amendment No 5 which , although not perfect , is a reasonably fair reflection of the situation .
Again , although this may seem , as I have said many times in this Chamber before , a rather arid and academic subject , it adds to the protection of consumers and banking laws and systems in general .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for their valuable contribution to the consideration of this proposal .
Although , as a member of the Commission , I cannot agree with what has been written in Mr Lehne 's report to the Committee on Legal Affairs , I do understand the legitimate concerns that lie behind it .
It is precisely for this reason that I would like to express my appreciation to Mr Lehne and Mr Rothley for introducing new amendments for this part-session to replace the previous ones , which the Commission welcomes wholeheartedly because they help to clarify and improve the proposal .
This proposal will fill a gap in the legislation relating to the single market as it provides legal certainty with regard to cross-border and domestic payment and securities settlement systems .
Until now the uncertainty concerning the legal framework to be applied in the event of insolvency has inhibited the development of these systems .
This was deplorable , considering that the efficiency of cross-border transactions has increased substantially since these systems have been in place .
It is also legitimate to expect a reduction in the cost of business transacted through them .
Studies carried out by the Commission have shown that , because of the inefficiency associated with cross-border transactions , the charges for low-value transfers - which are , after all , what interests our citizens the most - may amount to as much as 25 % of the sum transferred .
Another important aim of this directive is to provide a legal basis for establishing collateral security with the central banks of other Member States , a practice which will become even more important with the introduction of the single currency .
Finally , this directive will be an essential back-up instrument - it is on record - for the target , the vehicle through which the European Central Bank will create the common monetary policy .
New Amendment No 5 balances two interests : on the one hand there is the interest in protecting the payment and securities settlement systems and avoiding major crises in the financial markets , and in this respect South-East Asia clearly illustrates the effects of such crises , not only on national economic systems but also worldwide ; on the other hand , there is the need to respect the principle of par in par creditorum in bankruptcy law .
This amendment represents a fine balance between the two interests .
Paragraph 2 of Amendment No 6 clarifies what was previously stated in more ambiguous terms in Article 11 of the common position .
The Commission can therefore agree to the deletion of Article 11 and its substitution by this paragraph .
The fact that Member States can impose a duty of supervision on systems may not under any circumstances prejudice the powers conferred on the European Central Bank pursuant to Article 22 of its charter .
In this regard , bearing in mind all that has been said , I would like to recommend the following wording be added to paragraph 3 of Article 10 : " in addition to the duty of notification under the first paragraph and without prejudice to Article 22 of the charter of the European central banking system of and the European central bank or the areas of competence of the European central bank , the Member States may subject to supervision or request approval for systems which enter within the respective jurisdictions ' .
Finally , the Commission is prepared to accept the greater degree of transparency with regard to the sender of a payment or a transaction concerning securities , which has been introduced in the third paragraph of Amendment No 2 .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that , thanks to the fruitful dialogue between our Institutions , the Commission is able to accept the two new amendments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Connected telecommunications - Mobile and wireless communications
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0023 / 98 by Mrs Read , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on connected telecommunications equipment and the mutual recognition of the conformity of equipment ( COM ( 97 ) 0257 - C4-0275 / 97-97 / 0149 ( COD ) ) ; -A4-0027 / 98 by Mr Camisón Asensio , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the further development of mobile and wireless communications - Challenges and choices for the European Union ( COM ( 97 ) 0217 - C4-0271 / 97 ) .
.
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal concerning connected terminal equipment first came to this Parliament in 1990 and was based on a proposal from the Commission about mutual recognition of type approval for terminal equipment .
That approach was based very much on the test house system and mutual recognition in every country in the Union of acceptable testing .
For a variety of reasons which are articulated very clearly in the Commission document , the Commission feels it appropriate for a new proposal and a different approach , based on manufacturers ' self-testing and a unilateral declaration of conformity .
Broadly , I and the Economic and Monetary Committee voted in favour of this approach .
The proposal contains measures about the definition of equipment and essential requirements and about the procedure for ensuring compliance .
One matter which has exercised me , as the rapporteur and other colleagues on the Committee , is the whole question of the ability of terminal equipment either to damage the network or to damage the users .
I listened very carefully to the representations to me about how likely this was and how great a danger it presented .
If it presents a danger - and I was convinced that to some extent it does - then it is right to allow the possibility of the withdrawal of those products from the market or temporary disconnection .
I have submitted some compromise amendments which I hope are going to meet with the approval of other groups in this House which have addressed this issue but suggested that any remedy should be proportionate to the chance of any damage , either to the network , I emphasize , or to the users .
I spent some time too looking at the rights of disabled consumers who traditionally have gained employment in this field of the telecommunications industry .
It was interesting that the Amsterdam Treaty , drawn up at the time we were considering this proposal , makes its own statement on which I draw . I think it is worth quoting from it .
It is a declaration regarding persons with a disability and it reads : ' the conference agrees that in drawing up measures under Article 100a of the Treaty establishing the European Community , the Institutions of the Community shall take account of the needs of persons with a disability . '
For that reason , part of my report and my suggestions cover this very matter .
It is right to stress that we support the Commission approach ; we know that there has been a revised Presidency text taking into account many of the constructive points put forward by the many lobbyists and I have tried to take those into account when drawing up my own proposals , even though we were procedurally working with the Commission 's original text .
I commend my compromise amendments to you and I very much hope that we can have a constructive and thoughtful first reading .
Before I continue , I would like to make an announcement , and I hope that everyone who is going to participate in this evening 's debate or is intending to listen to it , can hear what I am now saying .
As you know , it was the intention to have a break at 8.00 p.m. , but because we only have around 1 ½ hours of debate left , I propose that we continue the debate until 8.30 p.m. and then close for the day .
I am pleased that Mr Herman and others look happy .
I therefore consider it accepted .
Mr President , the Commission has brilliantly conveyed the vital issues in relation to mobile communications and new developments in cordless communications .
The intention is to develop more efficient mobile communications systems to meet users ' needs .
The explosive development in telecommunications has been changing our world at a very fast pace .
Things go at enormous speed and do not hang around waiting for the slow decision-process to take effect in Europe .
What we now need from the Commission is a clearer plan for the third generation UMTS system , and involvement in the international promotion of European views .
The Commission has to stress its special role as emboldener and researcher .
The continued tale of success of the European GSM , and the growth of markets require a strong policy of support .
The outlook for mobile communications is promising .
Markets are growing and , at the same pace , industry 's expectations for sales of cordless and fixed multimedia applications are growing also .
International competition for customers is fierce , however .
The keen Asian markets are growing fast , in spite of the crisis .
There are great demands now being made by consumers .
They want to combine mobility , telecommunications and multimedia .
It is vital to see how European and Asian user needs and spheres of development in markets differ from each other .
Unless these needs are understood in good time , Europe might lose its influence and no longer be an important player in this important area of industry .
Computer technology and the communications industry are important for the whole European economy , because they are a meaningful and ever-growing part of industrial activity and because they offer the possibility of more jobs .
Strong domestic markets have given European industry , as far as GSM is concerned , the best conditions for competition in the world market .
This competitiveness in products and services coming out of the production process must be preserved , because it forms the basis of the developing information society .
The social dimension must be brought in here , with the assurance that the sparsely populated regions can also have a share in this future supply of services .
There have been bad experiences from the so-called frequency auctions in the United States .
With them the price can get so high that it clearly affects the operator 's ability to get sufficient coverage and provide a decent service .
This would distort competition and hamper the chances of new , innovative , small-sized companies getting into the market .
Mr President , firstly a few words about Mrs Read 's report .
It says that there is a need to ease the advent of new telecommunications equipment onto the market .
Since 1991 there has been a principle of mutual recognition where the authorities in one Member State do not need to approve equipment for the market if one other country has already done so .
Now they intend to ease the process still further .
The Greens think this is risky .
We agree with Mrs Read that in the future we should try to work in harmony , in order to ensure that safe and userfriendly goods will come into the market .
We must take care that the work environment is not so confusing and complex as to encourage a growing variety of telecommunications systems , which are not at all compatible for the user .
We especially support Mrs Read in the concern she has expressed in many of her amendments .
Also linked with this is the need in future to demand that this new technology will present no problems for the disabled .
Here there is a very great danger of inequality arising out of the prospect of new telecommunications equipment making it difficult for disabled people to work .
I believe the Commission has to address this matter much more seriously .
Finally , the most outstanding thought we had on Mr Camisón 's report on cordless communications and mobile phones was that the Commission should give strong support to how this kind of electronic smog might affect our health .
This is an important point when we consider how more and more new wavelengths are being split up .
Mr President , I am grateful for an opportunity to add my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Camisón , on his report .
My group is delighted to support it .
I briefly want to draw attention to just a couple of points .
One is that his work is very much about the future , albeit the immediate future as his explanatory statement rightly stresses .
He says in his report that ' the concept of third generation mobile communications is not yet fully developed but the problem is only one of time and progress seems unstoppable ' .
Later in his report he and Mr Lindqvist both stress the importance of the competitiveness of this sector and its importance in making sure that we have a viable , competitive European industry to compete against Japan and the United States of America .
His report also talks about the importance of market forces and the balance between that and regulation .
The consumer is less and less interested in the means of making a telephone call or using other telecommunications services .
What they want is to do it cheaply , effectively and efficiently and this is an important part of this equation .
I congratulate Mr Camisón .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Open network provision ( ONP ) to voice telephony
The next item is report ( A4-0013 / 98 ) by Mrs Read , on behalf of the European Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the application of open network provision ( ONP ) to voice telephony and on universal service for telecommunications in a competitive environment ( amendment of European Parliament and Council Directive 95 / 62 / EC ) ( C4-0003 / 98-96 / 0226 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I have great pleasure in recommending that the plenary approve the joint text that has gone through the conciliation process .
If I could remind you - and I am sure Commissioner Bangemann and his officials will need no reminding - this is the third attempt we have jointly made to get this proposal right .
It is somewhat ironic , in particular in view of Mr Camisón 's report that it is almost in danger - as I am sure the Commissioner will say - of being overtaken by technology .
Certainly many long-distance calls are now made via the Internet rather than traditional telephony methods .
Nevertheless , one of the reasons Parliament rightly placed great emphasis on consumer protection in connection with this report is because this is the basic voice telephone service that most of us use in making our day-to-day telephone calls .
We tried very much to have the needs of the ordinary domestic consumer , the small business , in mind when we were conducting our deliberations .
I want to place on record my own thanks to the Commission officials who had endless patience in the many meetings we had on this , Parliament officials in the conciliation service and , of course , the presidency .
We were able to get a conclusion , not absolutely what we wanted but sufficiently meritorious to command the support of this Parliament on the concept of affordable price . On the question of the cost of universal service , about consumer protection and service quality , about the protection of disabled users ...
I apologise for my cough . Whisky would be better than water ! ... about the protection of disabled users and again we use the new clause in the Amsterdam Treaty , about number portability although we recognized that this is also much more appropriate in what stems from the Green Paper and with regard to network access .
It is the best outcome and one that merits the support of this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after what Mrs Read has just said , there is not much to add .
I too would like to congratulate the Commission and the Presidency of the Council for having had the patience to negotiate inch by inch with Parliament in order to achieve something which was acceptable to the industry , the companies and the consumers .
I believe that the compromise obtained is a good one .
It was due time to reach it , because the deadline had been passed .
Everything should have been ready on 1 January this year .
We are a few weeks late , but I do not think that is irreparable .
The most important thing is to continue along this line , in this direction , and I am pleased that Parliament , I think I am now able to say this , will be supporting the conclusions of the Conciliation Committee virtually unanimously .
Mr President , first of all , I hope Mrs Read 's health has improved a little .
I do not think that a whiskey would be a good idea in this House .
We should not drink whiskey , Mr President , so that we can have sober debates .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate Mrs Read on this report and on her efforts to come to a common rule in this field of universal service .
I think that on this point we have had a very important struggle to formulate concepts such as affordable prices and the cost of public services and so on , and to arrive at a common position with the Council and the Commission .
It was worth it in every respect .
What is also very important on behalf of my group , I think , is that we included the notion that Member States may make additional demands , but that they are not allowed to transfer this to the operators .
Because I think this gives telecommunications another opportunity to develop further in a sound way .
I think that the charging principles which we have adopted are good .
It is a pity , therefore , that as soon as than number portability became a reality , and people were having the opportunity to change operators , Deutsche Telekom immediately set itself up to give the customer a penalty discount .
I am therefore glad the Commission immediately responded .
But it does indicate that we will have to be alert when discussing the subject of number portability and carry preselection in this House during a second reading .
I would like to speak up once again about public emergency services .
I know that the Commission is looking at this at the moment .
We have the emergency number 112 , but in a number of Member States such as Spain and Greece the number does not work .
In Belgium the police are still driving around with a reference to the old emergency number , and in a number of Member States telephone operators only speak their own language to the great frustration of foreign tourists who are stranded .
I would really like to ask the Commission and the Commissioner to breathe new life into the emergency number 112 .
I am glad that on the issue of the disabled we have reached an effective agreement and compromise .
I believe this means that the European citizen has a decent piece of legislation .
It is obviously evolutionary legislation .
During the review in the coming years we will have to come back to this .
Mr President , what I have to say will not take long .
Mrs Read deserves our applause .
She has achieved an excellent result for Parliament and indeed for consumers everywhere .
Concerted action of this kind does not always necessarily produce a satisfactory result .
Sometimes one simply has to accept something because one can do nothing else , but in this case Parliament 's amendments represented an improvement on the original proposal and most of these ultimately prevailed .
As to the question which Mr Herman raised yet again , namely whether in this situation one should be satisfied with these provisions and even with the date , it is naturally true that with Parliament 's final decision we have lagged a bit behind the 1 January deadline .
Last week we had some time off .
We are now making up for this .
Last week we heaped praise on Mrs Read and other Members of this Parliament , and this may to some degree compensate for this loss of time .
From a practical point of view there is nothing wrong in this , Mr van Velzen .
Even the Deutsche Telekom decision , which you have again referred to , must first be approved by the national regulation committee .
That body is responsible for looking into such matters , and in this respect the customer can rely on the fact that such decisions will not be made over his head by the so-called operators , but will actually be properly examined .
As regards the other point which you raised , namely the emergency number , there is in fact no legal problem because the Member States have accepted this position from a legal point of view .
There are practical problems with the conversion , but we will be discussing this at the next telecom meeting so that progress can be made here .
Let me express my overall thanks to Mrs Read .
If it were not considered a bit risky nowadays , I would say that we were moving towards a love affair , because one could not have wished for a more agreeable or more sincere partnership .
I therefore extend to the rapporteur my warmest thanks .
And I hope that my colleague Mrs Bjerregaard is not too jealous .
( Mrs Bjerregaard : But I am , Martin )
Socrates
The next item is report ( A4-0012 / 98 ) by Mrs Pack , on behalf of the European Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Decision amending Decision No 819 / 95 / EC establishing the Community action programme Socrates ( C4-0002 / 98-97 / 0103 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is of course a good thing that the Conciliation Committee succeeded in obtaining a modest increase in funding for the Socrates programme , though as Mrs Pack quite rightly says , this is not in fact a real increase .
Nevertheless , we must accept the result .
Unfortunately I fear that this decision indicates that there has been no improvement in the European Finance Ministers ' basic understanding of the enormous significance of the European youth exchange scheme for European policy , integration and employment .
If the European Community is only prepared to provide for youth policy actions no more than 1 / 270th of the amount which it allocates to agriculture policy , then this is simply disgraceful .
As we prepare for the entry of central and eastern European nations we now need more than ever a greater exchange of people and ideas in the field of education and a greater interchange with the young people of those countries , in order to overcome the historical alienation which exists between the different European peoples .
But I would also advise all politicians with an interest in employment affairs , who quite rightly deplore the scandalously high level of youth unemployment , to take a very close look at the correlation which exists between the increased availability of work experience in other countries and the new employment opportunities for young people in the European job market .
More and more employers are including overseas work experience and knowledge of a foreign language as essential job qualifications , and let us not forget the importance of cooperation between schools and colleges in Europe for the introduction of innovative teaching and education methods and for the overall level of qualification being achieved .
There is no doubt that EU education programmes such as Socrates have proved an overall success .
The Socrates programme is a first-class way of promoting integration and , in conjunction with the Erasmus programme , for example , it has certainly promoted the concept of Europe among the young people of the Union .
But the scheme is only open to a few , because it is hopelessly underfunded , and this has had fatal consequences .
Study grants are underfinanced and even here we see social selection taking place .
The average grant is between ECU 50 and 100 .
Such a situation is socially incompatible and tends to undermine the impact of the programmes .
We have all heard the complaints of our own constituents and we know of many applicants who have missed out here .
The critical funding situation is even beginning to threaten the popularity of the programmes themselves .
In view of the allocation ratio of 1 to 10 in the case of Erasmus , some colleges and even a number of vice-chancellors ' conferences have considered withdrawing from the programme .
We all want to see study periods spent in other EU countries recognised once the student returns to his country of residence .
We therefore need more money to support schemes such as the European Course Credit Transfer .
And we also want to see more students being provided with grant assistance for foreign trips , provided that these are being organised for practical purposes .
I believe that we should fight for a substantial increase in this programme budget .
Mr President , the enlargement of the European Union is important for the whole of Europe and for all Europeans .
What is more important is that this process be undertaken in an orderly fashion .
The membership negotiations which are to commence shortly will seek to achieve this objective .
But the so-called pre-membership strategy also serves to achieve these ends .
Within this strategy one fact which has particular weight is that we quite consciously wish to include the central and eastern European states in one of the most successful Community programmes which we have launched in recent years .
Erasmus is a programme which , in place of neurosis and xenophobia , seeks to establish a Europe-wide network of young people as part of their education process .
These young people have intercultural experience , a knowledge of foreign languages , which is expanding , and are undergoing an expansion and transfer of know-how , from which we shall all profit .
I know this personally as a trustee of one of the Erasmus programmes which brings together law students in 15 Member States , and one hopes that in future this will also include the countries of central and eastern Europe - and the legal fraternity is notoriously difficult to bring together because of the alleged and actual disparity which exists between our various legal systems .
This year for the first time we resolved to extend the Erasmus programme beyond the existing framework .
The Council and the Commission then got out their red pencils .
Criticism has already quite rightly been expressed that , had this House not insisted on its rights of conciliation , then a good idea , and a necessary one for a larger unified Europe , would have seen its progress checked in a way which would have not really been enforceable .
As a university lecturer , I wish to thank all those involved for supporting this initiative .
Good things obviously take time , but this should not be taken to extremes .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate all those involved in conciliation and achieving more for the Socrates Programme than some of us even dreamed was possible .
It is one of the best , most important and most popular of European initiatives .
A recent article in one of the British magazines said that most EU citizens could not even tell you what the EU is for and the British disease of Euroscepticism was creeping across Europe .
There is no better way to counter scepticism than to provide education .
Education and opportunities to learn about other countries , other cultures and other people ; to learn about the joint history of Europe and to build on what unites us and not what divides us .
Mrs Pack spoke about a Europe of the citizens and this is what Socrates works to provide .
It can be the key to countering the Euroscepticism to which I referred .
With the expansion of Europe , as Mr Rack described a few moments ago , the Socrates programme is more important than ever .
In talking about enlargement of the European Union , it is important in providing exchanges - exchanges of people , yes , but exchanges of ideas and information too .
Countries that are developing and recovering from repressive regimes need extra funding and there are wide differences in the amount of funding available for education .
By coincidence , there is a study being launched today by the National Union of Teachers of England and Wales and the Educational Institute of Scotland which talks about comparisons in education funding across Europe .
In this Chamber we all know about the importance of education and the importance of realistic levels of funding to give young people chances in life and equalities of opportunity .
Somebody said that the trouble with education funding is that it is a bottomless bucket .
It is true that we could always spend more .
Mr Elchlepp spoke about the amount of money the European Union spends on agriculture and the amount that is wasted on the common agricultural policy and abuses in that system .
There are millions of pounds of European money going in fraud .
New Parliament buildings are going up across Europe .
Shortly we will have four hemicycles .
We have fancy offices which most Members did not want and cannot justify .
These - rather than providing education for the young people - are strange priorities for Europe to have .
Education and learning about Europe is a priority and needs funding .
The Socrates funding , as others have said , is always well spent .
Mr Elchlepp said that it is heavily over-subscribed in Germany as it is in other countries .
It is a success and money well spent .
We must address our priorities and this report is going very much in the right direction .
I support it as does my group .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Pack for the splendid work she has done for the programme , especially in her defence of Parliament 's view on the Conciliation Committee .
The ECU 70 million addition to the Socrates programme is a positive move .
We must nevertheless remember that even with this additional financing the resources planned for the programme will not be sufficient to do all we need to do .
Article 126 of the Treaty on European Union defines community goals in education and policy on youth .
In the spirit of the treaty let us strive to bring the European dimension to the question of education .
The goal is an extremely clear one and one that is important in structuring a real Europe of citizens .
Unfortunately , not everyone has internalized this as yet .
Each Community-spent mark , franc or crown which helps our citizens to become more mobile in a concrete way , makes the Union seem more real and meaningful in the eyes of our people .
If students and researchers are made more mobile this should be the key project for both close-knittedness in the Union and future enlargement .
It is vital that Socrates money be increased significantly in the near future .
It is a crying shame that some of the exchange programme places have not been filled just because the Erasmus project was so meagre in its funding and so young people have not been given the opportunity to study abroad .
I know of examples from Finland where the Erasmus student grant was 2 000 marks , or around 15 000 Belgian francs a year .
The sum is ridiculous , and is forcing many students to fund their overseas education with loans .
Is this the European dimension in educational development ?
The Union must try to see that everyone wishing to go abroad gets a basic cost-of-living allowance .
The status of the Erasmus-funded student is of little comfort to the young student or researcher seeking the international experience .
Mr President , going from ECU 25 million to ECU 75 million is a major achievement .
This is all down to Mrs Pack and at this point let me thank her most sincerely for her successful efforts .
As part of the debate on the eastwards enlargement of the EU we must be careful to ensure that these new member countries also have access to the European education programmes .
But this cannot be done without the financial means .
One of the most important points concerns the preparation of the countries in question and the creation of a solid basis for universal education and vocational training .
I am sure that their involvement in the Community programmes will have a positive effect on the participants and that this represents an excellent basis for preparing for membership .
How else should young people better learn about democracy than in an exchange with other young people in Europe ?
And I am in no way excluding Turkey from these considerations .
Here too , participation in the various programmes will help young people greatly increase their understanding of the democratic processes and I would very much welcome the opportunity to resume this debate in the coming months with my report to the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , where I am hoping for support .
Now I am anxious to know how the programmes are progressing .
We will have to carry out a census in order to identify and retain those which are successful .
Admittedly some aspects deserve criticism , such as the amount spent on application procedures .
I also hope that we can count on increased resources for adult education purposes .
Lifelong learning is now more important than ever and we must continue to impress this on the national consciousness .
The 1996 European Year of Lifelong Learning has already proved successful and it would be logical to follow this up by launching projects within the Socrates and Leonardo programmes .
Finally , let me say how much I welcome the increasing emphasis being placed on quality assurance in Socrates .
I hope that the Council will support Parliament in its efforts to set up a European network .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is pleased to confirm that it has been possible to achieve agreement on Socrates within the conciliation procedure .
The outcome is due in part to the fact that Parliament was prepared to prioritize the programme for 1998 and 1999 .
I would like , on behalf of the Commission , to give special thanks to the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and especially the Committee 's chairman , Mr Pex , but of course most of all to the rapporteur , Mrs Pack , for the perseverance they have all shown , and also to those responsible for budgetary affairs , in particular Mr Samland and Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , who have done a great deal of work , as we have heard during the debate here this evening .
The conciliation procedure has thus very quickly led to a result which all the institutions can support .
That shows how successful the programme is and that there is the desire to put the programme in a better position to fulfil the objectives set .
It will , of course , be far from being a question of luxury , but it does involve a substantial sum , and it will be noticeable in connection with all the activities under the programme .
The Socrates programme provides a solid basis for the future .
We therefore value the input you have made during the conciliation procedure in order to achieve a result which clearly shows that the Union wants to create an even closer relationship with its citizens .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Wild animals in zoos
The next item is report ( A4-0010 / 98 ) by Mr White , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council recommendation relating to the keeping of wild animals in zoos COM ( 95 ) 0619 - C4-0103 / 96-95 / 0333 ( SYN ) .
- Mr President , we really need an EU directive on the protection of wild animals in zoos .
A simple recommendation on how the EU States should keep their zoos would be non-binding , non-enforceable and would just not be good enough .
Some zoos in the European Union are little more than concentration camps for animals .
People who visit them with their eyes open will see animals who are distressed and demented within their confined enclosures .
Minimum rules to protect these animals are long overdue .
From an educational point of view zoos can be highly misleading , as they try to teach children that it is acceptable to keep wild animals in confined spaces .
Educating children about the wide variety of animals in the world is hugely important but if wild animals are put on display in conditions vastly different to their natural habitats , the effect is mis-educational .
It would be far better to use advances in interactive technology to give children an impression about natural habitats and the need to protect these habitats and preserve them .
The argument that zoos are essential to the conservation of endangered species is not borne out by experience .
In many cases there has been a much higher death rate among zoo animals than among their counterparts in the wild .
For example , in Dublin Zoo almost fifty per cent of all the hippos born there over the last decade have died in infancy .
That is a mortality rate several times higher than for hippos in the wild .
Furthermore , the very highlighted role of zoos in conservation of endangered species is wildly exaggerated .
Research by the wild life organization Born Free has shown that only three per cent of animals held in world zoos belong to internationally recognised captive breeding programmes .
There is no doubt that certain species of animals like , notably , large cats , birds , elephants and giraffes experience recurring problems in zoos .
These animals are kept in zoos solely to attract people through the entrance gate and it is wrong and dishonest of people to suggest otherwise .
Finally , I would just like to say that the experience of Dublin Zoo , for example , last year was extremely disturbing .
There were a huge number of events where questions need to be answered .
Eleven penguins died and that has not been explained ; there was only one that actually survived .
As well as that , there was a rhino that tried to escape and was shot without using a tranquillizer to minimize the pain ; that has also not been explained .
Zoos are unessential in this so-called civilized world of today .
- Mr President , I strongly support this report and I very much hope the Commission will take the view of the Parliament that we want a directive on the management of zoos .
I speak in my capacity as President of the European Parliament 's All Party Group for Animal Welfare .
There is a longstanding pressure from this Parliament for a directive .
The sad thing is that some six or seven years ago there was almost a total agreement with the need for this directive from the Parliament , Commission and the more responsible people who manage zoos .
This fell foul of the rather silly argument about subsidiarity .
This is an area where it is sensible that the decision should be made at European level .
We want to ensure that proper standards are maintained right across the European Union .
We have heard one of two speeches this evening by people who question whether we really need zoos at all .
I do not entirely go along that road but I do take the view that zoos that do not maintain the best possible standard and the most natural environmental conditions for their animals are unacceptable and should not exist .
So we want these high standards .
As the rapporteur said , there is a considerable interchange of animals between different zoos .
This is often inhibited because , quite rightly , zoos which are responsible organizations and care properly for their animals are reluctant to transfer them to zoos that are not .
Countries that do not maintain the very best standards for their zoos lose out in this way , and incidentally lose out on tourism .
Zoos are attractive from a tourist point of view but tourists will not go to those countries again and visit their zoos if they see the animals are not being properly cared for .
It is in everyone 's interests that we should maintain the very highest possible standards and I hope that this report has some success in pushing that aim forward .
Mr President , I believe there is only one issue that is really facing this Parliament and I thank Mr White for bringing forward this report in the way that he has done .
There is a great deal of unanimity in the Parliament on most animal welfare issues .
We have been the main institution at European level that has driven animal welfare forward as an issue at all .
I personally am a staunch supporter of stricter animal welfare laws and this Parliament 's leading in the field of animal protection . Whether it be farm animals , animals in transport or animals in laboratories , it is all part of the same issue .
Zoos which we are discussing here tonight come into the same category .
The issue of animal welfare in zoos has been , as pointed out , under discussion for a decade at least .
It was a predecessor of ours , Sir James Scott-Hopkins , who raised the issue initially .
Action is needed .
Animal slums actually exist in Europe at the present time trading under the name of zoos and that is not good enough .
If we want to do something , we have to do it properly .
A recommendation which people can ignore is just not good enough .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will be able to give us an answer tonight as to what your position will be if Parliament takes a very strong stance on this and calls for a directive rather than for a recommendation , which is what the Commission is currently proposing .
I can foresee that the Commission will be extremely unpopular in this Parliament if they go against the will of the people .
Subsidiarity has been mentioned and of course it is an issue but animal welfare as a subject is seen , in this Parliament especially , to transcend all matters of subsidiarity .
I hope Commissioner that you will spell out quite clearly your own position because we must have a level playing field in this area , otherwise the people of Europe are going to be highly discontented with this Parliament and I believe with the Commission .
Mr President , I was originally rather a sceptic about the idea of having a European directive on zoos but I have been converted to the idea by a number of considerations and I am grateful to Mr White for his generous reference to Sir James Scott-Hopkins when he introduced his report .
First of all , we have to consider whether or not Europe is actually legislating , if it does legislate through a directive on zoos , in response to a popular demand .
After all we do an awful lot of things that most people do not like , including the introduction of a single currency .
The people of Europe must sometimes wonder whether there is anything going to come out of Brussels that they actually do want .
We have heard enough today , at least from the British Members and also from Mrs Redondo and Mr Lindqvist to make us realize that this is actually rather a popular issue and would be sustained by a popular demand that Europe should act .
The second issue , is it appropriate to consider this a European responsibility ?
Mr White has referred to what happened at the Edinburgh Summit .
My understanding of the chain of events was that essentially it was Chancellor Kohl who came in at one point and said : ' What we do not need is for Europe to go on fiddling around with detailed legislation ; for example , there is this proposal for a directive on zoos , surely we can junk that one ' and generally threw his weight around .
And when Chancellor Kohl throws his weight around people tend to take notice .
I disagree with that idea ; I think it is appropriate to consider this as an European initiative and I take issue with the point about subsidiarity .
Subsidiarity does not necessarily mean , as Mr White has realized , that you pass legislation down to a lower level of responsibility .
It means that you legislate at whatever level is most appropriate .
It seems to me that in this instance we already have the idea that animal welfare is accepted as a part of the European Union 's responsibilities .
We should also take into account a point raised by Mrs McKenna which is that zoos look after part of the general environmental heritage .
There is a sense in which a supranational body is the most appropriate body to look after that .
The other question I would like to consider is will it be possible to enforce - I think it will .
This is actually one of the directives it would be reasonably easy to enforce .
My problem with Mr White 's report is that I do not see how easy it will be to translate what has been proposed as a recommendation into a directive .
What stance would the code of practice have ?
Can you have a code of practice in a directive ?
Would it be legally enforceable ?
I also disagree with the rapporteur on seeking to widen the legal base to include Article 100a for reasons given in the Legal Committee 's opinion .
For once , I hope that Mr Kohl will be ignored .
I hope that Mr White will be able to work on his government , which has written to me that they are not necessarily over the moon about the idea of a European directive on zoos , and I look forward very much to a positive response from the Commissioner .
Mr President , as many speakers have mentioned , we are discussing a proposal which has been on the table for almost seven years .
In all that time the wretched conditions for many animals in certain European zoos have not got much better . Indeed , in some they may even have got worse .
I entirely agree with Parliament that this is unacceptable .
Unfortunately this delay is due to irrelevant discussions which are not so much concerned with the content of the proposal as with the form any involvement by the Community should take .
Parliament has consistently supported a directive , and I am sure that Mr Elliot , who is also in the All Party Group for Animal Welfare , and others can remember that I personally , both in the group and in reply to questions here in Parliament , have spoken in favour of a directive .
I can therefore give a very simple answer to the question put by Mr White about why I gave him that written answer .
It was because I considered it proper to sound out the new Commission and see whether it was possible to get a change in the view that it should be a recommendation , but it was not possible , and that is why Mr White received the answer concerned .
It is , you see , the case that the Commission and the Council have unanimously decided that they do not want a Council Directive on animal welfare in zoos and that they think this should still be a matter which falls within the competence of the individual Member States .
So that is where we stand today .
Therefore , in my opinion , Parliament should consider whether there is not a possibility that the Community could make a meaningful and positive contribution by issuing a recommendation from the Council , because that could prompt the individual Member States to adopt appropriate rules .
It may not be ideal , but it is better than nothing .
It goes without saying that against this background the Commission will not be able to accept many of the amendments proposed by Parliament .
I shall not go into details , but we cannot in fact accept any of the amendments apart from one , which Parliament will certainly think is quite unimportant .
It think it can be said that the report concerned contains the elements required to form a basis on which the Member States can quickly adopt appropriate regulations .
I am convinced that animal welfare organizations in individual Member States will contribute to reasonable supervision .
So , against the background of the information available , I would recommend that we try to progress with a recommendation .
Thank you , Madam Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , during the sitting yesterday adjournment of a debate was requested under Rule 131 .
The debate covered asylum rights and the adjournment was requested by Mr Schulz .
It can happen , of course , that adjournment has to be requested , but we have a feeling that the Socialist Group plays these kind of tricks every time .
We saw it last week at the part-session in Strasbourg during the debate on drugs policy which was adjourned on the same grounds , and yesterday we had to witness this trick with regard to asylum policy .
We are under the impression that the Socialist Group does this when they cannot win a debate .
It was clear that on drugs policy they were going to lose gloriously in the House .
It was clear that on asylum policy the opinion of the Socialist Group was not going to be shared by the majority of the House .
Mr Nassauer made that clear more than once to the Socialist Group .
Using Rule 131 to spring surprises on Parliament does not fit in with the mores of the House .
I have become familiar with the excuses of the Socialist Group , but I do think that on this point we have to make agreements in advance .
It is not acceptable to spring surprises on one another .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , I let you speak for longer than your allotted speaking time , but I would like to ask the other members who have asked for the floor to keep to their speaking time .
I assume that you wish to speak on the same subject , Mrs Fontaine .
Madam President , I would like to address the same subject , that is , referral to committee of the asylum rights issues which were decided upon yesterday afternoon .
Of course , I am not contesting the request for referral which is entirely in accordance with the rules , but rather the conditions under which the vote was taken .
Only 51 Members were able to take part in the vote , and I feel , Madam President , that this number is not very representative of our House , particularly on such a sensitive issue as that .
However , I think that we gained at least one thing from it all ; we were able to carry our a very useful practical exercise in measuring the time and distance between our offices and the Chamber .
I hope that this information will be recorded in the minutes .
Many of us were trapped in the lifts which were , of course , stopping at every floor to admit colleagues who were hurrying to get there , and a large number of us arrived just a few minutes before the vote .
Madam President , might I request that the Quaestors provide a rule which specifies that a period of 15 minutes be allowed between the first bell and the time of the vote .
I feel that this proposal is very reasonable , and will submit it to the Quaestors .
Madam President , I agree entirely with what Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mrs Fontaine have just said .
On page 15 of the Minutes , I see that the president of the sitting responded to the speakers who raised the arguments just mentioned , saying that ' two Members spoke and this left enough time for Members to get to the Chamber ' .
I would strongly reject this , because in fact a number of Members heard the bell and immediately hung up their phones , some quite casually according to their interlocutors , but they were not actually in a position to be able to vote .
This is scandalous .
I would point out that in national parliaments there is not just one bell - some of our colleagues even thought that it was a fire alarm .
As already requested , Members ' offices should be fitted with lights , as is the case in some parliaments ; these would indicate when the vote is announced to give the Members the time they need to get to the Chamber .
I would ask the Office and the College of Quaestors to tackle this issue .
Madam President , I agree with what Mrs Fontaine and Mr Pasty have said but I should like to broaden the matter rather than narrow it down .
We accept what happened yesterday on the floor of the House because it was under the existing rules .
The unfortunate thing was that time was not allowed for Members to get here .
It is Rules 126 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 131 and 132 which need to be looked at .
Those rules say quite clearly that the vote will be taken immediately .
What does immediately mean ?
When the bells are rung it normally means that we have ten minutes before we get to the plenary for the start of a session .
The bells rang yesterday , but as Mr Pasty quite rightly said , there was no other indication whatsoever what was going on in the Chamber .
I recognize that we have just moved into a new building and the full scenes are not yet available on our television sets but it is an issue that the administration needs to address .
Maybe this should go to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities so that the Rules can be changed to accommodate what happened yesterday .
Madam President , I also want to complain about what happened last night .
Not only was I not able to get to the vote but I was out of the House on parliamentary business and came back to speak .
The world was waiting to hear my words on Socrates and was deprived of them .
Changing parliamentary business at the last minute as was done on a very small vote last night is totally contrary to the spirit of democracy .
Speaking on behalf of the Green Group , I utterly condemn what happened last night .
( Mixed reactions )
Madam President , first of all I naturally reject what Mrs Oomen-Ruijten just said about the attitude of the Socialists .
And I would go further than that : on page 14 of the Minutes it says that when Mrs Díez de Rivera - in other words , I - arrived in the Hemicycle yesterday after the bell rang for the vote , I protested there and then because we had not been given enough time to get to the vote , when it was an exceptional vote .
So , Madam President , I agree with what Mr Pasty , Mrs Fontaine and Mr Provan said , but I was late , despite running out of my office .
Therefore , once again I reject Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's criticism of the Socialist Group , and there is the proof that we all tried .
Madam President , as is clearly apparent , the Social Democrats have also had difficulties getting to the vote concerned here .
I am , of course , also sorry about the problems which other groups have had , but we tried to warn them in advance that we wanted to have a vote under Rule 131 because we believe that , after the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party had withdrawn their signature from the joint proposal , we needed more time to draw up a joint text on the right of asylum , which could also achieve broad support in this House .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think we are agreed that Rule 131 of the Rules of Procedure was the basis for the vote .
So I am satisfied that the Rules of Procedure were correctly followed .
However , I recognize that those Members who have expressed the view that the distance here is too great have some right on their side .
I think it is the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , and not the Quaestors , who should look at that Rule and consider how we can make sure that this does not happen again .
I have to say that my own office is on the 12th floor , and I also heard the ringing ; I got here just as the vote was taking place .
It was certainly very tight and we cannot allow that to happen in the future .
For the time being , I am bound to say that matters were conducted in accordance with the rules yesterday .
During the next part-session , the Conference of Presidents will have to decide where this will come on the agenda .
However , I shall pass on the criticisms that have been made here both to the Bureau and to the Conference of Presidents . We can then decide whether to forward the matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , or whether , as Mrs Fontaine has suggested , we can find a simple solution in advance , so that we have acceptable arrangements in future .
Madam President , what Mrs Jensen is saying is terrible .
I like her , but we cannot have a situation whereby. when another group withdraws its signature under a resolution , Parliament no longer votes on a text .
This is happening for the second time now .
First it was drugs , now asylum policy .
The Socialist Group is not going to make it and simply says : well , then we will withdraw it .
This is unparliamentary behaviour .
It does not fit in with the mores of the House .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , someone has already pointed out - I think it was Mr Provan - that we should have been informed that a vote was taking place and what it was about .
I can only say that we all have a duty to look at the agenda .
Everyone had a chance to check what was on the agenda , and everybody knew that according to the Rules of Procedure anyone can adjourn an item at any time .
Those are the rules but I do have some sympathy for what has been said .
Madam President , I would suggest one simple way of overcoming the problem of the distance between Members ' offices and the Hemicycle .
It is one that a colleague of mine has already adopted .
It would simply be for Parliament to provide all Members with bicycles .
Thank you very much , Mr Watson !
Training of seafarers
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0411 / 97 ) by Mr Parodi , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive amending Directive 94 / 58 / EEC on the minimum level of training of seafarers .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the amendment to the Directive on the minimum level of training for seafarers , which is the subject of the present recommendation , was prompted by the need to adapt the training of seafarers to suit the actual conditions which pertain in maritime transport , in particular the new technological developments which have been introduced on board ships and new methods of occupational training .
Let us not forget that 80 % of maritime accidents can be directly attributed to human errors or omissions .
The objective of the revision of the STCW Convention and the associated amendment to Directive 94 / 58 / EEC is to remedy this situation and , if possible , to lessen the impact of the human factor on maritime accidents .
This goal can be achieved by establishing minimum requirements for the occupational training and watch-keeping certification of seafarers , providing effective control of the application of international regulations and preventing the credibility of the certificates issued from being damaged by a general failure to comply with the provisions of the Convention , as has happened in the past .
In my judgement , therefore , this amendment must be regarded in a positive light , as it represents a step towards increased safety and reinforces the powers of the IMO with regard to procedures , the supervision of training methods and certification .
At first reading , the guiding principle I adopted when drafting my report , with the decisive support of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , was to improve and consolidate as far as possible the proposal for a directive by eliminating any uncertainties in law and legal disputes concerning the obligations of Member States with regard to the issuing and recognition of seafarer 's training certificates , thereby preventing the employment of barely qualified crews .
In fact , I believe that a rationalization or harmonization of the criteria used for recognizing qualifications , coupled with the adoption of strict quality requirements , may help to raise seafarers ' level of competence , improve the safety and competitiveness of the Community fleet and reduce the number of substandard ships .
As I have said before , safety is at stake ; however , I must add that the Commission has amended its initial proposal in light of the first reading .
The Council 's common position has welcomed the sense , the concept and the objectives which are an integral part of the amendments made to the provisions of the original proposal .
In fact , the Council has reworded a number of paragraphs in the initial proposal .
It has also introduced new paragraphs which are more in line with Parliament 's wishes and whose objective is to increase safety .
The new articles concern the rules governing coastal shipping , sanctions and disciplinary arrangements , quality standards , medical requirements , the issuing and registration of certificates , the liability of shipping companies and the inspection of landing facilities .
These are articles which , together with the other amendments , have the merit of removing uncertainties and simplifying interpretation .
In conclusion , at this point I believe that the common position and the position expressed by the European Parliament which inspired the amendments have been fully taken on board by the Council .
Thanks to these amendments and the present improvements , it will be possible to take a further step towards increasing safety at sea , an objective which Parliament has been pursuing for many years and which we shall continue to pursue .
Madam President , on behalf of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to begin by expressing my wholehearted support for this proposal for a directive amending the original directive on the minimum level of training of seafarers .
It is another positive step in the improvement of both safety at sea and the protection of our very important marine environment .
Bearing in mind that over the past decade we have lost some 12 , 000 lives at sea throughout the world - and , indeed , continue to lose more than 200 ships a year throughout the world , we in the European Union need to be constantly on guard to enhance and improve the standards of safety at sea .
The essential essence of this directive is to address the human factor .
As the rapporteur , Mr Parodi , quite rightly pointed out , some 80 % of maritime accidents are attributable to human error and therefore this key issue should play an important part in our maritime strategy to enhance safety and protect the environment .
It is vital that seafarers receive the necessary high level of training and certification in order to reach the level of competence and skill needed during their service at sea , to be able to communicate effectively with the crew , follow instructions and advice and , on occasion - all too often I fear - deal with crisis situations .
Vessels must be crewed by seafarers who possess the necessary theoretical and practical knowledge .
This current proposal seeks to incorporate the requirements of the 1995 Convention on the standards of training of certification and watch-keeping for seafarers .
I would like to congratulate the Commission not only for keeping pace with international maritime law but transposing it into Community legislation to ensure that it is effective throughout our European waters .
I hope that the Commission will continue to maintain this pace of improving safety at sea .
This proposal for a directive seeks to include the new training and certification requirements , including watchkeeping requirements and to introduce common criteria for the recognition of seafarers ' certificates issued by third countries .
Like Mr Parodi , I was pleased that the Council , with the support of the Commission , has incorporated most of the ideas and objectives of the European Parliament in the first reading .
I am pleased to say that Mr Parodi successfully managed to further clarify and enhance the Commission proposal , removing uncertainties and simplifying the text .
I was particularly impressed with the emphasis which the rapporteur put on the need to attract young people into the maritime profession and to promote the employment of seafarers .
In its recent communication ' Towards a Maritime Strategy ' , the Commission indicated that there is a worldwide shortage of qualified and able seafarers .
Developing a European policy to bring young people into the profession is a vital means of providing both highquality seafarers and helping resolve the problems of unemployment in Europe , not least in our maritime communities .
I would like to take this opportunity to commend the rapporteur on the importance he placed on having a common working language to be able to work effectively and , in particular , handle crisis situations .
I look forward to the implementation of this directive in Member States as another positive move in our campaign for maritime safety .
I would conclude by urging the Commission to ensure that this amendment to the directive is implemented , is transposed and is enforced by the Member States .
We have recently had a report that some 60 % of all transport internal market directives have yet to be transposed by the Member States .
Perhaps the Commissioner would like to comment on how best we can ensure that this very worthy directive is not only supported here in this House , implemented by the Council but is actually implemented on the ground by the Member States and their enforcement agencies .
Indeed , I would like to see some mechanism whereby we can have a regular reporting mechanism to ensure that safety standards throughout the EU are not only maintained but are implemented and enforced at a high level .
Madam President , on behalf of the European People 's Party I must stress that we too support the common position , as amended by the Committee on Transport 's three amendments , which we already approved in committee .
I must point out that the proposal being considered amends Directive 94 / 58 / EEC , which was adopted by this Parliament , and also that it is a directive which has largely been incorporated into the national legislations .
Consequently , I am optimistic that the amendments to that first directive , concerning which we have the present common position , will enjoy equally rapid incorporation into national laws .
This new amending directive certainly represents great progress .
Its most important point is that it introduces measures which could constitute incentives to attract new young seafarers .
On the other hand , the new directive clears the picture , because it makes a clear distinction between matters relating to the training and recruitment of seafarers , and those relating to how crews on ships operate .
I must therefore say that while we all welcome this progress achieved by the new , supplementary directive , it should at the same time be noted that the Commission has not adopted initiatives in the area of positive measures on behalf of European shipping .
We make progress with safety issues , we extend the controls applied to ships in European ports and in terms of the ability of the crews that man the ships , any ships , and steer them into European ports , but we have still done nothing to propose positive measures to stop shipping from abandoning European flags .
The Commission has been slow about that .
It seems that there is a dearth of ideas in the Commission , that it has no proposals to offer .
There is of course a proposal on shipping strategy , but because of the many problems it created , that has somewhat fogged the whole picture of European shipping policy .
I should like to say , however , that it is time for , and we are waiting to see , a new spirit , a new approach to the issue of positive measures on behalf of shipping , because we continue to progress haphazardly either via second ships ' registers , and now every country is setting up a second ships ' register , or by continually running down the European flags to the benefit of other , improbable flags , and I stress this point .
There are tiny islands which have large merchant fleets .
This is not the right time to point out the dangers in that , but from the floor of Parliament I once more call on the Commission to reflect on how it could deal with the problem we know as ' positive measures on behalf of shipping ' .
Madam President , I too think that the report by Mr Parodi contributes greatly towards improving the Council Directive amending Directive 94 / 58 / EEC , and our group supports it .
Of course , I would like to mention two reservations or questions , ones that stem at least from our experience of Greek shipping , granted that Greece has one of the largest merchant fleets in the European Union .
The first reservation relates to the statement that 80 % of accidents are caused by human error .
The experience we have from Greece is that while human error certainly plays a major part , a very large proportion of accidents are caused by the operation of old vessels which can only respond to bad weather or other problems with great difficulty .
I could accept Mr Parodi 's argument if , under the heading of human error , we included neglect , criminal neglect and the criminal cover-ups often associated with the operation of such vessels .
My second reservation relates to the recruitment of young people to ships and this is an orientation that is very important indeed .
However , once again our problem in Greece is not that the young are not attracted into training with a view to having a professional career in shipping , but that the labour market for shipping is constantly being restricted , decreasing and contracting , despite the fact that Greece has a very large merchant fleet .
And that , in my opinion , is because shipowners all too often pursue a policy of recruiting cheap , ill-trained crews from third countries , from Asian countries etc . , with the result that , not only is the labour market reduced in the Community area , but there is also a lack of safety in the operation of the vessels .
The three amendments insisted upon by Mr Parodi have our support , in relation both to medical fitness and to watch-keeping conditions on the bridge , as well as the subject of restricted rest periods .
In particular , however , we should note the matter of verbal communication .
There is often a very great problem with verbal communication among the crew , which often leads to accidents .
And I would like to say that Greece has recently suffered two major shipping disasters , with many lives lost at sea , which took place during the holidays .
Madam President , I should like to join in the congratulations to Mr Parodi for his excellent work and welcome the constructive nature of this whole debate .
I would also like to echo the points made by Mr Watts about the dangerous nature of seafaring .
We broadly support the whole thrust of this report .
Like Mr Sarlis and Mr Alavanos , however , I share the concern about crews from third countries which are an increasing phenomenon in the EU shipping area .
It is causing a lot of concern , not only in Scotland where I come from , but over a huge range of European countries .
It will be helpful for the port states to have a role in this .
They will be crucial in enforcing the standards which we rightly expect of the European countries .
I would like to say to Commissioner Bjeregaard that the challenge now from the point of view of the European citizens is to see that the standards that we expect are applied to those third country crews .
Otherwise , there is a grave danger that a lack of fluency in the right language , the failure to be able to communicate could put lives at risk .
In a year when a large box-office draw is a film about the sinking of the Titanic , we need no reminder how terrible disasters are and we want to do everything possible to prevent their occurrence .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there are a considerable number of accidents caused by human error in the domain of seafaring which have serious consequences for human life or for flora and fauna .
In far too many cases , ships show the flag of convenience and are manned by non-Community crews , so ensuring a cheap workforce .
The National Front has always denounced this movement of workers which means using an under-qualified , non-European workforce .
Not only is this harmful to employment , but it is also endangers the safety of ships and of our coasts .
We must oppose the concept of social dumping which pays a Polish or Chinese sailor FF 2500 per month , where a French sailor gets FF 10 000 .
We can only relaunch and protect this sector by adopting a systematic policy of national preference for employing sailors , and direct or indirect financial support for its own shipping fleet by each country .
So we welcome the report by Mr Parodi which aims to promote an adequate level of sufficiently harmonized training and professional competence which will increase safety of seafaring within European .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think this is a good example of how the Council of Ministers and the Parliament can work together .
In response to a good proposal by the Commission we have essentially agreed in two readings on how the training of seafarers could be improved , with particular reference to their protection and to protecting our citizens and the environment .
As various Members have already said , substandard ships are the nub of the matter , although I must tell my friend from Greece that I am not quite sure if I would include old ships .
Ships may be very old , yet if they are well maintained and have a good crew , they are highly seaworthy .
I sincerely believe that the human factor is one of the main causes of accidents , and - we are lucky in having the right Commissioner with us this morning - accidents at sea often result in dreadful pollution which put nature and the sea seriously at risk .
Training seafarers so as to avoid accidents can accordingly make an indirect contribution to preventing sea pollution and to environmental protection .
I believe it is particularly important that watchkeeping requirements have been tightened up .
But it is my belief , whether the Titanic is a good example or not , that they knew what was happening .
They just needed to react properly .
However , the economic interests of the company outweighed the need to protect passengers .
We must make sure that never happens again , so I believe that these watchkeeping requirements are very good .
But watchkeeping is not of course the end of the story .
Mr Parodi has once again brought forward a very good proposal from the first reading .
Madam Commissioner , it would be wonderful if you could give this additional Parliament amendment your support , as its aim is even more stringent treatment of exceptional circumstances in relation to watchkeeping , and I believe that safety at sea must come first .
On the latter point , I should like to support what my colleague has said .
It is no good at all if the Parliament and the Council , in conjunction with the Commission , make excellent law , and if Member States implement this law by amending training regulations , if the same Member States then fail to ensure that checks are carried out under Port State Control to ensure that ships are , in practice , only crewed by well trained seafarers .
In this context I think we need to ask the Commission , regardless of subsidiarity , to check whether training regulations are being adhered to , under Port State Control .
Madam President , I am very pleased that the rapporteur , Mr Parodi , is satisfied with the main approach of the Council 's common position on the training of seafarers , just as most of the speakers have been .
I therefore also hope that Parliament will approve it at the part-session .
The Commission considers the joint position to be acceptable throughout because it is in agreement with the principles in the original proposal which was supported by Parliament .
In addition , it represents a clarification and , in particular , greater consistency in relation to internationally recognized requirements found in the revised STCW Convention of 1995 .
In addition , as Mr Parodi states in his recommendation , account has been taken of the substance of the most important of the amendments which Parliament adopted during the first reading .
I would therefore like to urge Parliament not to insist on the amendments set out in the report , because they are actually contrary to the three fundamental principles of the directive .
The common position has been formulated so that it agrees as far as possible with the STCW Convention of 1995 .
Amendment No 1 weakens this relationship because it changes wording which precisely corresponds to Rule 1 / 9 No 1 of the Convention .
I hope Parliament can recognize that it does not really make sense to deviate from this principle .
Another fundamental principle is that the amending directive must not make the non-binding part B of the STCW Code , which serves as a guideline for the national authorities , binding .
However , the addition proposed in Amendment No 2 corresponds to the wording of the non-binding part B , while the common position is in full agreement with the binding part A. Parliament will in any case be aware that the question of non-binding guidelines is discussed in the seventh consideration in the common position .
The third principle is to maintain the spirit of Directive 94 / 58 / EEC which deals with standards for the training of seafarers .
It was never intended that the directive should deal with watchkeeping conditions as such .
Within the framework of the directive , the Commission and Parliament have succeeded in persuading the Council to incorporate certain rules on watchkeeping conditions in Article 5 H , on fitness for service , into the common position , namely rules on preventing fatigue and the associated safety risks .
These concern minim um rest periods which several of the speakers have also mentioned .
I hope against this background that Parliament agrees that the rule on watchkeeping conditions in Amendment No 3 is not appropriate for this directive .
Madam President , I have tried to explain as fully as and clearly as possible why the Commission cannot support the proposed amendments .
I hereby urge Parliament to reconsider its provisional position on the proposal so that we can get this legislation in place as soon as possible .
Madam President , if the Commissioner is going to ask us after such long discussions to reconsider our amendments again , then I for one believe that it would be much better for us to adopt the three amendments and ask the Commission to consider their position again , because their presentation was incomprehensible !
Madam President , a number of Members raised a key issue , namely that it is all very well for this Parliament , the Commission and the Council agreeing legislation but how do we ensure that it is respected , not only by all Member States but also with regard to ships flying flags of convenience ?
I understand that this it is difficult for the Commissioner to react immediately but on a future occasion we would like a response from the Commission as to how we can ensure that this very worthy legislation is uniformly applied throughout European waters to ships , irrespective of flag .

Madam President , very briefly I should like to say to the Commission that I have noted a certain hardening of its attitude . Let me explain .
While we make ourselves available to resolve a very serious problem which certainly merits much greater attention , I do not think we should be asked to do a U-turn . Rather , it is the Commission which should be looking more towards the future and taking decisions more in keeping with the wishes of fifteen countries who are asking for this .
Madam President , it is clear that I will pass on the message which Parliament has given today , but as you know it is not the Commission alone which decides whether anything will come of a piece of legislation .
What I expressed hope for in my closing remarks was that we could get the proposed legislation implemented soon .
I feel quite certain that my fellow commissioner , Mr Kinnock , will be very careful in ensuring that the Member States also comply with the legislation which is adopted , and will also make use of the fund we have available for the implementation of the adopted legislation .
But the request concerned the fact that we are very keen to have a piece of legislation adopted soon .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.00 a.m.
Trans-European hydrological networks
The next item is the report ( A4-0407 / 97 ) by Mr Izquierdo Collado , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the technological feasibility of trans-European hydraulic networks .
Madam President , in Parliament we have had some very important - I would even say beautiful - debates about water , thinking about water as a resource and an essential part of culture , which even distinguishes the cultures of different peoples .
This aspect of water , as a basic resource , is becoming more significant as time goes by , and it is already apparent that in the next century those water resources will become even more important .
The European Union must keep a very careful eye on this fundamental aspect of sustainable development and peaceful coexistence within Europe , and this is what we are working towards in Parliament .
What has the European Union done about water resources ?
It has done some important things , but always focusing on water quality .
Obviously , at the moment , when we are so concerned about atmospheric pollution , and world summits are being held to protect the ozone layer , the quality of water resources needs to be protected firmly and vigorously .
I think the Commission is clear about that .
At the moment , it is preparing a directive which , unfortunately , is incomplete .
We have received a communication and a correction , and another correction is in progress , which perhaps does not give the best impression of the directive . However , the European Union is undeniably doing something about water quality .
I believe it is essential to protect our water , and work in that direction must continue .
Well , Madam President , in addition to quality , we also need to talk about the quantity of water .
While we were carrying out a study into this , through STOA , and during the Parliamentary initiative , Commissioner Bjerregaard , who is here with us now - and is not listening to my speech at the moment because she is not wearing her headphones - had the good sense to speak on behalf of the European Union about the amount of water , almost for the first time .
She did so following her visit to Seville , in Andalusia , where she was able to see that talking just about the quality of water will not solve the European Union 's many water problems .
And indeed , the European Union can contribute that element of added value so that the optimization of water resources , at EU level , can be a reality .
Obviously , the Member States are working on their catchment area plans , and those plans are necessary in order to rationalize the various hydrological basins so that water resources can be rationalized in those areas where , for geographical reasons , such steps are necessary .
But we have to go a step further and carry out transfers of water between the basins if we want to provide solutions to the structural problems which arise within the European Union , such as flooding , drought and desertification .
Therefore , to a large extent , my initiative report attempts to draw attention to the fact that we need a European hydrological plan , and it is our duty to start designing it now : a plan which considers the overall needs of the European Union , and therefore administers water resources efficiently , constantly and strategically , protecting the environment , of course , and allowing it to be reactivated and improved through the use of that water . That European hydrological plan could be used to do many things , both in areas susceptible to flooding and in areas affected by drought .
In the report I give an example , which could be applied to other areas : connecting the basins of central and northern Europe with basins in the south which are short of water .
This would have no noticeable negative effect on the basins in the centre and the north , and the added value which could be contributed by transferring certain quantities of water could provide the answer for improving the hydrological plans of the southern Member States . These Member States ' plans are necessary but cannot be put into operation , because the prolonged droughts of six or even seven years mean that the basins in the south which normally have an excess cannot transfer water to the southern States ' own deficient basins .
I want to conclude by saying that the report is highly sympathetic to the fact that water is an extremely sensitive subject , and makes it absolutely clear that no water could be taken from any Member State without its express consent .
Madam Commissioner , I think there is a chance for us to work in this direction , and people are very hopeful that the Commission may be able to work to further this report , if it is approved by Parliament .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Izquierdo Collado , for his excellent report .
The report underscores the problems of the uneven distribution of water resources in the countries of the European Union , for example , between northern and southern Europe .
So it is important not to ignore the angle of studying the technological feasibility of a given network which could effectively resolve the issue of water shortages in certain regions of Europe .
Of course , the study must show us that a viable solution exists , and this is why I insist that it is important that the European Commission gets this prospective study underway .
We do not have a great deal of experience of this in Europe .
We only know about the draft study between the regions Languedoc-Roussillon , in southern France , and the Barcelona region in Spain .
So as a Frenchwoman , I am particularly interested in this subject .
A prospective study on transferring water between two European regions must define the needs , the possibilities and also the different impacts and the potential which exists in Europe .
It must be a comprehensive study , taking into account any effects of this type of network on the management of water resources .
The rapporteur has of course explained that fully .
At an environmental level , this study must be accompanied by specific investigations which take into account all environmental aspects , such as the impact on landscapes , natural surroundings , ecosystems and human activity .
I would also like to make an important point clear to all our colleagues , as the rapporteur has done : a project of this sort , if it is feasible , cannot come about without the agreement of the country which would be required to transfer part of its water resources to a region suffering from an imbalance in its resources .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Izquierdo Collado for his hard work but also for his astuteness in picking a subject of paramount importance and for approaching his work in a spirit of scientific and technological inquiry .
He used a STOA inquiry which is exactly what we should do in this Parliament to test our views .
That STOA study made it absolutely clear that this is something the European Union should tackle .
Of course , it is an overwhelmingly important subject . It will dominate us in the 21st century .
We must look not simply at the quality of water but at its location , its availability , and how it is managed .
We need a European audit of water in our Community .
Water was identified as one of the key areas when the task forces were set up by Mrs Cresson .
We need studies on reforestation .
We need to learn from the mistakes of the last two or three centuries which have left parts of the world as desert .
We need to look at how water can be retained .
We need to look at the location of water and how infrastructures could be used .
In doing all these studies we must look at the impact they will have on the environment .
The pilot scheme which I commend in Mr Izquierdo Collado 's report would be an excellent way of seeing in practice how this would be feasible .
This continent will have to study water very soon .
Let us not wait for more crises .
We need rigorous and exhaustive impact studies before any such scheme takes place .
That is one condition .
The other , as Mr Collado has said , is the wholehearted and informed consent of any Member State whose water supply is involved in such a hydraulic network .
Madam President , the first thing I want to say is that we think this initiative report by Mr Izquierdo Collado is very timely , but , at the moment , it is just a technological evaluation of the feasibility of these trans-European hydrological networks .
In this Parliament , and in the European Union , we are working on the Fifth Framework Programme for Research and Development , which places great importance on the question of water .
And that importance , ladies and gentlemen , is due to the fact that most of us in this House are convinced - some are not , but they will soon see - that water is far more important than oil , gas or any other form of energy , because without water there is no life .
However , anything that comes out of this study must definitely be included in the water management policy which , as Mr Izquierdo Collado said , is in its infancy in the European Union .
Whoever does this study will of course firstly have to take into account an analysis of the alternatives . The first alternative is to use water better .
We can save a lot of water if we use it better .
Secondly , we have to consider other sources , such as the desalination of sea-water , for example . That is essential for the European Union , in order to produce technological equipment which could be exported to other countries , given that the big problem of the 21st century will be water .
It is possible there may be wars over water , ladies and gentlemen .
So we are talking about an enormously important technological question .
Thirdly , there will need to be an assessment of the energy balance-sheet . It seems to me that this is the big difficulty which these hydrological networks will encounter .
If they use up too much energy or if the results are energetically unacceptable , these networks will not be much use .
In any case , however , there are many hydrological basins which have already been connected , with transfers being made from one to another .
But it is only natural that we should first make these connections and perform these transfers within our own countries .
Madam President , Spain , where both Mr Izquierdo Collado and I come from , has a great deal of water , but it is not very well distributed , either in time or in geographical location .
It is all up in the north , around Cantabria , with very little in the south .
Therefore , we will study these actions in the centre of our country very carefully and , if appropriate , and if the Union makes that decision , we would join in with a water policy based on hydrological networks .
Obviously , the economic aspects will need to be studied .
Water is badly treated and not given the consideration it deserves : it does not receive sufficient financial resources , especially at municipal level .
I think whoever does the technological evaluation work will have to bear that in mind .
Obviously , there has to be an environmental impact assessment - European legislation demands that - but there would also have to be a strategic assessment of the plans themselves .
I want to inform the rapporteur that the Group of the European People 's Party will support his report , although some of our members have certain doubts , perhaps because they see this important question in a different light .
However , I congratulate him in any case .
Madam President , this may appear to be a rather out-of-the-way issue for us in the European Parliament .
However , water is vital for everyone .
It is a natural resource which everyone needs for survival , so it is natural for us to discuss it here .
Two questions must , however , be asked .
The first question is whether this is a matter for the European Union .
Or is it a matter which naturally falls under the principle of subsidiarity , i.e. is it the responsibility of the Member States ?
The other question is whether the proposals presented in this report are good .
Are the large-scale proposals for the interconnection of European hydrological networks good ?
I shall attempt to answer these two questions on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party .
Firstly , it is currently the case that all rules which regulate natural resources are national . For example , in all countries we have national legislation for forests , land and water .
That is natural , since forests and land lie within the nation states .
Even for water we have national legislation .
But there is a difference : water flows between different countries , rivers flow through different countries and lake systems are shared .
Therefore , there is a common interest in safeguarding water as a natural resource , both with regard to the quality of the water and ensuring that everyone has a share of it .
So the question is this : is the proposal to interconnect hydrological networks good ?
We must really question whether this is the right way forward .
Is it right that mankind should interfere with natural hydrological networks with large-scale exploitation and solutions ?
We have no idea what consequences that could have for the ground water , the climate or the environment .
It is also true that many of the problems which exist because of water shortage , droughts and floods , which we are trying to solve here , were caused by our human intervention , such as logging , plantations and earlier water controls .
If we are going to do something , we must first of all optimize the installations which already exist in order to make better use of the water in Europe .
To conclude : water is primarily a national concern , but with some common responsibility to use it sensibly and for everyone to share in it .
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party accepts a study , but it should first of all be directed at existing installations .
I myself am going to abstain from voting .
Mr President , this report by Mr Collado emphasizes that within the countries of the EU there are different conditions as far as access to water is concerned .
In one region there may be a shortage of water , while in another on certain occasions there is a great surplus of water .
This is quite simply governed by the laws of nature .
To then suggest , as the rapporteur does , that we should take initiatives to try to restrain the laws of nature and to redistribute the water , so that it is more evenly distributed in the EU countries , is quite alien to me .
The truth is also that it is often mankind that is largely behind the water problems we have , through , amongst other things , agriculture or through the building of various infrastructure projects .
One example of this is Hallandsåsen in Sweden , where the ground water was lowered according to the criteria determined for the building of a tunnel through the ridge .
Mankind 's way of living gives us a number of explanations for today 's problems with water shortages or surpluses of water .
It seems as if people now believe the solution is to manipulate water courses further .
Such a measure involves interference with nature .
That is generally irreversible and therefore it should not be done , out of regard for the principle of caution .
Of course we should consider the issue of water here in Parliament , because the kind of water we have is vital .
Above all it is water quality that can be an EU issue , and where we at EU level should try to achieve something .
There should be no interference with nature to change or manipulate water flows .
The Green Group in the European Parliament is not going to support this report and will therefore vote against it in the final vote , just as we did when it was discussed in committee .
Mr President , I first want to express our most decided support for the report presented by Mr Izquierdo Collado , and especially for the implicit message contained in that report , which I think everybody has noticed , since the actual implementation of trans-European hydrological networks represents an important way of contributing to economic and social cohesion .
I do not think it is a question of governing the rain , as has been said here , but rather of somehow reusing it , or being well prepared , so as not to lose a single drop of that vital liquid , and to avoid the floods which have also been mentioned here so many times .
I think UNESCO has also made a statement along these lines , saying that 12 million people currently die every year because of a lack of water , and warning that in 25 years ' time more than 50 countries will be short of that vital liquid , and that potentially serious situations may even arise as a result .
In fact , we should be aware that international legislation in this area is inadequate . Many countries do not even know the extent of their water resources .
In that sense , I should like to mention the proposal being studied and discussed by UNESCO at the moment , that the age-old Water Tribunal of Valencia could be adopted in the future as an international point of reference , to help avoid some of the potential conflicts which might arise in the 21st century .
The shortage of water in certain areas represents an additional natural problem , and in order to overcome it we should act together , and from this Parliament , to urge all the peoples of Europe to show solidarity and promote really sustainable development in all the European regions . Hydrological networks , Mr President , have a lot to do with that development .
The creation of a trans-European hydrological network would therefore be a good way of contributing to the development of those regions . In that way , a common asset - water - would contribute to a common objective - Europe .
Mr President , the report by Mr Izquierdo Collado deals with a subject whose importance has not yet been fully recognized ; in the next few decades , water is likely to become an ever more critical factor in geostrategic terms .
Neither must we lose sight of the fact that if water resources decrease considerably , especially , but not solely in southern Europe , then this is primarily a result of often irresponsible human activity .
Before establishing the feasibility of setting up trans-European water networks , we must first ask if this is what we want .
Of course , not all nations are equal in terms of water resources .
But we would be wrong to believe that water is more or less limitless in some countries .
By seeking to share wealth , we risk sharing shortages .
A desire to transport drinking water over hundreds or thousands of kilometres may be satisfactory for certain industrialists , but for the importing regions this would surely be an admission of failure , and would signify giving up a real water policy .
This policy can only be local , based on safeguarding wetlands , preserving estuaries , and implementing more sparing agriculture and industry , recycling liquid waste , and if necessary , using the sophisticated technology of desalinating sea water .
This resource must be managed as close as possible to the point of consumption .
Rain water should be examined , collected and its drainage towards ground water facilitated .
This is exactly the opposite of what intensive methods of production and national and regional development have done for 50 years .
We must stop tearing down our hedges , filling up our ponds and concreting over our waterways .
We must also redevelop the Mediterranean forest areas , damaged by fires : they have their part to play in restoring water reserves .
On the contrary , a continental network of water transport would represent waste , irresponsibility and could end in shortages if we do not take care .
Moreover , I am surprised by the absence in this report of any mention of using water networks to transport merchandise , where possible , at a time when road and rail networks are saturated , or even for passenger transport within the framework of tourism .
To sum up , I would stress that in order to improve the problems of real water shortages , it is our priority to take action to stem the causes of desertification , and we can do this because most of these causes are human ones .
It is important that priority goes to local action rather than launching a large-scale operation .
Community solidarity should be expressed at this level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we shall probably only really appreciate how important water is when we no longer have any .
That is why it is no coincidence that our Spanish friend has picked this subject .
I should like to give him my very firm support .
Our friends from the northern countries have got somewhat excited about this here today , because they are afraid that the southern countries want to take away their water .
In fact , just the opposite applies , as every tomato or orange from a southern country that we eat in the north actually means that we are taking water away from the south .
Every tourist who travels to Spain or another southern country uses water .
Assuming that everyone uses two to three litres of water a day , that means that tourists visiting Spain alone consume an additional 1 to 3 million cubic metres of water .
So there is already a kind of trade in water , but it is hidden .
Just think of all the bottles of mineral water , Perrier , Apolinaris , San Pellegrino or what you will , that are shipped all over the world .
That is all trade in water , except that it is transported by bottle rather than by pipeline .
At the time of the Roman Empire , they had a 70 kilometre long water pipeline in Cologne , and they also had similar things in other cities .
Why should we not consider transfrontier water pipelines now ?
It seems quite normal to me .
Mr Pinel 's comment earlier was correct .
We need not only to work on water pipelines but also on proper management of available water . This seems so obvious to me that it is hardly worth repeating , we just need to get on with it .
Water has a role to play in a Europe without borders , not only oil , gas and electricity , the trans-European networks that we already have .
Why should water not play a similar role ?
In any case , I believe that water can be classified as a product or a service under the EU Treaty , it certainly comes under the EU Treaty and is not excluded from normal goods .
Mr President , there are parts of Europe where there is not enough water , and areas where there is sometimes too much .
Other natural resources are similarly unequally distributed : forest , gravel , ores , oil , and so on .
Would it be right to claim compensation for the unequal distribution of olive oil resources , for example ?
This region we are in here is a pretty substantial non-olive oil producing region .
Waterway systems have always caused radical change to the ecosystem .
The reference to the canals of Provence and California was made without justification or critical examination .
We could just as well mention the ecocatastrophe that the River Aral waterway system has caused .
Before decisions are made in favour of one side or the other and measures taken , we should carry out a worldwide survey of the effects on ecosystems of waterways , canals and anything else connected , at the same time assessing their socio-economic and financial effects .
In the case of Europe the matter is complicated by the fact that the effects are common to more than one Member State .
There has been plenty of experience of these for a long time now , but hardly any analytical work has been carried out at all thoroughly .
The survey should be undertaken by an independent study group or consultant .
Rights of ownership to land and water differ dramatically from one country to another .
There are countries where ground water belongs to the territory in which it is found , and is thus totally privately owned .
It is not right that the EU should interfere in individual nations ' laws of ownership .
A positive feature of the resolution is the mention of the creation of a water market .
This must be made much more of in our efforts to reach a stage where everything will happen within the framework of a free market .
Spain 's tourists are drawn by its waters .
In any case an inventory of water reserves should be drawn up and these reserves must be protected through EU directives . We must , above all , respect national law .
Mr President , Mr Linkohr , who spoke just now , asked why we should not consider trade in water , and added that water is after all just an economic commodity .
He seemed somewhat surprised at the excitement this subject arouses in countries with abundant water .
I am from Austria , and there is great excitement in my country about this , so perhaps I can help him a little here .
Many people in Europe think that every problem can be dealt with by treating it as a commodity .
Everything that there is a demand for is a commodity .
They treat cloning this way , and book price maintenance in Germany - everything is a product and you can consider everything in that light .
My question is , how do we consider things ?
Why do we not think about the causes of water shortage ?
Why do we not think about a European strategy for European water legislation , a legal , political and technological strategy for sorting out water management problems , for water conservation and reutilization ?
Why do people not worry about the mistakes made in agriculture and the single crop farming methods that are contributing to this water shortage ?
What about agricultural reform ? I think that the confidence of people in these water-rich countries is important .
It is vital that politicians recognize the value of this commodity , Mr Linkohr , that they should have some notion , for example , of the contribution Austria 's centuries-old water laws have made to giving my country its present level and quality of water reserves .
But no-one is suggesting doing anything like this at European level .
Instead , wherever and for whatever reason there is a water shortage or water quality is inadequate , we envisage simply bringing in water by pipeline from places where it is still available , and imagine that we will have solved the problem in that way .
That breeds mistrust , and that is the reason for the excitement we have seen , and we need to have a complete rethink if water is not only to be treated as a commodity , but if people are also to be aware of its value .
Mr President , I can of course understand the problems of countries who have managed their water differently , and where it is now a commodity in short supply .
But whenever we come across logistical and structural problems it seems we try to solve them by interfering with nature on a gigantic scale .
That has to be wrong , it cannot work in the long run .
Before we consider major pipeline systems , we should consider how water supplies can be provided on the spot .
We should call for urgent studies into the effect of microclimates and the effect of vegetation adjacent to water reserves .
I am very much of the opinion that not only can we influence rainfall , but that we are already influencing it through our actions .
I think that there is enormous scope for doing very positive things with our water resources , including in countries where there are problems at present .
I believe that this debate should make us think about specific measures to solve these problems .
These measures should not consist of setting up yet another network and expecting spurious solutions to solve real problems .
We cannot therefore support this report now .
However , we would like to be constructive and stress that we regard this debate as an opportunity for considering decentralized water management structures , and for investing money in them , because every ECU invested in that way will have an enormous medium and long-term benefit , I am quite convinced of that .
Mr President , you will have realized that this report has provoked a debate on a very Austrian subject . I would have been very grateful if the Member from the Austrian Freedom Party who spoke before me had used the same words that he used in Austria in connection with this report , namely that there is a water war in the EU at present .
In that light the whole picture looks quite different , and it is a very long way from the constructive approach that we are accustomed to working towards or appearing to work towards in this House .
We do not doubt the quality of this report .
We know that there is no question of making new EU law in this field .
We also know what our rapporteur has referred to - point 18 in the report stipulates that there can be no transfer of water within the Union without the express permission of the Member States .
That means that the European Treaties come into play , and in view of that I think we will have relatively few problems .
Even if this report seems a bit fishy to me , a fish with a very Spanish flavour , I do welcome the fact , as a number of earlier speakers have mentioned , including both Mr Linkohr and Mr Voggenhuber , that once again we in Parliament are dealing with one of the most important commodities , namely water .
One of our conservative friends has also quite rightly pointed out that there are undeniably ways of using and distributing water more efficiently in the southern countries .
But we need to be aware that the bill for clean water in the future will be a very hefty one .
In dealing with water management problems , we need to bear in mind that we may be talking about new policies , such as a new agricultural policy , as the present one takes no account of water at all , or , for instance , transport policy , which also fails to address water as an issue .
Mr President , I fully accept the need for bilateral agreements in this area , and I wish Spain and France well .
I am also very grateful to the Members in my delegation , and above all to Mrs Grosstête , for agreeing to an amendment to which I attach great importance , as it makes it perfectly clear that any interference with a Member State 's water without its express permission is completely ruled out .
We can only give our support if this amendment is accepted .
I understand that all Member States already have very strict and precise internal regulations governing who may access water and how , so surely this is even more important when it comes to bilateral relations .
I would like to say a few words about those states that have their eye on their neighbours ' water : do they really manage their own water carefully ?
How do industry , factories and households behave ?
Untreated water is discharged into our rivers and lakes in an appalling , dirty and dangerous state .
That is unacceptable .
It is everyone 's duty to keep their own ground water reserves clean in the first place , and only then do they have a moral right to even consider looking at their neighbours ' water !
I believe that we can only think about trans-European water networks when every country manages its own water with the utmost care .
One thing has to be clear : with the greatest respect , Mrs McNally , we do not want any wars because of water .
So we need to consider rights of ownership very carefully here .
Mr President , before long all the Austrians in the House will have said something on this subject , but we still have not said everything there is to be said .
I would like to tell Mr Bösch that I am using exactly the same words to say in Austria what I have to say here , and this is not scaremongering . I am just expressing concern , despite having great sympathy for the problems of other Member States of the European Union .
This report is based on the dangerous assumption that natural resources unevenly spread between the sovereign states of the European Union can be supra-nationally redistributed .
Water is not a natural resource belonging to the European Union , as suggested in recital D , but rather a natural resource at the sole disposal of the people of those countries on whose territory it is found .
We very firmly reject the notion that quantitative aspects of water policy can be treated as a priority European Union policy .
Nevertheless , the report does address some ideas which could provide an appropriate approach to solving the problems of countries where water is in short supply , such as technical measures aimed at improving the poor condition of water pipelines , reforestation or desalination of sea water .
Above all it is necessary to optimize existing local facilities , which would lead to a greater improvement in regions suffering from water shortages .
But intervention by the Commission in quantitative aspects of water policy would run counter to the principle of subsidiarity , and create additional unnecessary supranational powers , which would inevitably result in tensions between Member States .
Quantitative water policy is and must remain the sole preserve of sovereign states .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to say thank you for the initiative from the Committee .
It reflects the citizens ' ever growing interest in the question of water resources .
It is not only about drinking water , but about water in general as a limited resource which must be protected by a joint effort .
I can fully confirm what the rapporteur , Mr Collado , said about the fact that it made a great impression on all the Ministers when they visited Andalusia and experienced the great water shortage .
Fortunately it may be said that later ( I have just visited the Doñana area again ) the region did get some water , so the situation is not as desperate as it was at that time .
You will therefore understand that I place great emphasis on the questions of water management and the protection of water resources , and , as you know , in February and November 1997 the Commission approved a draft framework directive on water resources which will act as the central element of European water policy .
It was in fact Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection which , together with other institutions , took the initiative for a change in European water policy with the symposium on water in June 1995 .
Very briefly , a few comments on the draft framework directive on water resources , because it is currently being discussed by both Parliament and the Council , and because it contains a number of significant innovations .
Firstly , it will expand protection to cover all water resources and also promote sustainability in connection with the exploitation of these resources .
Secondly , its objective will be to achieve a good status for all water resources .
The means will be to combine limits for discharges with an objective for water quality .
Where regions or Member States share hydrological networks , they will set their objectives jointly .
Thirdly , there is the question of water volumes and the protection of water resources .
That is also being considered .
Water catchment shall be subject to a licensing procedure and an objective will be set to ensure that there is balance between water catchment and the natural renewal of water .
Last , but not least , the framework directive on water will increase transparency and ensure the involvement of all affected citizens and parties when management plans or hydrological networks are being drawn up .
That means that significant topics raised in the draft resolution have already been taken up in the draft framework directive on water resources .
Let me give a few examples : protection of both water quality and water volumes , payment for water usage with full coverage of costs , assessment of existing facilities and their best possible use , increased transparency and involvement of citizens in water management .
However , there are some questions raised in the draft resolution which Parliament 's Committee on the Environment regarded with a certain degree of reservation , so to speak .
That applies in particular to the interconnection of Europe 's hydrological networks with the aid of artificial watercourses .
The opinion of the Committee on the Environment , and I quote , ' insists that at present the European Union does not have the know-how or experience needed to establish such networks . '
I admit that I share the Committee on the Environment 's scepticism on this point .
The Commission is convinced that problems should first and foremost be tackled at source .
That is why the draft framework Directive on water obliges Member States and regions to jointly seek to solve their water problems within shared hydrological systems , but does not aim for large-scale transfers of water between hydrological networks .
At the moment , as several speakers also mentioned during the debate , the Member States and their regions show very different patterns of water-related problems and also very different strategies for solving them .
In my view that is one of the reasons why the institutions , Member States and non-governmental organizations are agreed that there is a need for a new European water policy , and I share many of the opinions expressed during the debate that this will be one of the major issues in future .
If , at this stage , the Community was obliged to set up a hydrological network , that would , in my opinion , not comply with the principles of sustainable development and of tackling environmental problems at source which are prescribed in the Treaty , and which are also one of the pillars of the proposed framework directive on water .
In addition , and here I will again point to the Committee on the Environment 's opinion , it is still too soon to start on a study which covers the whole of the Community .
The necessary data will not exist until the framework directive on water resources has been adopted , and comparable objectives have been set .
I feel there is support for this position in the opinion of the Committee on the Environment and in paragraph 8 of the draft resolution , which points to the possibilities of , and I quote , ' making the best use of existing facilities ' and the fact that it is important ' to improve management before you invest . '
But the proposed framework directive would by no means prohibit such solutions in certain regions where people are clear about the data and assessments , respect the environmental objectives and have achieved agreement between the parties .
During the development of a new European water policy , it has from the beginning been my intention as Commissioner for the Environment to consult with all interested and affected parties .
When I now look back on this process of consultation , I must regard it as extraordinarily successful , both because we have had very valuable input , and because there has been general support for the view that there is need for a new water policy , and for the structure it has been given in the proposal .
And it is also in that light that I see the very exciting debate which has taken place in Parliament this morning .
I am convinced that the proposed framework directive for water resources will form a good basis for cooperation on sustainable water management between the EU institutions , the Member States and their regions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.00 a.m.
EC- Republic of Yemen cooperation agreement
The next item is the report by Mr Pettinari ( A4-0007 / 98 ) on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the conclusion of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Yemen .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , Yemen is a country which over the past few years has made a number of major strides towards democracy and economic reform and these deserve the support of the European Union .
If we look at the political situation in the Arabian Peninsula , Yemen is setting a good example , admittedly with some contradictions , but one which requires a commitment from the European Union side by side with the authorities in San 'a .
To this end , I recommend that the economic and trade Cooperation Agreement which is the subject of my report be ratified . The report will be put to the vote shortly .
Since 1990 Yemen has been undergoing a process of reunification between the north and south of the country which has changed its geography and its politics .
With the defeat of the secessionist forces in 1994 , the country experienced an acceleration of the democratic process which has resulted in the organization of general free and democratic elections .
A delegation from the European Parliament was even able to monitor the conduct of the elections and testify to the fairness of the electoral process .
Today , Yemen has a parliament made up of 301 members in which the normal interaction between the majority and the opposition are bringing about a population with a maturing democratic awareness .
To understand my favourable views properly , you have to consider carefully the regional context in which Yemen finds itself . In the Arabian Peninsula Yemen 's democratic experience is probably the most advanced and has developed despite external obstacles and opposition , in particular from Saudi Arabia which , for obvious political and economic reasons , has always tried to place obstacles in the path of the development of democracy in Yemen .
What is more , the foreign policy choices made by Yemen during the Gulf War did not help to create a climate in which the country would be accepted into the international community .
Only now is it finding its proper role on the regional and international stage .
In this context I should like to point out the country 's constant and determined search for peaceful relations with its neighbouring countries .
This is further evidence of the existence of a deliberate democratic choice which I believe we should be supporting : a global good neighbours treaty has been signed with Oman to put an end to long-standing territorial disputes in the east of Yemen ; the International Court of Justice in the Hague has become directly involved in the dispute with Eritrea over the Hanish islands , using peaceful diplomacy to put an end to a situation which must not be allowed to wreck relations between two important countries needlessly ; contact is even being reestablished with Saudi Arabia to resolve territorial disputes in northern Yemen .
In my opinion , these are important , positive political choices to which the Union should give its backing .
Admittedly , we all know only too well that Yemen still has a lot of problems .
We only have to think of the unacceptable incidences of abduction which on more than one occasion have also involved tourists from my country .
But Yemen is undergoing a process of change and the context in which this is happening must also be understood by its critics .
In San 'a I discussed face-to-face with the country 's highest authorities the accusations of human rights violations which have also been voiced by Parliament , and I found they were open to dialogue and were prepared to provide all the explanations asked of them .
Likewise , the Yemeni authorities are aware of the different approach in Europe to women 's issues , which must not however be tackled by shutting the country out , but by fostering closer cultural and social relations which , even in Yemen , must lead to the necessary emancipation of women .
I can testify personally to the existence of a sincere and proven desire for dialogue on the part of the Yemeni authorities who are actually asking for help with specific programmes to further improve human rights and conditions for women in Yemen .
Finally , I believe that the approval of the agreement between the European Union and Yemen must be seen as an opportunity to bring about closer Euro-Arab political and economic relations in a region which is of fundamental importance to world security .
The European Union has often neglected the Arab and Mediterranean world and , in light of the current difficulties being experienced by the Middle East peace process , we can appreciate how important it is to have well-established relations with the Arab world .
Yemen is an active member of the Arab League , and the democratic experience which it is undergoing is all the more reason why it should become a political partner of the European Union .
Because of its history and its economic structure , Yemen has a natural inclination towards a priority relationship with the European Union , an inclination which must be frustrated .
In this regard , the economic and trade Cooperation Agreement which I am asking you to approve can only be a starting point for bringing about closer ties between this country and the European Union which , in my opinion , will be advantageous for Yemen and also for Europe .
Mr President , I would first like to thank Mr Pettinari very sincerely for his report and to congratulate him on the conclusions he reaches in it .
I know that he has been able to contribute a great deal through his personal knowledge of the situation in the Yemen .
This means , and I must say this straight away , that I find it all the more sad that the Cooperation Agreement was signed back in September and that we are just going through the motions by giving our assent to the agreement , so that the input of Mr Pettinari and the other people who cooperated on the report will have no influence at all on the shape of the agreement .
In this context I think it is particularly important that the agreement includes a future development clause .
This means that the agreement is simply a basis that can be built upon in the future .
Although the agreement is far more broadly based than the one drawn up in 1984 , it is nevertheless important that this is just a basis .
It is good that this agreement covers the extensions of tourism and the modernization and restructuring of the agriculture and fisheries sectors , because these are all signs that things have changed enormously in the Yemen in recent years .
We must remember what has been achieved there in just a few years : a country that was once a training centre for terrorists , and which used to be a channel for money destined for international terrorism , has in a few years achieved an incredible process of internal transformation and restructuring , which is of course associated with the reunification of the two parts of the country .
It is logical that the Yemeni people should look to us for clear signs that we intend to offer them support and for suggestions as to how this relationship between the European Union and the Yemen can be developed further in the future .
Mr President , I also want to congratulate Mr Pettinari on his report .
My colleagues from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and myself welcomed the particular agreement with the Republic of Yemen in December .
We all know , and it has been said already , that the Yemen has made great progress recently in democratization and in respect for basic human rights .
The support we are offering today is essential .
Even though it is late it is important that this Parliament should extend this support if the Union is to see itself as a genuine buttress of fundamental human rights and the freedoms which we espouse worldwide .
It provides an example and a message to other countries in the region which have very inferior human rights records and no respect for democratic methods .
Universal suffrage in elections to the Yemeni Parliament is especially praiseworthy in the context of the all-male electorates in neighbouring states in the region .
I was one of Parliament 's observers at the elections there last year .
There were shortcomings but our observations were that they were free and fair elections , despite the fact that there were segregated polling stations , and I was dismayed to see that there were separate counts taking place for women voters .
There was also a problem in that we were unable to visit certain areas for security reasons .
A number of other problems remain and some of them have already been alluded to .
For example , the death penalty .
Although it has not been implemented for several years , it remains in the Yemeni penal code .
Existing minimum wage and child labour provisions should be enforced and improved .
Literacy rates need to be improved , especially in the context of the elections where literacy was a huge problem .
Action must be taken against the continued practice of female genital mutilation .
Various NGOs from inside and outside the Republic of Yemen approached me and my colleagues from time to time with criticism about certain corrupt practices and inefficiencies in the judicial system , about individual human rights abuses sometimes perpetrated by the security forces , and the arbitrary imprisonment of many thousands without due process .
These people are taken into prison without proper documentation or proper charges being made .
So , there are those problems but by linking the human rights clause in this agreement and the non-execution clause we are provided with further leverage in pressing for observance of these rights .
Finally , despite the problems therefore , I welcome the very positive approach taken by the rapporteur .
I am sure that the benefits of cooperation will encourage further cooperation and democratization .
I consider that Parliament must continue to press for ratification by the Yemen of important international human rights conventions and continue to take up individual cases of human rights abuses as they are presented to us .
The Yemeni Government is listening to us and is taking note of what Parliament says .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Pettinari on his report and , like Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , I regret that we are only debating this now after the ink has dried .
Yemen is an interesting country in that it is one of the world 's divided countries and a country which is now trying to overcome the problems of division .
Indeed , the reunification process has not been without its setbacks and difficulties in the Yemen .
The agreement we are discussing today is the culmination of valuable cooperation between the EU and Yemen , dating back as far as 1979 , as support given to Yemen for economic and development projects totalling ECU 58 million has gradually put the country into an economic and strategic position which suggests that further positive developments are guaranteed .
I believe that another aspect of this positive situation , which Mrs Malone has already described , is the prevailing pluralistic democracy , which seems to be on the right path , despite the criticisms she mentioned , not to mention the cautious economic policy aimed at avoiding social dislocation .
But I am sure that the whole thing will only become stable once the commitments of nearly ECU 2 billion made by last year 's conference of donor countries become a reality , and soon .
This agreement will round off , so to speak , the various agreements in the Mediterranean area .
I also believe that Yemen will take this opportunity to prove to us that religious traditions and respect for human rights can certainly be combined .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution on the Pettinari report on the Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Yemen highlights three broad reasons which largely correspond to the areas of political , economic and human activity .


In the political arena , three main elements should be noted : firstly , the unification of Yemen and the attempts to reduce the internal splits between the north and the south ; Secondly , also in this area , the democratic character of the regime indicated by the elections on 27 April 1997 which has continued ever since ; and finally , the third political reason is the mandatory encouragement by the European Union in this area of personal and collective responsibility .
At an economic level , we have noted the implementation of progressive reforms which seek to avoid internal clashes in an economic context which remains difficult .
Secondly , in this domain , combined economic policies are being sought and implemented .
Finally one last point on the economic front , there are attempts to promote balanced trading ; at present there is an imbalance generally in favour of the Union which must allow Yemen to sell its original products better .
Lastly , at a human level , we are taking into account , as necessary , the needs of the Yemeni people ; they are extremely poor in comparison to us , and the emphasis is being placed on education and technical assistance , as well as the mandatory continuation of aid which contributes to the improvement of local rural development and the standard of living of the most disadvantaged people .
The combination of these reasons leads us to conclude that total cooperation is essential , and the UPE group will vote for Mr Pettinari 's report on the Cooperation Agreement between the Union and the Republic of Yemen .
Mr President , the Republic of Yemen deserves a prize for effort .
The Liberal group will therefore wholeheartedly agree with the Cooperation Agreement between Yemen and the Union .
The new agreement is an important adjustment of the agreement of 1984 .
This adjustment reflects the altered reality in Yemen .
Whilst the agreement of 1984 , as everyone knows , was signed with North Yemen , the new agreement applies to the reunited country .
The unification of 1990 laid the foundation for harmonious development in the country .
The riot threat in 1994 , thankfully , strengthened the country .
The report shows that politicians are at last convinced of the need for democracy and human rights .
Yemen occupies an exemplary position within the region .
This is often forgotten , as the region is chiefly dominated by Saudi Arabia in a positive sense , it is said , and by Iraq in a negative sense .
Foreign policy is directed at solving all disputes with neighbouring countries .
Multi-party democracy works and the parliament is elected unanimously .
The April parliamentary elections definitely deserve more than the benefit of the doubt .
In the sphere of economics , too , things are put right in conjunction with the IMF .
But we must obviously remain vigilant about the future .
Yemen is an extremely poor country in which democracy is still showing considerable gaps .
That is why we wholeheartedly support the signing of this agreement which should contribute to the intensification of contacts with Yemen .
The agreement should , on the one hand , be used to develop its economy and trade between the Union and Yemen .
On the other hand , much attention must be paid to improvements in the legal and the voting systems and in public administration .
Further strengthening of democracy must remain an important focal point .
The Yemeni government must make efforts to engender respect for human rights , to combat corruption , and to obtain further guarantees for press freedom .
This Cooperation Agreement is a prize for effort , as I have already said , and the government of Yemen deserves support for the reforms , and a boost for further activities in this direction .
The Union must seize this agreement , and intensify and diversify its efforts in the region .
We should not merely focus on Saudi Arabia , but also on other countries , Yemen in particular .
I would like to thank Mr Pettinari and to voice my respect for his excellent report .
I expected no less from him .
Mr President , for many years prior to the unification of North and South Yemen in 1990 , development was held back by border wars between the two states and bitter internal struggles which periodically flared into civil war .
Sadly , even since unification , Yemen has been the victim of the civil war of April to June 1994 .
Hopefully it will be possible to avoid any recurrence of such events and the country will be able to achieve an improved level of economic growth in future . This could provide the means of raising living standards for all Yemeni citizens , but in particular those living in poverty , deprivation and squalor , provided that this is not just left primarily to free market forces .
With this in view we should welcome the cooperation agreement before us today .
It could make an important contribution to Yemen 's forward march .
This will also , however , require real improvement in the area of human rights .
Last year this House approved a resolution which drew attention to serious human rights abuses , despite the fact that Yemen has agreed to some human rights conventions and incorporated them into its laws .
Since April there have been numerous arrests although many of those arrested on unjustifiable grounds have now been released .
One of the problems is that political security acts in a totally arbitrary manner and is responsible only to the President .
There are also Draconic punishments in the penal code of 1994 .
Women 's rights are restricted although the situation is much better than in some other Arab states .
This House should support the agreement but demand that the human rights situation is kept under close attention .
Hopefully even those accused of participation in the 1994 civil war will be amnestied since this would be a vital step to national reconciliation .
On this basis I support the report and the agreement .
Mr President , the new Cooperation Agreement concluded between the European Community and the Republic of Yemen has to be analysed within its historical context .
The unification of Yemen was supported by a majority of the population in both states , but the new government had to face the obstacles of national reconciliation and the considerable economic deficit created by the civil war .
As you know , Yemen has successfully tackled these challenges .
Today , Yemen is a single country , a unified country , and the government is doing all it can to reconcile public opinion in the south , although certain elements both inside and outside Yemen continue to offer opposition .
A united Yemen represents an important keystone , and the European Union fully supports it .
We consider that the process of democratization in Yemen is irreversible .
The country held democratic general elections in 1993 , followed by a second election last year .
As Mrs Malone said , the international observers generally felt that both elections were fair and free , irrespective of whether certain shortcomings may have been detected .
The democratic process is still young and will need help , and I want to stress that the European Commission lent its support to governmental and non-governmental organizations during both elections , and is programming more aid in order to strengthen this young democracy .
The Yemeni government has not only begun the process of transforming a strictly state-controlled economy into a free-market economy , but is also carrying out important reforms within a framework already agreed with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank .
In fact , during a meeting in Brussels in June 1997 , a sum of ECU 1 300 million over three years was promised for this operation , and the international donors expressed their support for and appreciation of the government 's efforts .
While these positive changes were taking place , the Yemeni government over the last decade has been exploring the possibility of establishing new , broader , modernized cooperation relations with the European Union .
The new agreement was modelled on the Community 's cooperation agreements with developing countries , and in February 1997 the Council approved the negotiation guidelines proposed by the Commission . Then , on 25 November , the agreement was signed .
I believe this agreement can make a considerable contribution to the processes of modernization and economic development to which the Republic of Yemen has committed itself .
The agreement includes the promotion of the private sector and the establishment of permanent economic dialogue in various sectors .
Furthermore , as several speakers have already said , this agreement includes the normal clause on respect for democracy and human rights as a basic principle of our cooperation .
And in that respect , Mr President , I want to emphasize that the Yemeni government has accepted that obligation fully and unreservedly .
I want to thank the Committee on Development and Cooperation , the Committee on External Economic Relations and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy for having realized the importance of this agreement ( as does the European Commission ) , for having shown it this support , and for supporting it with a favourable vote .
Mr Commissioner , thank you for your speech .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a few minutes .
Votes
Mr President , yesterday during the debate on this subject , it became clear that a large majority of the groups are thinking along the same lines .
The various resolutions originally submitted by different groups were also a clear indication of this .
Unfortunately , a majority of the groups decided to withdraw their resolutions , and we know that due to lack of flexibility the groups were no longer able to support our resolution , despite the fact that they largely agree with us on content .
We would find it incredible if this Parliament were to vote in a majority vote against something with which it actually agrees in principle .
That is why we are withdrawing our resolution .
But we do say very clearly that even though it is human , it is not very elegant , Mr President .
The resolution is withdrawn .
The conciliation which is the basis of the present report had reached a number of acceptable compromises with the demands of the European Parliament concerning the concept of affordable price , the cost of universal service , consumer protection and service quality , protection of disabled users and number portability .
We can , therefore , support this report .
It remains to be said , however , that a satisfactory state of the Open Network Provisions is one necessary condition of the liberalization of Telecom markets , and that , without strong intervention from parliament , they would have remained quite below the necessary standards of regulation .
It would be useful , indeed , if the Commission and Council would prepare further action in related fields with more care and with considerably more attention to the concomitant necessities of regulation .
Pack report ( A4-0012 / 98 )
In 1994-1995 we held long and difficult negotiations to establish the grant for the Socrates programme .
The European Parliament played an important role in fixing the financial package at the reasonable level of ECU 850 million and in adding a clause for the review of funds at the half-way stage .
The Socrates programme has now shown its mettle .
The promotion of education throughout life has been organized around this unique programme which operates from pre-school age up to the third level of university education .
Thanks to its vast range of activities , the opportunities offered to young people and to teachers have been increased tenfold , with the consequence that a real sense of European identity has developed .
Positive results recognized by everyone have been achieved by a large number of the 119 million people under 25 and the 4 million teachers .
The enormous popularity for the European educational community must not be compromised two years before the end of the programme when eleven new countries are knocking at the door of the European Union and offering the opportunity for mutual enrichment .
We need the appropriate finance and we must widen the programme as far as possible , taking into account the latest technological developments , particularly in the area of information .
I am therefore in favour of the Pack report and the increase in financing , to the tune of ECU 70 million , for 1998 and 1999 , which he stipulates for the Socrates programme .
Like most of my colleagues , I only regret that the final compromise could not have been made on the basis of the additional 100 m proposed last June by the European Parliament .
Education and training have become the most important factor in the economic and social future of Europe .
Acting to promote exchanges of students and ideas also promotes Europe and the single currency , and economic and monetary union .
Let us not forget this when deciding on the budget .
If there is one area which unites our Parliament in stressing its importance , it is education , and more specifically mobility within education .
Mrs Pack and others have rightly highlighted that the Socrates programme is a fundamental instrument for young Europeans , both for their education and for adding a ' European ' approach to their studies , and , more generally for a more open approach to others .
The programme even represents a point of reference for individuals who often only know about the actions of the Community through things which affect their own world or that of their children .
This is why I am voting for this report and for the budgetary increase finally decided upon by the Council of Ministers , not for Education but for Finance ! ! !
We should note carefully the irony of Finance Ministers making cuts first of all in the education and culture sectors !
We can only hope that this historic decision is reproduced in other areas and that it can put an end to the general hypocrisy of the speeches .
The Council and Parliament have reached agreement on earmarking an additional sum of ECU 70 million for the Socrates training programme so it comes up to ECU 920 million .
In today 's Europe it is important to invest in the exchange of young people , which is why the Socrates training programme is a sensible measure .
It provides an opportunity for young people from the whole of Europe to be able to train in other countries and to meet other young people from the rest of Europe .
I therefore give the report my full support .
Socrates is a classic case of the advantages of Community intervention .
The only lucid policy decision must be to strengthen this scheme for student and teacher exchanges at all levels of education .
Despite this evidence , however , Member States have hesitated for a long time before granting the necessary financial means to make it possible to do something they themselves had decided on : the extension of the scheme to countries that are applying to join the Union .
The Commission proposed a 50 % increase , Parliament asked for 100 % and the Council decided on 25 % .
For that reason the compromise solution was surprising , because in settling it at 70 % the Council finally decided in favour of a bigger increase than the Commission itself had suggested .
How are to we account for this unusual outcome ?
It is due to two important factors : the agreement between the Committee on Culture and the Committee on the Budgets , who made common cause and brought it into the 1998 Budget ; and the committed and well-informed work of one Member , who has not shrunk from bringing direct pressure to bear on governments and stirring up public opinion .
Politics needs passionate personal involvement and well-directed diplomatic activity .
I am therefore delighted to vote for this significant report .
Read report ( A4-0023 / 98 ) and the Camisón Asensio report ( A4-0027 / 98 )
The Commission has drawn up a draft directive on telecommunications equipment which is to replace two Council Directives on telecommunications terminal equipment and ground station equipment in connection with satellites .
In addition , the Commission is recommending increasing the scope of the Directive so that radio communications equipment is also covered by the rules .
However , it is vital to allow for the fact that radio amateurs , who build their own transmission equipment , have no chance of living up to the tough demands for technical standards required by the directive .
But nor is this necessary , because amateur equipment is not intended for sale .
In the light of the fact that I , as protector of the Danish radio amateurs , have received a guarantee from the Commission that the radio amateurs ' equipment is not covered by the directive , I give the report my full support .
Recommendation for 2nd reading by Mr Lehne ( A4-0005 / 98 )
I should like to comment briefly that this report , especially in view of the present financial crisis in Asia , which is essentially attributable to private debts , is broadly linked to the issue of banking supervision , the coordination and harmonization of which is a matter of urgency in the context of the internal market and the single currency .
This is relevant to the Lehne report given that , especially in relation to Amendment No 2 , it may well be asked to what extent the ' duty of supervision or approval ' to be imposed by Member States in turn requires a European framework system .
This is , however , no reason to vote against the report , which is itself uncontentious .
Recommendation for second reading by Mr Parodi ( A4-0411 / 97 )
The Commission has proposed to update Directive 94 / 58 / EEC , based on the international STCW Convention on the training conditions of seafarers .
At our first reading in May last year , we asked the Council to take into consideration 35 amendments aimed at strengthening the original proposal .
Of these amendments , we are delighted to note that 20 were approved by the Community executive .
Our work involved supplying proposals relating to the training of seafarers .
How can we not take into account the human factor in accidents at sea ( 80 % of these accidents are due to human error ) .
I welcome the proposal of my colleague which calls for the creation of a European institute of training .
Seafarers in the European Union are highly qualified as a result of their training ; we must extend , preserve and communicate this knowledge .
Our maritime industry which uses this workforce can only become more competitive as a result .
In conclusion , I think about the thousands of young people who aspire to the noble occupation of seafarer .
We must offer them the prospect of serious training .
Our colleague 's proposal is a step in the right direction .
White report ( A4-0010 / 98 )
We must get rid of the idea that when something is not going too well in the Member States , it is high time for Europe to step in .
Of course I recognize that the living conditions of many animals in zoos are very poor .
I support the position which Ms McKenna recently took , namely that a zoo is a totally unsuitable place for large numbers of animals .
But that is another subject . Mr White 's report is about whether you should make European-wide regulations for zoos .
I categorically believe not , which is why I voted against the report .
The fact is that the arguments for European legislation on zoos are not very strong .
This is one of the topics on which the European Union has overstretched itself .
Quite rightly , the Council in Edinburgh blew the whistle on the Commission . But in his report Mr White wants to return to the pre-Edinburgh stage : he wants a directive , not a recommendation , and he wants a directive based on legal basis 100A and 130S to boot .
The other day I gave this example to a group of Dutch members of local authorities who were visiting .
They soon agreed that this is an issue Brussels has nothing to do with .
And these people were not even my own grassroots supporters !
From a legal point of view the European Parliament occupies an equally weak position .
According to the subsidiarity principle , the Union has no authority in this area , and should therefore not act in this case .
The discussion about the legal instrument is therefore completely superfluous .
At best we can ponder whether or not to make a recommendation .
In view of the seriousness of the situation in many zoos , it seems to me that a recommendation would be in order .
The Commission 's comprehensive draft recommendation ( almost a directive ) is quite sufficient .
The Member States and the zoos have their hands full with this , leaving aside the cost implications .
I do not doubt their good intentions , but a directive would be too much of a good thing .
The new protocol on the wellbeing of animals which is included in the Treaty of Amsterdam commits the Community and its Member States to bear that requirement in mind , while it also invalidates the decision on the incorrect application of the principle of subsidiarity in this matter .
Everybody knows that as far as wellbeing is concerned , the circumstances of animals in zoos are far from adequate . Such circumstances are not even guaranteed sufficiently in Member States ' own legislation .
Nor is it a simple matter to provide an appropriate environment for many animals , such as killer whales , dolphins , bears , etc . It is also important to bear in mind the suffering and change of habits imposed on the various species by this captivity , which is of a clearly commercial nature .
At the time , I expressed these same sentiments with respect to the report prepared by Mr Scott-Hopkins , whom I had the honour of accompanying on a visit to Madrid zoo .
Today I will of course support everything that Mr White says , because a recommendation alone , as the Commission knows very well , will not solve anything , and what we need is a solution to this problem .
Since this is an urgent matter , I agree with the rapporteur that only a directive is capable of making sure that animals in captivity in the European Union 's zoos get the protection they deserve , if the Commission also matches deeds with words and thereby fulfils the Treaty of Amsterdam .
We have chosen to abstain in the final vote on the report .
We do not think that the EU should draw up detailed legislation in all areas .
We therefore reject the Committee 's proposal for a change in the legal basis and the formulation as a directive .
However , we do think it is worthwhile to have extensive cooperation on issues of animal protection .
It would be best , however , if this cooperation were formulated through recommendations and conventions at a pan-European level .
Today the Danish Social Democrats voted in favour of having a directive on the keeping of wild animals in zoos instead of the position which was recommended by the Commission , because we believe it is important to have proper rules throughout the EU .
Zoos are either private or publicly owned and the standards can vary greatly .
Properly run zoos fulfil many functions , such as scientific research , education and the preservation of species .
Zoos which are only run for profit should be watched closely .
There are far too many examples of zoos where the animals suffer , and there is very good reason to check that the international conventions on the keeping of and trading in wild animals , which the EU is a party to , are fully respected .
That is why we are in favour of rules and support the report , even though we know well that there are many who will champion respect for the principle of subsidiarity and say that the EU has no power in this matter .
We would like to see it put to the test .
The trade in or exchange of endangered or vulnerable species is governed by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora .
Zoos are allowed to import , export or exchange any animal in connection with work on the preservation of species .
EU rules in this area could help to check that the international agreements are upheld .
The fact that there is a set of guidelines intended to systematize and harmonize the legislative framework of the various States regarding the keeping of wild animals in zoological gardens is of course a positive step .
Positive as it is , it is equally true that we have been expecting that legislative framework to produce actual laws for some years now , but that action has been delayed a number of times for various reasons .
The report essentially attempts to alter the guideline framework suggested by the Council , by turning it into a directive , with the backing of a wide consensus of opinion among the many associations and organizations in the European Union which work for the preservation and protection of animals .
The report deserves our support , although it might have gone further .
The fact is that it could and should also have covered permanent private collections , even those to which the public are not allowed to have access , since the conditions in which animals are kept ought to be uniform and universal .
Similarly , it might have dealt with aspects relating to educational and teaching elements , in order to discourage the keeping of wild animals outside their habitat . This aspect should also have been taken into account in the actual licensing of new public and private exhibitions .
I hope our vote in favour will help make it possible to make good the deficiencies and improve the text as soon as the opportunity arises to revise it .
I am voting in favour of the White report on the keeping of wild animals in captivity , since it is time we put an end to the present free-for-all , with its suffering and lack of openness .
Without wishing to question the love of animals shown by the owners and managers of many small zoos , it is obvious that many of these places do not comply with minimum conditions and that the veterinary services available are not of the technically specialized type needed for ' exotic ' species of animals .
What the European Parliament now demands , and is reinforcing by voting on this report in part-session , is that compulsory standards should be introduced throughout the territory of the Union - including during transport - and that means of ensuring supervision , openness and animal welfare should be strengthened .
All proposals which improve the living conditions of animals in general and in zoos in particular are worth supporting .
We are basically in favour of the proposals contained in the White report .
However , we think that this is a matter which should be regulated by the individual Member States because of the principle of subsidiarity .
The intention of this report is very proper .
However , I think this is a matter for the Member States .
Democracy and national self-determination are an overriding principle .
You cannot justify restrictions on democracy by the fact that it serves a good cause .
Therefore , I have voted against the report 's proposal ( Amendment No 1 ) that there should be a directive in this area .
Recommendation on racism ( B4-0108 / 98 )
We voted for the resolution to show our abhorrence of racism , but we cannot support the wording in favour of Greater Union .
The motion for a resolution by Mr Mohamed Ali deals with a serious subject : racism , xenophobia , anti-Semitism .
As a secondary subject he has also added the results of the European Year Against Racism , which would seem to be on a different level .
A theme of this type warrants a clear and rigorous elaboration of the moral options and a serious approach in the exposition of the facts and ideas .
The text proposed to us hardly meets these requirements .
There is no mention of the moral and spiritual foundations for absolute rejection of racism : the equal dignity of every human being from his or her conception until his or her natural death , regardless of race , social condition - be it high or low - , religion , state of health or age .
The omission of these founding principles weakens the impact of the resolution .
Furthermore , the text mixes up proposals to which one could not subscribe , for example , the call for exemplary behaviour from teachers , with inadmissible ideological proposals , such as the idea of ' positive discrimination ' , which obviously runs counter to the fight against discrimination .
Moreover , the rapporteur mixes up notions which have nothing to do with one another , such as racism and nationalism .
He plays with dangerous notions such as the detection of possible racist , xenophobic or nationalist tendencies which could pave the way towards an implausible inquisition of thoughts .
Certain considerations are obscure , for example , factor H which either expresses an obvious fact , or involves some incomprehensible ulterior motives .
Lastly , he refers to the Amsterdam Treaty , which , for the time being , is not part of the legal order of the Community since it has not been ratified by any of the Member States .
For these reasons , we were unable to vote for the resolution .
It will come as no surprise that , as a socialist and Frenchman , I support without reserve the questions and inquiries of our colleague , Mr Ali .
I warmly congratulate him for them !
I would add my voice to his in the questions relating to the intentions of the Commission on possible demonstrations linked to the European Year against Racism and on putting in place the European Observatory against Racism .
These are fundamental questions .
I would add that they are not politically neutral questions ; they are linked largely to the misery which affects an increasing number of our fellow citizens , which is no justification for them .
I believe that under no circumstances can we excuse this minority of Europeans who swear allegiance to the extreme right which is bogged down in xenophobia and highly reactionary nationalism - the situation is much too grave .
I , too , would like to give a warning to the fringe of representatives upholding the right wing who think they can maintain their positions by forming alliances or by aligning themselves with the positions of the most extreme parties .
I hope that they will never forget that they are playing into the hands of the extreme right and will not even recover the voters who have left them .
History teaches us that all parties of the extreme right bear within them the seeds of violence , and this violence always gives rise to tragedy .
This resurgence of hate in a majority of countries shows us that the ' demon ' which our fathers and some of us fought against is not dead , and the best way to pay our respects to those to whom we owe our freedom ... is to continue their fight .
We have voted for the current resolution on racism .
We fully support the resolution 's basic spirit of anti-racism and humanism .
In spite of this we have objections on three points :
1.We do not think the immigration policies of the Member States should be harmonized.2.We do not think that criminal issues , such as the criminalization of racist organizations , should be decided at EU level.3.We would like to stress that work on human rights takes place mainly within the framework of the Council of Europe and that the EU should not try to take over matters from this pan-European institution .
Although the Members from the Austrian Freedom Party will vote for the motion for a resolution in the final vote , this does not signify that they accept the content of all the points .
We reject a European Charter on the Rights of Immigrants just as we reject European harmonization of criminal law or the abolition of the principle of mutual criminal liability for certain criminal offences .
Thors report ( A4-0008 / 98 )
The report highlights a number of deficiencies in relation to the observance of Community rules in individual Member States .
It also describes the observance by individual Member States of international agreements entered into by the EU .
The amount of EU rules is constantly growing .
Earlier messages about fewer but better rules have got no further than words .
The amount of EU rules makes the regulatory system difficult to comprehend and is a cause of problems with implementing and applying the rules in the Member States .
Another reason may be that the rules which are not perceived as important or essential , or which are perceived as interfering , are not implemented or are implemented last .
However , in principle , the proposal in the report is good , which is why I have voted for it .
Izquierdo Collado Report ( A4-0407 / 97 )
I voted against the Izquierdo Collado report on trans-European hydrographic systems because , as I see it , by recommending a water policy based on transfers , it runs contrary to the sense and scope of the current discussions on the framework directive on water , and the water regulations existing in international law , particularly those contained in the Helsinki and Espoo Conventions , for the protection of states which share rivers .
Apart from anything else , the exclusive option for water-transfer calls into question the European legislation on environmental impact itself .
A water quantity policy , which is highly important in southern Europe , cannot be separated from the aspects of quality and solidarity ; and , above all , in hydrographic basins covering several Member States , the achievement of compatibility of interests is the keystone of the policy to be adopted .
This is an initial report .
The European Parliament will soon have an opportunity to decide on the framework directive in the legislative process .
I wanted , however , to be sure of emphasizing this warning from the outset , so that the differences will be noted at this stage .
How could anybody refuse to vote for Mr Izquierdo Collado 's report on trans-European hydrological networks ?
Those of us who have experience of working on environmental matters know that all ambitious projects require the appropriate impact assessments , which are now unavoidable .
Therefore , to use that as an argument for voting against this report makes no sense .
The fact is that extensive areas of the Community suffer cycles of unbearable drought , and without water there can be no life , progress or solidarity .
The water problem is not just qualitative but also quantitative . In fact , this problem has only one solution : transEuropean hydrological networks .
It is in that spirit that my positive vote is a vote for solidarity .
The Danish Social Democrats are following the voting list of the Group of the Party of European Socialists for the report by Mr Collado on the technical feasibility of transEuropean hydrological networks .
But we would like to point out that people should be extremely wary of embarking on projects which are aimed at expanding these hydrological networks .
It will always be necessary first to carry out a fundamental investigation of the concrete cases where such a project could be realized .
First and foremost people should make sure that the problem cannot be solved by more appropriate management of existing resources .
This should be understood broadly and should therefore include the consideration of possible conversion of agriculture and industrial production .
Conversion of agriculture is necessary , for example , in cases where certain water-intensive crops are gr