Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 20 January 2011 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Statements by the President
I would like to pass on five pieces of news by way of preliminary remarks .
I would firstly like to touch on the situation in the Mediterranean , which , as we all know , is changing very rapidly .
The European Parliament was and is ready to lend its support to democratic changes initiated by the citizens themselves , who are our European neighbours .
When we hold our debate today on Tunisia , we will be discussing a partner country which has already taken the first steps on the path towards true democracy .
Just a short while ago , I met the Tunisian Foreign Affairs Minister , and I was accompanied by five other Members of the European Parliament .
The situation in Egypt is different , and it is less certain which direction is being taken by the changes , which are already irreversible .
These changes must not lose their momentum , however .
Both countries have one thing in common : all the democratic forces urgently need to make every effort to undertake political reforms , and subsequently economic and social reforms .
They also need to lay the groundwork for free and democratic elections , so that the people 's demands for democracy do not go unanswered .
We must also make it known - and we will do this during this part-session , both today and tomorrow during voting time - that democracy in neighbouring countries is just as important to the European Union as their stability .
There is no choice between democracy and stability ; both are imperative .
The second matter is that 20 January 2011 was the 20th anniversary of the Latvian ' Bloody Sunday ' , as the day is historically known .
On this day , the pro-Soviet OMON units attacked strategic buildings in the capital of the newly-reborn state .
Seven people lost their lives on the barricades defending Latvian independence , and many were injured .
On 29 January 2011 , after a trial which was an affront to international standards , the Dutch and therefore EU citizen Zahra Bahrami was hanged in Iran .
I would call on the Iranian authorities to clarify the charges made against Mrs Bahrami , and the opaque judicial procedure .
The European Union holds the position that the death penalty can never be regarded as an act of justice .
On 26 January 2011 , David Kato , a defender of human rights and civil rights activist , was murdered in Uganda .
I would call on the Ugandan authorities to apprehend the perpetrators of this crime .
We all deplore the fact that homosexuality continues to be regarded as a crime in this country .
Finally , my last piece of news : in connection with today 's debate on preparation for the European Council on 4 February , I would like to inform you that on 8 February , or in other words next week , a meeting of the Conference of Presidents will take place that is open to all Members of Parliament .
Mr Van Rompuy , President of the European Council , will be a guest at this special meeting , when he will present the conclusions of Friday 's summit in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon , which states that the President shall report on such matters to us .
Mr President , I hope that the House and you will allow me this short indulgence to congratulate you on the statement you have made on behalf of David Kato who was murdered in Uganda .
He was , as you said , a human rights defender and he defended the rights of lesbian , gay and bisexual people .
I just wanted to say that here in this House we have passed a motion on what is happening in Uganda .
It is vital that we support Ugandan civil society and remember that David was a giant who stood above those who preached hatred and discrimination , and we should remember his family at this sad time .
Thank you .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Corrigendum ( Rule 216 ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Oral questions ( submission ) : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents after consulting the political groups at its meeting of Thursday , 20 January 2011 pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
[ Wednesday / Brussels part-session ] :
Item 1 : After I have made a statement on the European Union 's recognition of the Roma genocide during World War II , the next items will be as follows : a statement by the Council , a statement by the Commission and a round of speakers from the political groups on the Roma genocide .
Item 2 : The title of the debate on the situation in Tunisia will be amended as follows : ' Statement by the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the situation in the Mediterranean , in particular in Tunisia and Egypt ' .
Item 3 : The vote on motions for resolutions on Tunisia will take place tomorrow , as scheduled .
The vote on motions for resolutions on Egypt will take place during the second February part-session in Strasbourg .
Item 4 : The debate on the Council and Commission statements on rising food prices will be postponed until the second February part-session .
It will be replaced with statements by the Council and the Commission on the appointments of ESA senior executives , followed by a round of speakers from the political groups .
[ Thursday / Brussels part-session ] :
I would like to inform Members that the Speroni report on the request for waiver of the immunity of MEP Tamás Deutsch will be presented during voting time .
( The order of business was adopted )
Mr President , I would like you to consider with the Conference of Presidents timetabling the one-minute speeches earlier , because in the last part-sessions this was pushed back to the last hour of our discussions .
The general effect is that less and less people are inclined to participate and I would hate to think that this was indeed a reason for pushing it back .
So please consider timetabling this earlier to give us the possibility of participating , as we did previously .
Thank you for your comment .
Rest assured that we will hold talks on this matter and decide on the next steps to be taken in this regard .
EU recognition of the Roma genocide during World War II
The next item is the statement by the President concerning the EU 's recognition of the Roma genocide during World War II .
Today the Roma are the largest ethnic minority in the European Union .
They are also the most oppressed community in Europe at present .
During World War II they were persecuted on grounds of race by the Nazis , in the same way as Jews .
Hundreds of thousands of Roma , whose ancestors had been European citizens for generations , were slaughtered .
The 66th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau , which we commemorated on 27 January this year , serves as a reminder to us that the Roma were the third largest group among the victims of this camp .
Unfortunately , not all Europeans are aware of this fact .
Only a few EU Member States have officially recognised the Roma genocide .
It is time to make European citizens aware of the fact that the Roma living among us experienced the trauma of genocide as a community .
Education is the best way to fight discrimination .
The European Parliament acts as the EU 's voice in the fight for human rights .
Today we are speaking up for our Roma brothers and sisters .
We would like their suffering to be remembered and their situation to be better understood .
Colleagues , there will now be a very short discussion on this topic so please do not leave the Chamber .
First we will have a statement from the Council and , as you know , Roma integration is one of the priorities of the Hungarian Presidency .
This will be followed by a statement from the Vice-President of the Commission and then short statements on behalf of the political groups .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , a few days ago we commemorated Holocaust Remembrance Day in the European Parliament together with Holocaust survivors .
On behalf of the Commission , I highly appreciate the fact that today we are commemorating the Roma genocide victims as well .
After visits to Oswiecim , Yad Vashem or the Holocaust Museum in Washington DC , you are always shocked by the inhumanity of the Holocaust perpetrators .
Those of you who visited the Children 's Pavilion in Jerusalem would agree with me that you leave the pavilion shaken and you cannot believe that such events were possible in Europe and only 60 or 70 years ago .
Therefore we have to speak about this .
We have to teach our children about this sad story because , as we know , history has a tendency to repeat itself .
So we must make absolutely sure that this horror will be remembered and never repeated .
Let us all fight together the ghosts of the past .
History has taught us a bitter lesson in what racial hatred and intolerance can do .
The European Union is therefore built on fundamental rights and values , which include the protection of minorities , the principle of free movement and the prohibition of discrimination , and all these apply in full to Roma .
It is unacceptable that , in the 21st century , Roma people still have to face discrimination on the basis of their ethnic origin .
Too many Roma are still victims of racism , discrimination and social exclusion .
Too many Roma children are still on the streets instead of going to school .
Too many Roma are still denied fair chances in the labour market and too many Roma women are still victims of violence and exploitation .
The inclusion of Roma is a priority for the EU and it requires the commitment and joint efforts of national and local authorities , civil society and EU institutions .
For its part , the Commission is deeply committed to improving the situation of Roma people and , in particular , their social and economic integration .
We have been working continually to these ends : this is a longstanding and long-term commitment for us .
However , we have to acknowledge that responsibility for Roma integration lies primarily with the Member States and that is why , in the communication we adopted last year , we provided them with a concrete list of actions for making their Roma integration policies more effective .
This was the first-ever policy document dedicated specifically to Roma .
However , our assessment shows that further serious work needs to be done in the Member States to improve the effectiveness of their policies for Roma integration .
That is why , in April , in close cooperation with the Hungarian Presidency , the Commission will adopt a European framework for national Roma integration strategies , which will make proposals for tackling Roma exclusion .
To conclude , at this solemn moment let me emphasise again , on behalf of the Commission , the importance of protecting fundamental rights in Europe and ensuring the harmonious integration of all into society .
It is very important to make sure that history definitely never will repeat itself .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( HU ) Minister of State , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I would like to express my satisfaction and gratitude that , for the first time , the European Parliament is commemorating the Roma victims of the Holocaust .
This is exactly what we , their descendants , have to do : remember and learn .
We must show respect for the suffering of the victims , and integrate these painful lessons , in unity and mutual tolerance , into our common history and common memory .
This is why it is important for us to support universities , scientific societies and research institutes that help reveal and present the hardships faced and endured by the Roma during our long history .
I propose that national curricula in all European countries should present the centuries-long common history shared by majority societies and the Roma .
This day , too , provides an occasion to reinforce this unity and to reassert that we , the Roma , are citizens of our countries and a state-creating factor ; free and equal European citizens .
We should be content with nothing less .
Seven hundred years of common history lie behind us ; seven centuries filled with struggle , during which we demonstrated our loyalty to our home countries and Europe on countless occasions .
While remembering the dark times of segregation and persecution , we must draw strength from these uplifting moments of our shared history , and find hope that , by uniting , we may become a dignified , harmonious community .
Just as we share a common history , so will we share a common future , as we all know ; and I should like to hope that together we can achieve everything , as I am also certain that we can only achieve everything together .
The committed efforts of successive generations will be needed for everyone to endeavour to build a more acceptable and more perfect world in their own lives and their own surroundings .
Our ancestors have demonstrated innumerable times that our nations are able to unite if our destiny is at stake .
And for us , the situation of the Roma of Europe is a question of destiny .
It is our turn now , and the first step must be taken today .
If you allow me to add one more thought , the second step will need to be taken two weeks from now at the plenary sitting , when the European Roma strategy can finally be launched according to the expectations of all of us .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , thank you for your statement , and I would also like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council and the Vice-President of the Commission .
I would like to thank all those who suggested we have this debate - from my group , Mrs Göncz in particular .
As you said today , Mr President , the extermination of the Roma has often been pushed into the background when talking about the extermination of the Jews .
However , there were also other victims of the National Socialist atrocities .
In this context , I would also like to mention the homosexuals , as you have also done today in a different context , Mr President .
I agree with the President-in-Office of the Council and also with the previous speaker that the best form of commemoration is when we also think about the future .
We cannot be satisfied with the situation of the Roma on our continent today .
They are still discriminated against and prejudices still exist .
When a country is now considering reverting back to the name ' gypsies ' instead of using the name ' Roma ' in order to avoid any confusion , then I will certainly not criticise that , only to say that the fight against the prejudices and the fight against discrimination is what is important and not bowing to the discrimination by changing a name .
We have been debating the issue of the Roma in this Parliament for years , and we have to admit - even on our visits to the various countries - that there are still very major problems , that the cycle of discrimination and disadvantage has still not been broken and that many children are today still being taught in separate schools .
I am therefore also very grateful to the Hungarian Presidency for taking up this subject .
Despite all the differences of opinion that we have , Mrs Győri , on this matter we will hopefully achieve a major success together .
Our group has for some time been in contact , through Mr Schulz , with Günter Grass , the German writer , who has also set up a Roma foundation .
Günter Grass once said : ' You , the Romani , in your permanent state of dispersal are - strictly speaking - Europeans in a sense that we , imprisoned in the confinement of our nationalities , ought to bear in mind if the united Europe is not to develop into a bureaucratic administrative and all-powerful economic colossus .
At least in this one respect , with their cross-border mobility , the people we call gypsies are ahead of us .
They should , first of all , be allowed to prove their identity with a European passport that guarantees them the right to stay anywhere from Romania to Portugal . ' ( end of quote )
We ought to create the conditions that make all Roma feel at home where they live .
We ought also to create the conditions that allow them to travel freely throughout Europe without being deported again .
When we finally see this happen then we really will have done a great deal for the Roma , and then we will have made the terrible things that the Nazis did to the Roma through the Holocaust during the Second World War a thing of the past .
( Applause )
Mr President , ' Samudaripen ' is the word which means ' hell on earth ' in the Romani language , in other words , genocide or holocaust .
Hell on earth is the description of how Europe 's Roma lived during the Second World War when hundreds of thousands of them were murdered for the sole reason that they were Roma .
We actually do not know the exact figure .
The Holocaust Museum in Washington DC reckons that it is approximately a quarter of a million .
Other studies mention more than a million Roma murdered during those years .
This lack of certainty is due to the low profile of those Roma who were victims of the Holocaust .
It is further proof that this people has been systematically discriminated against or ignored for centuries .
This is why the declaration made today by the European Parliament , through its President , marks an historic moment .
However , we cannot just stop at this .
This occasion must be followed by specific measures at both EU and Member State level .
Such acts of recognition of the Roma genocide must be made by every Member State and , furthermore , knowledge about this chapter in our history must be publicised among Europe 's citizens .
Until European children learn at school about this holocaust and the centuries for which the Roma have been slaves in many countries that are now EU Member States and until European society realises that we have a historical duty to this population , we will fail to conduct our anti-racism campaigns properly and we will not have too much success either with our national or European Roma inclusion strategies .
Mr President , I speak here this afternoon with deep feeling .
Above all , Mr President , I would like to thank you personally for your commitment .
The recognition of the Roma genocide is a historic moment for those millions of Europeans who belong to the Yenish , Sinti , Roma , Manouche and traveller peoples .
Hundreds of thousands of their relatives were murdered during those dark years , often having been disgracefully branded as social outcasts .
However , it is also an historic moment for all of us , citizens of the European Union .
Let us not forget , the Roma were the first to move between different countries of Europe , well before we had set up our common area .
Today , with a population of 10 million , they are our largest minority .
Their history is our history , too .
It was high time , ladies and gentlemen , to restore the confidence of these European citizens in their European institutions .
They have been shunned by our societies , and they still suffer from a double punishment .
To the horrors of war have been added neglect , indifference and silence .
The recognition of the Roma genocide is therefore a genuine act of remembrance .
Clearly , it provides an opportunity to remember , but it should above all be a guarantee of a different future .
Last week at the Bundestag , Members of the European Parliament and of the national parliaments , from the East and West alike , shouldered their responsibility to history by encouraging recognition of this genocide .
This is the first step towards changing the way in which our fellow citizens view these Europeans .
There is still a long way to go .
Let us make the Roma people European citizens in their own right .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the fact that the Roma were the victims of genocide during World War II is as self-evident as the fact that Jews were victims of the same process .
Anyone who denies this fact should be treated as unforgivingly as those who deny the Holocaust of Jews .
You are right to say that the Roma represented the third largest ethnic group among those massacred in Auschwitz .
The second largest group were Poles .
All the nations that were victims of the Holocaust during World War II should be remembered .
We should remember everything that happened in Auschwitz and the other concentration camps , as well as the murders committed in Katyń and other places during those terrible five or six years , so that such events are never repeated .
The European Parliament has a moral and political duty to ensure that this memory is kept alive , and our debate today is one way of doing so .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a really important moment , because today , for the first time in the European Parliament , we are commemorating the Roma and Sinti victims of the Holocaust .
Let me start by with a farewell letter written by a 14-year-old boy , Robert Reinhard , in 1943 before his deportation to Auschwitz from a German children 's home .
He wrote : ' I have found my parents again .
We are being transported to the concentration camp .
After much soul-searching I have reached the point where I can face death .
Thank you once again for everything that you have done for me .
Greetings to you all .
See you in heaven .
Robert . '
Like 500 000 other Roma and Sinti , this young boy never came back , and although the Roma and Sinti , together with the Jews , were the first victims of production line killing , today - 66 years on - the full truth of what happened remains untold .
The joint culpability of the majority society is also often glossed over .
We need the whole truth about this chapter of history .
The Roma and Sinti must be avenged and the Holocaust recognised as a crime against humanity , to ensure that it can never happen again .
We must fight fervently to eradicate the prejudice against these people .
We must put an end to racial hatred as well as violence , as seen the year before last in Hungary for example , and we should do this with the courage of our convictions .
Freedom , equality and solidarity are not the privilege of a few , but a right for all , because human rights and civil rights are indivisible .
Mr President , I should like to endorse what has been said so far .
The Roma have made a decisive contribution to the development of Europe , especially to its culture .
The comment I would like to make , and it is a rational comment , is that any programmes concerning the Roma in the European Union which come from the Commission are fragmented and are often included within the framework of social exclusion .
I would propose a more rational approach .
In other words , that the Commission adopt an initiative just for the Roma outside the framework of social exclusion , so that there is a programme which only concerns the Roma .
This would enable us to work more effectively for the Roma at national level .
Madam President-in-Office , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , colleagues , I would like to thank you all for your remarks .
This is a very important debate for all of us , and for the European Parliament as a whole .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
I very warmly welcome the call for the European Union to recognise the Roma genocide during the Second World War .
Some Member States have already taken this step , and I hope that they will be followed by as many of the other Member States , and also by the European Union as an institution .
Unfortunately , the large majority of European citizens are unaware of the Roma genocide .
This is why , as was also emphasised by the Romanian president in his speech recognising the Roma genocide , made in October 2007 , we must not stop at a symbolic gesture .
We need to encourage the inclusion of information about the Roma holocaust in the school curriculum for European pupils .
On the other hand , it is unacceptable that 66 years after the prisoners were liberated from the Auschwitz concentration camp an ethnic minority is subjected to such large-scale discrimination across the European Union .
This is why I think that Roma social inclusion , one of the Hungarian Presidency 's priorities , must become the focus of a European policy based on specific , effective and measurable actions .
Matters concerning the victims of the Third Reich 's tyranny during World War II are still an extremely delicate subject , but one which is worth looking at in detail .
Today we want to broaden the context within which the term Holocaust is viewed , since the general public understands it to mean the mass extermination of Jews .
The ' cleansing ' of other ethnic , national and social groups during World War II should also be remembered and commemorated .
Too few people are aware of what happened , in particular Europe 's young people .
It is for this very reason that we are trying to raise the painful and somewhat neglected issue of the extermination of the Roma during today 's debate .
Porajmos , which is the Roma term for this extermination , claimed between 500 000 and 2 million Roma throughout Europe .
They were the third largest group in terms of nationality to be murdered in Auschwitz , after Jews and Poles .
These facts leave no doubt as to the enormity of the losses suffered by the Roma , which places us , as Europeans , under an obligation to commemorate those who suffered the injustice of falling victim to genocide , and spread awareness of their fate .
Raising awareness of these events is a priority for current and future generations .
The Roma are the largest ethnic minority in the EU at the moment , but they have also been the most oppressed down the ages .
Hundreds of thousands of Roma were killed and persecuted during the Second World War .
Unfortunately , only some Member States have recognised that the extermination of the Roma was actually an act of genocide .
In honour of the victims ' memory and as a sign of deep respect for the Roma survivors of the Holocaust , in 2007 the Romanian President recognised the atrocities suffered by the Roma and awarded the National Cross for ' Faithful Service ' 3rd class to three Roma who survived the genocide .
The Roma are part of the future of Romania , a European Romania .
The tragedy of the Holocaust is now part of our collective memory .
I take this opportunity to welcome one of the Hungarian Presidency 's priorities , namely , the Roma integration strategy .
The best form of commemoration is to look to the future .
In every Member State we must examine the centuries of history which the Roma have been part of and strengthen this Roma initiative now .
They are free , equal European citizens .
We should also create the prerequisites for the free movement of Roma , without them being expelled again .
We need a community which will be fully integrated into modern society .
I welcome the initiative from the President of the European Parliament , Jerzy Buzek , requesting the European Union for official recognition of the genocide committed by the Nazis and their allies against the Roma population during the Second World War because it marks a step forward in the battle to defend the rights of the most widespread ethnic minority in Europe .
Tens of thousands of members of the Roma population were subjected to torture or murdered in the Occupied Eastern Territories and thousands more died in the Nazi regime 's concentration camps .
The historian Michael Billig summarises the principle of the racial superiority doctrine in the following statement : ' A man is not killed for what he does , but for what he is ' .
This phrase can be used to sum up the sad reality of a time when more than a million Roma were oppressed and deprived of any freedoms , including freedom to procreate .
I think that we need specific EU-level measures to combat racism and fight against social exclusion .
I advocate that we need better cooperation and an exchange of good practices at EU level between national and European Roma inclusion strategies .
Preparation for the European Council meeting ( 4 February 2011 ) ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on preparation for the European Council meeting of 4 February 2011 .
The first to speak will be Mrs Győri , President-in-Office of the Council , on behalf of the Council . Please take the floor .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I am very happy to be able to speak to you before the next meeting of the European Council , even though the role of the presidency-in-office is defined by the Treaty of Lisbon in such a way that the preparation of meetings of the European Council is primarily the responsibility of the permanent President .
However , the presidency-in-office has cooperated very closely with the permanent President in preparing the meeting of the European Commission , for example in the case of the General Affairs Council held on Monday during the Hungarian Presidency .
Furthermore , we are naturally monitoring the implementation of the European Council 's conclusions , both in the General Affairs Council and in other Council configurations .
Allow me to first give an outline of the major issues on the agenda of the February meeting , which primarily focus on energy and innovation .
While determining the Europe 2020 strategy , the European Council decided in March 2010 to hold a thematic debate on the issue of energy and innovation .
I believe I do not need to point out how extremely important these two sectors are for European economic growth and employment .
That is because the task of the European Council is not only to respond to direct crisis situations , but also to formulate strategic guidelines for the future .
Let us begin with the matter of energy .
Energy security is a priority for all of us .
This requires a greater degree of integration and interconnection of the energy market .
We must increase research and development expenditure , make the economy more competitive and sustainable , and tighten cooperation between major transit , energy producer and energy consumer countries .
The first element is therefore an integrated and interconnected energy market .
The establishment of a complete internal energy market is a necessity .
To this end , the European Council must decide on several important steps .
First of all , it must implement legislation on the internal energy market .
We also still have regulatory tasks ahead of us .
We must , for example , simplify authorisation procedures for building new infrastructure .
Additionally , we must make serious efforts in order to modernise and expand European energy infrastructure , and also to connect the markets through cross-border cooperation .
We must not allow any country or region of the EU to remain isolated .
All this must be funded primarily by the private sector .
Furthermore , appropriate cost sharing principles must be laid down for cross-border investments .
Thirdly , there will be projects which , despite being of exceptional importance to energy security , will still not be attractive enough to private capital for it to finance them fully .
In such cases it could be justified to provide limited public financing for the projects from Member State or EU resources .
The aim of the current discussions , however , is not to prejudge the debate to be launched at the end of June on the multiannual financial framework .
The second major topic in the field of energy is energy efficiency and renewable energy .
Needless to say , these increase competitiveness and promote the security of energy supply , and also serve sustainability at lower costs .
In 2011 the Council will examine the proposal that will be submitted by the Commission concerning the new energy efficiency plan .
The proposal will take account of what has been achieved so far regarding the EU energy efficiency targets set until 2013 , and will also envision additional measures .
Foreign relations are also of exceptional importance in energy policy .
EU and Member State activities related to key producer , transit and consumer countries must be coordinated more systematically .
It would , for example , be expedient if Member States would not only share information with each other about treaties concluded with regard to natural gas , as they do today , but also those concerning other types of energy .
Concrete work must begin in order to establish partnerships with key actors with regard to regulatory approaches in all matters of common interest .
This of course applies to Russia , but also to all partners and neighbours of the EU .
Let us move on to the topic of innovation .
Innovation is what might help solve the most critical social challenges of our age , such as the challenges of health , food security , energy security , sustainable development , climate change and an aging population , while also providing opportunities for new markets .
Innovation could also help resolve the dilemma between budgetary rigour and pro-growth policy .
From where can we obtain funding for growth before it becomes self-sustaining ?
Not from credit , since that is not something we want .
We want to stop debt , after all .
It is therefore innovation through which reserves of creativity can be uncovered , which can help us give the appropriate answers .
Within the topic of innovation we must therefore focus on responding to significant social challenges , and make progress towards a European Research Area .
We must ensure the free mobility of researchers , improve framework conditions applicable to innovative enterprises , and the European Council must also address the matter of ranking state aid .
Energy and innovation : investments pointing towards the future .
The European Council , however , must also deal with current economic and financial issues , as we all know that the crisis is not completely behind us yet .
We are in a delicate situation .
We must do everything in our power to protect the common currency , the euro , and calm the markets .
The European Financial Stability Facility must therefore be strengthened , and bank stress tests must also be discussed .
The Hungarian Presidency is particularly committed to the package of six economic governance laws .
We wish to report on this , about how the consultations are coming along both in the Council and in Parliament , to the heads of state and government .
And finally , we must address what further common measures are needed to ensure competitiveness , and , of course , in the current , acute situation , the heads of state and government will also speak about Tunisia and Egypt .
Ladies and gentlemen , I trust that we will have a European Council dealing with very difficult issues , where specific questions can be formulated , which will also determine the work of the Council for the coming months , and President Herman Van Rompuy will report to you about this after the meeting .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , this European Council takes place at a very important moment for our neighbourhood , namely Egypt , Tunisia and Belarus .
While respecting the different specific situations in these countries , I expect this European Council to state in very clear terms that the principles of the rule of law and respect for fundamental rights and pluralist democracy must be enacted and respected .
Democracy is indeed the best way to achieve stability and prosperity in those countries , just like anywhere else .
This Friday , the European Council will discuss two areas which are also very important for the future of Europe and its economy : energy and innovation .
Both of them are core elements of the Europe 2020 strategy and central to our aim of restoring sustainable growth and increasing the European Union 's competitiveness .
And let us not forget that energy and innovation are also two fields where the Community approach and European dimension can offer a lot of value added .
This is an important point to make in the current context .
Through the Europe 2020 strategy we have already agreed on a set of ambitious goals and targets on energy innovation .
I could mention the Innovation Union flagship initiative , adopted last October , or the Resource Efficient Europe flagship initiative , adopted just last week and in which energy features prominently .
So this week 's European Council should identify clear , concrete deliverables .
The discussion and outcome should be as operational and productive as possible .
I have described energy policy as the next great European integration project and it is not hard to see why a safe , secure , sustainable , affordable energy supply is key to our economic and strategic interests as a global player .
We have already done a lot in the past with our climate and energy package and with internal market legislation .
We must build on that by exploiting the opportunities provided by the Lisbon Treaty , deepening our existing cooperation and launching initiatives in new areas like energy security .
Therefore the first credibility test of our energy policy is delivering what we have already agreed upon .
The Commission has outlined the measures we think are urgently needed in our Energy 2020 and energy infrastructure communications .
I want the European Council to endorse these priorities and , in particular , make a clear commitment to completing our internal energy market by 2014 .
A common technical standard should also be fixed for electric vehicle charging systems this year , as well as for smart grids and meters by the end of 2012 .
A truly integrated internal market on energy is key to delivering more growth and jobs , promoting technological progress , modernising our infrastructure and reducing our exposure to import and price volatility .
We must also ensure that , when it comes to energy , no Member State is isolated from the rest of Europe .
I want Member States to agree on a 2015 deadline to put an end to energy islands in Europe .
We have done good work in connecting the Baltic countries to the continental system .
Now I will turn to Central and Eastern Europe to move forward the north-south energy interconnections .
I want a plan to be agreed in the autumn on the projects needed to link the Baltic to the Adriatic .
While we are on track to achieve our renewables targets , on present performance we will only meet half of our energy efficiency targets .
More efficient energy use is the key to unlocking massive environmental and economic benefits - and reducing Europe 's annual energy bill by around EUR 200 billion .
It could also create two million jobs by 2020 .
So I will ask the European Council to give new impetus to our pursuit of energy efficiency .
We could use the scale of public procurement across the EU to give a real boost to energy efficiency and this means local jobs , jobs that cannot be outsourced , jobs for SMEs and real savings for both industry and households .
The Commission will adopt in the coming weeks an energy efficiency plan proposing specific measures to boost energy efficiency ; for instance , that by 1 January 2012 all Member States should include energy efficiency standards in public procurement .
The Commission will then review the progress achieved with these measures by 2013 and will consider further measures , including proposing legally binding targets if necessary .
Member States should agree a deadline for including energy efficiency standards in all public procurement for public buildings and services .
For its part , the Commission stands ready to explore new measures in the fields of energy saving for cities , sustainable biofuels , smart grids and energy storage .
We also need to focus on the external dimension of European energy policy .
Just a fortnight ago I had encouraging discussions with the Presidents of Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan on Europe 's access to the Caspian gas fields , which would enable the realisation of the southern corridor .
An important breakthrough was achieved with the signature of a joint declaration with Azerbaijan and a concrete commitment from Turkmenistan to supply gas to Europe .
The message I took from that visit is this : when we take key decisions on energy jointly in Europe , we are a strong player in the global race for energy resources .
Underlining the importance of the external dimension of the European Union energy policy should be a key message from the European Council , so I am looking forward to a very important discussion on energy at this European Council and - I am happy to say this - here in the European Parliament .
I know this Parliament is very supportive of a strong European policy on energy and the President of Parliament has been a champion of a stronger commitment by Europe in terms of energy policy .
Moving now to innovation , I think there is already broad agreement about what should come out of the European Council .
Perhaps less evident is a sense of how urgent , how desperately urgent , action is ; why boosting research and innovation is needed now , when Member States are all making difficult choices about where to cut their budgets .
Fiscal consideration and public support for innovation are not irreconcilable policies .
Several Member States have shown that you can cut your overall budget while maintaining growth-friendly expenditure , in particular on research and innovation .
This is important because delivering the innovation economy is the key deep structural change .
Our competitors know this , they are already betting on innovation .
To avoid being left behind , we need the European Council 's endorsement of our strategic and integrated approach to innovation .
Innovation needs to be part of our economic policy , not simply a research instrument , as some people think .
At European level we can add real value by improving the framework conditions for research and innovation in the European Union .
Europe must become the natural home of innovation , through effective standardisation , better use of intellectual property rights , innovation-friendly public procurement and measures to help small innovative companies to secure financing .
Much of this does not cost money , but it does need political will .
And the political will to take measures using a European approach and a European dimension .
We can also squeeze much more out of the European Research Area , making full use of the single market by improving the mobility of researchers , for example .
And as well as maintaining spending , we need to spend better .
With the budget review we have launched a debate on how to simplify the way European Union money is spent , and to work towards a common strategic framework for research and innovation funding .
In other words , getting better value for money also means cutting red tape , so that EU-funded scientists can spend more time in the lab or on their work , and not on red tape and bureaucracy .
We will never attract the most brilliant scientists and most innovative companies with an incoherent set of funding instruments based on complex and bureaucratic rules .
So this month 's European Council will discuss energy and innovation .
But it will not avoid discussing the economy .
The economy , the problems of the unemployed , these remain the most important concerns for our citizens .
We have just launched the first European Semester - putting economic governance into action .
The Annual Growth Survey was well received .
The messages were focused and clear .
It provides the necessary guidance at European Union level so that Member States can take our interdependence into account when making their national policy decisions .
Good progress has already been made on the legislative proposals that will underpin our new system of economic governance .
I would like to thank the Hungarian Presidency .
The Hungarian Presidency has my full support in accelerating work to ensure adoption by June .
In addition , as part of this comprehensive response , we will need to resolve the outstanding issues surrounding the European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) and the European Stability Mechanism .
Regarding the EFSF , other than widening its scope , what is at stake now is how to increase its effective lending capacity - as stated by the Commission in the Annual Growth Survey .
Of course , this issue should be put in the context of the comprehensive response .
The discussions in the European Council of Friday next will most likely cover the need for reinforced coordination of economic policies in the European Union and the euro area .
I welcome such a discussion , which fits very well with the Commission 's Annual Growth Survey .
In fact , the European Semester is not just about coordinating budgetary policies , but addressing wider issues like macroeconomic imbalances and competitiveness gaps .
In addition , we have recently heard some authoritative voices arguing in favour of deepening economic governance , but at the same time stating that it can only be done through the intergovernmental method .
We have to be clear about this : the Commission welcomes the deepening and acceleration of economic governance and policy coordination , including within the euro area .
But we are firmly convinced that the Treaty provides the right framework and instruments to achieve this .
In fact , we would not further our cause if parallel structures were to work in an ultimately incoherent manner .
Establishing a system of reinforced economic governance for the EU , and in particular the euro area outside the Union framework , raises important , and politically very sensitive , questions .
In fact , Member States should adopt measures which are fully compatible with the Community method and the framework provided by the Treaty .
Insofar as measures fall under national competence - and of course some of them are under national responsibility -this competence should be exercised in coherence with the overall Union framework .
I really believe this matter is extremely important because we can , in fact , make great progress in matters of economic governance .
We need - and we have been arguing in favour of this - more policy coordination and better economic governance , but we have to do it in a way that is coherent and compatible with the Treaties and with a Community approach .
The Commission will be particularly attentive to these issues .
The Treaty , with the ensuing ' Community method ' , implies full respect for the role of all the European institutions .
Mr President , Mrs Győri , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , what will the European public take away from the meeting of its leaders this Friday in Brussels ?
Will it understand that European responses to European challenges - the euro , energy , research and innovation and employment - are being sought in good faith ?
Or rather that , once again , we are surrendering to the sorry spectacle of division and power struggles ?
What headlines will the major newspapers run ?
What will people be talking about on Saturday in blogs and on Facebook when they refer to the European Council 's decisions ?
About the timidity of Europe when faced with the situation of Mediterranean countries which long to have their rights respected , or , on the contrary , about its leadership ?
Europe 's duty in this regard is quite clear : it must harness all its resources and all its diplomatic skills to aid the transition and the organisation of democratic and open elections .
Ladies and gentlemen , as far as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is concerned , the solution to our problems lies in having more Europe , not less .
The solution does not lie in more so-called national victories , but in more common victories and more coordinated responses .
The solution does not lie in a lax attitude towards applying our common rules , but in greater discipline .
The solution , ladies and gentlemen , does not lie in greater divergences between our budgets , our labour laws and our taxation rates , but in greater convergence .
As far as the PPE Group is concerned , there is but one lesson to be learnt from this crisis , which is that , without a common vision and without shared resources , our countries will sink into sluggish growth and plunge into social crisis .
If there is just one lesson to be learnt from this crisis , it is that , by thinking , working and investing as Europeans , our countries will emerge from the difficult patch they are going through and will be forever stronger for it .
What else will make us react as one if not the difficulties that we have just experienced ?
Together with the European Commission , the majority of my colleagues in this House and , I am sure , the majority of the 500 million Europeans , I put the following question to the European Council : when are we going to act and react more as one ?
As for the euro , I now know that that our governments will hold fast and will not allow speculators to destroy 60 years of European integration .
I now call on them to concentrate on the consolidation of the Financial Stabilisation Mechanism , as this is essential .
I call on them in particular to strengthen their budgetary discipline and to keep up their efforts to reduce public debt .
European governance is the sine qua non of the success of our common project .
My group supports it as much as it supports the euro , that is to say , totally .
The solution to our problems , as I said at the beginning of my speech , is to have more Europe , not less .
While this is true in the cases of employment and the economy , it is also true for energy , a topic which the Council will also cover on Friday .
Having more Europe means , first and foremost , fully implementing the laws that already exist in relation to the internal energy market .
It can never be emphasised enough that making this market fully operational will make us more competitive , will ensure the security of our supplies and will guarantee a substantial increase in renewable energy production .
Having more Europe also means encouraging our States to meet the challenge of increasing their energy efficiency by 20 % between now and 2020 .
They were the ones that set themselves this objective .
We must ensure that they reach it , or else we shall have to raise the standards they have to meet to do so .
Finally , having more Europe in the field of energy means investing more .
The Commission estimates that it will cost EUR 1 billion to reach the required infrastructure level .
We expect ambitious decisions from the European Council in order to achieve this .
Europe needs secure , clean energy just as much as it needs a research and development policy and a policy for promoting industrial innovation .
Here too , the solution lies in having more Europe and paying more attention to small and medium-sized enterprises .
The solution lies in reducing bureaucracy to a minimum and finally reaching an agreement on a European patent .
In the area of innovation , too , we expect common solutions from our leaders , not parochial squabbles .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is time to move on from our knee-jerk reactions of the past .
Promoting our differences is all well and good , but making them mutually complementary is even better .
Taking individual initiatives can be useful , but playing as a team is the way to win the match .
Harbouring national ambitions is perfectly legitimate , but understanding that the game is won at international level by playing as a team is the way to guarantee a future for the people of Europe .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament held a hearing yesterday , during the course of which we prepared for the energy summit at the weekend .
My colleague , Mrs Ulvskog , will relate what we discussed there in more detail later .
I will therefore limit myself to two essential elements .
If we assess the level of implementation at national level of the 20-20-20 goals that we have adopted , and which were celebrated by some governments of the European Union , no more than 9 % of what we have set ourselves is achievable as things currently stand .
Thus , as far as energy policy is concerned , this weekend 's summit is a crisis summit , and if we do not put a massive amount of commitment into this , these goals will not be achieved .
My second comment is that we are seeing a trend on the energy price market that is leading to energy poverty in Europe .
Energy and energy supply are starting to be seen as a privilege by a large proportion of households .
The additional costs involved in renting are increasing to such an extent that , in future , those on low incomes will have to wear thick jumpers because they cannot heat their homes .
Disconnecting people from the energy supply is a question of social injustice .
That is also something that an energy summit such as this needs to address .
( Applause )
However , at this summit we will , of course , find that other things will be discussed , and I would like to pick up on what the President of the Commission said .
The government of the Federal Republic of Germany - led by the Federal Chancellor - has done a complete about-turn .
Everything that was previously wrong with economic governance , which was a socialist idea , is now suddenly right .
Well , it is better late than never .
The President of the Commission is right about one thing , however .
This about-turn must not lead to a change of direction that upsets the balance of the European institutions .
One thing is absolutely clear : all European policy that currently exists within the framework of the current treaties must be dealt with within the existing institutions .
At the heart of this is the Commission , and no other institution , and , I might add , for the following key reason : The Commission is the institution that is tied to Parliament in this regard , and parliamentary authorisation for action taken in matters of sovereignty - and monetary issues are key matters of sovereignty - is essential .
Therefore , we say ' yes ' to economic governance , but with its practical implementation based in the Commission and subject to scrutiny by the European Parliament .
That is a basic condition for maintaining the balance of the European institutions .
( Applause )
We are in a situation where Europe is faced with internal challenges and also challenges in terms of international policy .
I am - and I will say this quite openly here - disturbed by the statements made by some European politicians .
I am disturbed by the absence of Europe in a historic process .
You make your statement Mr Barroso - excellent .
Mr van Rompuy makes his statement - that is also excellent .
Baroness Ashton makes a statement - great .
Then Mrs Merkel , Mr Sarkozy and Mr Cameron make a statement in a joint communication - and I do not know what is behind this new alliance - that is also great .
However , there is no one there - there is no one on the ground who , in direct dialogue with the people who are fighting for their democracy , is talking about how we Europeans can help and support this process .
You can write anything you like on paper , but paper will not help us .
We must not waste the opportunity that we have here .
I will admit that , just in the last week , Mr Cohn-Bendit has made me aware of a great opportunity that has arisen .
I have to admit that I did not recognise it at first glance , but the people who are demonstrating on the streets , the people who are leading this revolution , have anything but a religious state on their minds .
They want secularism .
They want civil democracy .
These are our partners .
We need to work together with these people to make this a great opportunity for Europe .
( Applause )
In this regard , it is also necessary for Mr Mubarak to step down .
That would be a positive and encouraging signal .
While we are on the subject of our values , our democracy and our freedom of expression , I am pleased that Mrs Győri is here .
I would like to say one thing to you , Mrs Győri : I have now read the Hungarian Government 's response to the letter from the Commission .
I have to say that the Commission 's letter was excellent .
It was a polite question asking whether the Hungarian Government would be so kind as to tell us whether it could possibly agree that the law that it has drawn up might not perhaps be totally in order - and our apologies for asking !
The response was : how could you even ask us such a thing ; everything is just fine here .
This should not happen in Europe .
I will say once again : this law is not compatible with fundamental European rules .
( Applause )
It is not compatible with the Audiovisual Media Services Directive . That has been stated very elegantly by Mrs Kroes herself .
If this law is not amended , I will feel deceived by the President-in-Office of the Council .
The President and the Prime Minister of Hungary said in this House : ' If the Commission makes comments , we will amend the law . '
The Commission has made comments and I therefore expect Hungary to amend this law .
How do we otherwise intend to speak about democracy in the Mediterranean with any credibility if we do not implement it ourselves in Europe ?

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , in times of crisis two strategies are necessary : stop the imminent threat , and take advantage of the opportunities and move forward .
In terms of the energy and climate crisis , what is the response from the Council ?
Quite frankly , I find it both disappointing and embarrassing .
The world outside of Europe is facing the energy challenge head on .
The US is investing huge amounts of money in green technology .
In last week 's State of the Union Address , President Barack Obama emphasised energy efficiency and the possibilities offered by green technology .
( The President briefly intervened on a procedural matter )
President Obama even compared these new technologies to the space race and called it our generation 's Sputnik moment .
Now , in the Council , where is our ' put a man on the moon ' project in Europe ?
You do not even dare to discuss a binding energy efficiency target .
Energy efficiency is the favourite theme of every energy speaker or politician , and the Council defers it until 2012 .
China is investing heavily in research and new technologies .
Today China has more than 400 photovoltaic companies .
Ten years ago they had zero per cent of the world market .
Now they have 23 % .
Ten years ago they had zero per cent of the wind market .
They have 50 % now .
What are we doing in Europe ?
The competition and innovation programme , the CIP , is struggling for support and the financing for SET , the strategic energy technology programme , is at less than half .
That is where we are compared to China and the US .
We even have Member States which are already planning for a 30 % reduction in emissions , like Germany , but the Council does not dare to move ; neither does the Commission , by the way .
According to a recent joint report from Barclays and Accenture , the shift to a low-carbon economy is leading to a remarkable development of sustainable low-carbon technologies .
So the banks are moving .
Now , where is the European leadership ?
The Council is haggling about the energy target .
Nor do you see that the Member States are fulfilling the third energy market package and there is even a debate on funding for research and innovation in the long-term budget .
That is where we are in Europe , and the Council shows no leadership at all when it comes to energy , climate , competitiveness and jobs .
That is where we stand .
( blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) to Mr Schulz ) ( HU ) We could see how Mr Martin Schulz , leader of the European socialists , is extremely concerned about democracy and human rights in Hungary .
I must ask you , Mr Schulz , where were you between 2002 and 2010 , when your socialist comrades in power in Hungary had every single anti-government protest dispersed by force ?
Where were you on 23 October 2006 , when fourteen people were ordered to be shot in the eye with rubber bullets fired at head height ?
Where were you in autumn 2006 , when several hundred people were , as already established by final court ( the President interrupted the speaker ) I have one minute , President , don 't I , according to the Rules ?
Where were you then ?
And I would also like to ask why the Fidesz government is not asking you and your comrades the same question already ?
What is keeping the Fidesz government from doing so ?
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Morvai , I am watching Hungary 's internal politics very closely .
I was in Hungary quite often between 2002 and 2010 .
I also saw demonstrations by your uniformed Jobbik party in Budapest .
I will not tell you what these demonstrations reminded me of .
As a German I will not go into that here .
Between 2002 and 2010 - in order to give you a clear answer - Hungary was , as it is now , a democratic state based on the rule of law with a left-leaning government governing according to democratic rules .
So far , I have no doubt that this also remains the case in Hungary today under a conservative government .
There is one thing I am sure of , however , and that is that your party is a right-wing extremist , neo-fascist party .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the most recent reports from the southern Mediterranean and Egypt state that shots are being fired in Cairo .
The situation is coming to a head .
As a result of this news , I can only appeal to the European Heads of State or Government not to wait until lunch time on Friday of this week to agree on what the right message for Egypt should be .
It is long overdue for us to make it clear to Mr Mubarak that he has to stand down swiftly , this being necessary in order to prevent this unrest in Egypt from escalating further and to ensure that developments follow a similar path to those previously seen in Tunisia .
It would be really disgraceful if we were to simply wait to see what happens in Egypt .
( Applause )
This summit is actually supposed to be an energy summit .
However , when I see the preparations that are being made for it , I am actually not surprised that other topics are now setting the agenda .
On the basis of the slogan ' we need security of energy supply ' , a lot of contact - by you in particular , Mr Barroso - is being made with countries like Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan .
Mr Oettinger recently spoke in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy about how we are going to develop our energy relations with Iraq , Georgia and Turkmenistan .
In view of the events in the southern Mediterranean , where we are also seeing the consequences of our policies relating to our own interests and our external energy policy , I consider this to be rather hazardous .
I know we need diversification because we also face a problematic and very difficult situation to the east with Russia and the transit countries of Belarus and Ukraine .
However , diversification must not involve us now entering into relations with despots and countries in crisis .
Energy efficiency and renewable energies are the solution for a better and more secure energy supply , and I have to say , Mr Barroso , you have tolerated a great deal in this regard .
Mr Oettinger has neglected the area that was managed well by Mr Piebalgs , or - and this is the negative way of looking at it - he has once again chosen not to promote future-proof technologies such as renewable energies and energy efficiency and has reverted to the old energy mix .
Suddenly we find that feed-in tariffs for nuclear power stations , for atomic energy , are to be discussed at the summit - good grief , where do we actually stand in this modernisation and innovation debate ?
I have simply lost patience with this now .
( Applause )
Perhaps we have actually been too patient where economic governance is concerned .
Germany now seems to be following the Schäuble course .
However , what we currently have on the table still does not represent the state of the art .
We need more than a minor amendment to the stability instrument .
We urgently need to take a decision to amend the credit conditions for Greece and Ireland or we will end up destroying these countries .
We need more money in the crisis instrument , otherwise we can forget any ideas of providing assistance to Spain and Portugal in the near future .
What we need at long last - just so that we understand each other very clearly on this point - is a proposal for how we intend to deal with the restructuring of debt .
We cannot avoid it , everyone knows that , and we , as Parliament , also want to discuss it further here .
Mr President , energy security is an area which the EU should get involved in , and where it should act with the greatest possible degree of unity and coordination , which is not the case with many other European initiatives , and therefore we , as the European Conservatives and Reformists , support the creation of a common energy market , as this will strengthen the position of Member States vis-à-vis the main suppliers , while also limiting the scope for some suppliers of strategic raw materials to abuse their dominant position in order to play foreign policy games .
At the same time , however , we believe that the process of energy integration should respect specific national factors , in other words national energy mixes , including the use of nuclear energy .
On the financial side , I would like to say that my group is predominantly made up of parties from countries that do not belong to the eurozone , and which do not use the euro .
This does not mean , however , that we wish to see a weak , fragile and unstable eurozone , or that we would like the euro to fail .
On the other hand , I would like to state clearly that the recovery of the EU economy and financial stability must not lead to further supra-national tendencies , or fiscal federalisation , and must not become a pretext for the further transfer of powers from the national to the European level .
We are completely opposed to that !
I would like to make some comments on the events in North Africa - in Tunisia and Egypt .
There are considerable similarities here to the events in Central and Eastern Europe in 1989 .
We very much welcome the democratising tendencies in these countries and we should support them .
We want the immediate neighbourhood of the EU to be stable and democratic .
At the same time , however , we should take care that the justified efforts and calls of the people in these countries do not , on the other hand , go awry and do not lead to undemocratic , authoritarian , religious dictatorships .
The EU should proceed in such a way as to prevent this from happening .
Mr President , as we know , the energy sector is vital to the creation of new jobs , so opportunity should be the order of the day and the watchword for the Council for which we are currently preparing ; unfortunately , it is not .
We are in need of specific investment to tackle energy efficiency in our cities , in particular in the countries being subjected to the most serious speculative attacks and , above all , in the countries with the highest levels of unemployment .
However , the responses offered by governments continue to follow old formulae and it is these that we still try to impose .
What we need in this Council is an energy revolution .
We do not just need more public-private partnerships : that is persisting with failure .
We remain very tied to the old energy sources - to fossil fuels and nuclear energy - and very lacking in ambition with regard to new energy sources , which are the only ones that can ensure equality of access and the only ones which can ensure that large-scale projects are as important as local projects .
Only by combining everything could we have a truly integrated policy , and that is why this Council will continue as before , rather than break with the past as it should .
Mr President , I would ask your permission to appeal for just one more thing : emergency situations require emergency appeals , so the appeal that I am requesting your permission to make is for Europe 's leaders to have , in relation to what is happening in Egypt , at least as much solidarity with the people in the street as they had with the authoritarian regimes , whose governance was all about the economy and did not respect democracy .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I heartily wish our dear Mr Barroso good luck .
Good luck to all of us with the Azeris and the Turkmenis in the market .
They say they have already promised to supply five other parties with gas .
And this really raises the big question .
A few years ago we had the Russian-Ukrainian crisis , and we are still battling with that .
Now we have the North African crisis .
The price of oil is already rising .
So it is about time that we put on the agenda on Friday that Europe has to look into its own resources and sources .
It is about time we put exploitation , extraction , etcetera on the agenda .
I think you could ask the Member States to prepare maps of what is going on in terms of the exploitation of energy resources and sources in each Member State , evaluate the most promising projects , adopt incentives for private companies to engage in exploitation , and see what we can do with our own resources .
We face the most horrifying scenario of losing the Suez Canal .
So , as for Egypt , for all of us : orderly transition . Otherwise we are going to have huge problems .

( ES ) Mr President , thanks to many years of hard work , the energy policy objectives in Europe are now perfectly clear to us : constructing a domestic market , a secure supply , the promotion of renewable energy and energy efficiency .
In view of these objectives , which we have proposed ourselves , the paper that the European Council is going to work on is very lacking in ambition and somewhat bland .
If the drive for the European common energy policy has to come from the Heads of State or Government , then we have a long wait in store , as a national , short-sighted and outdated view seems to predominate among them .
This is no small matter we are dealing with here , as the backbone of Europe is the energy policy .
Its principles have to be defended with a unified voice throughout the world , unfortunately we are falling far short of this .
( DE ) Mr President , President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council summit is taking place at a time when there are a ridiculous number of other urgent topics in addition to the one that was intended for debate .
Mr Schulz rightly mentioned that we are all expecting the European Council to make a statement with regard to Egypt and what is happening there and for it to concern itself with this matter .
That is correct .
Mr Schulz , I could have agreed with you completely on this if you had not made the mistake in the second part of your speech of once again making a cheap party political show by arguing with the Hungarians .
That has absolutely nothing to do with it , we are currently talking about the Council and about the topics that are on the agenda .
Mrs Harms , I would also like to make one thing clear about what you said .
When you rightly say that these pressing issues - economic issues , issues relating to the euro and to Egypt - need to be dealt with , you cannot then also accuse Commissioner Oettinger of no longer dealing with the energy issue adequately .
That is absurd .
This is due to the fact that the Council has to deal with other matters as well .
Whether or not energy policy suits you or if other people have a different opinion does not make it good or bad .
It cannot be evaluated according to such a criterion .
I think that the Commission has made very thorough and sensible preparations for the summit in the last few months .
It has not been following the principle of constantly making new demands .
Instead , it makes sound and thorough preparations and then takes measures that will actually result in change .
Incidentally , Mr Schulz - he is not even listening , but that does not matter , this is just the parliamentary debating game where we blatantly talk at cross purposes .
( Heckling )
You spoke about poverty that can arise as a result of energy prices .
You are absolutely right .
However , Mr Schulz , to be fair we then have to ask the question : why are energy prices so high ?
What is the reason for this ?
What part do we play in this when we adopt political measures that constantly send prices souring ?
That is also a contributing factor - not the only one - but it should also be included in an honest debate and we need to take into account the new requirements that are being adopted here continually from morning to night .
In my view , this summit provides an enormous opportunity for us finally to move forward on the issue of infrastructure and to ensure that investment in infrastructure and energy is undertaken , because all other issues depend on us managing to do this .
There arises the question of prices , reliability and also of whether we integrate renewable energies properly into the network , and for this we unfortunately need considerable investment .
Moreover , the state will not be able to bear this cost alone .
( The speaker agreed to take a question under the ' blue card ' procedure ( Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) ) .
( DE ) Mr President , with regard to the thorough preparations for the energy summit and the political priority areas : Mr Reul , what then is your view of the fact that , in a major interview today in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung in Germany , Mr Oettinger warned the European Union against setting too ambitious renewable energy targets ?
This comes only a few weeks after the Renewable Energy Directive , of which all of us here were very proud , entered into force .
As regards thorough preparations on the subject of energy efficiency : what is your view of the fact that the energy efficiency action plan is still lying in a drawer and so there would in fact be absolutely no chance of debating it at the summit ?
( DE ) Mr President , there are politicians who constantly demand something new , but never see anything through to the end .
There are also politicians who make sound preparations and implement initiatives .
That is exactly the point .
I do not believe in continually making new demands , and therefore Mr Oettinger is absolutely right .
First , let us do what we have already committed ourselves to .
Mr Schulz quite rightly pointed out that in many Member States the matter of efficiency leaves a lot to be desired and that many Member States have not yet achieved their renewable energy quotas .
We are fairly good , but not good enough .
In other words , we are still a long way from where we want to be .
Sometimes it is more sensible to achieve what you have set out to achieve first before taking the next step .
There are people who try to go too fast and then trip over their own feet .

( SV ) Mr President , as Mr Schulz mentioned earlier , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament held an alternative energy summit yesterday .
We did this at a time when more and more families and citizens are unable to afford to keep their homes warm , while at the same time industry , which is dependent on energy and needs to be competitive , has been plagued by difficulties .
Another reason for doing this was the fact that initiatives at the highest political level in the EU have been very few and far between and extremely weak in this area .
In response to what Mr Reul said - some things have been initiated but then have simply remained on paper and got no further than the office drawer .
Our message from the alternative energy summit for tomorrow 's EU summit is very simple and clear .
Take action ; do something - here and now .
Ensure that we have binding energy efficiency targets that are actually complied with .
For example , there are around 190 million buildings in the EU that need to be heated .
Investments in them in order to prevent the current energy leakage would provide both financial benefits and new jobs .
Invest in renewable energy sources , unless you believe that those we have are infinite , and invest in distribution networks that are modern and efficient for all types of energy .
Give consumers and citizens strong and clear rights in relation to energy companies .
Ensure that the energy market is both transparent and capable of being monitored .
Just as we do not want a financial market that does not function properly and that is closed and completely unregulated , we do not want an electricity market that operates like the financial market did before the crisis either .
Use radical initiatives to show that energy demand is a question of social responsibility and political decisions rather than a private matter for individual citizens to cope with on their own .
Demonstrate , just as Mr Schulz said , that we understand that energy policy is also social policy , industrial policy and a policy for the future .
Mr President , this Friday 's summit is supposed to be strategically focused on energy and innovation .
I hope the heads of government will not be too distracted by the situation in Egypt . I also hope that the necessary discussions on energy infrastructure and cross-border cooperation - the supply side of energy - will not distract from discussion about the demand side of energy , which is equally important .
The 20 % 2020 energy efficiency target is a very long way off track .
What we need to hear from our leaders on Friday is a bold commitment to take immediate steps to get back on course .
Making the 20 % target binding without delay would be the simplest way of doing that .
Otherwise we will merely waste a great deal of this energy supply that we are so expensively putting in place .
That is not good economics , especially in a time of crisis .

Mr President , I think the importance of energy is clear from the fact that Mr Van Rompuy is not here , as he is giving a press briefing , and Mr Barroso has left .
So much for how important they think it is to listen to us .
Yesterday , at the invitation of the S & D Group , Jeremy Rifkin was in Brussels and he clearly set out a new economic vision .
Firstly , renewables , which is something we have in place with the directive .
Secondly , every building consuming 40 % of our energy today can be transformed into a low-energy building by using renewables , even in a positive-energy building .
Thirdly , I think we have broad agreement here that electricity grids need to be speeded up .
Fourthly , we have to use the next R & D to develop storage technologies and , finally , electric plug-ins .
With these five , and of course what Fiona has mentioned under the umbrella of efficiency in all sectors , we would , firstly , make our European economy one that is much less dependent geopolitically .
Secondly , we would save EUR 300 billion in transfers outside the European economy and use that to invest in jobs and other investments here .
Thirdly , the race for green technologies is on ; you only have to read the new Chinese five-year plan .
If , in the next months , we do not create the framework for Europe being the lead market for all these technologies , we will lose out on one of the few sectors where we are still leading the world economy .
It is such a pity that this is a summit that is not well prepared - Mr Van Rompuy is partly responsible for that , as is Mr Oettinger .
He has not prepared something that is well thought through on efficiency and on renewables and has spent the last three months being the Trojan horse for two or three big German power companies who wanted to destroy the renewables industry .
Finally , something we have achieved : Mr Oettinger has a 26-to-1 chance of defeat in destroying the national support schemes .
Only the Netherlands is supporting him .
This is a considerable victory and renewables will continue .
That is the number one energy of the future .

( PL ) Mr President , we are about to take the decision to allocate EUR 1 billion to the expansion of energy infrastructure in the European Union .
Spending public money on energy matters only makes sense if it helps us meet security demands .
The European Union 's energy security depends on a broad diversification , which presupposes not only new transmission routes , but also access to new sources of fuels .
Otherwise we will repeat the mistakes made in the TEN-T programme , which has claimed that projects such as Nord Stream are European .
We do not need any more new ways to pump more of the same Russian fuel onto the European market .
If we repeat the same old mistakes , our EUR 1 billion will only buy us the pretence of a market and competition .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I am expecting the energy summit to produce , above all , a comprehensive , but also intelligible and responsible approach to the interests of our citizens .
According to the last Eurostat surveys , energy price stability is one of the main priorities for a large proportion of EU inhabitants .
It is no accident that the Czech Republic leads the field in this statistic .
An irresponsible political and economic lobby in the Czech Republic has promoted inadequate financial support for solar power plants .
The wild rush of speculators , including foreign ones , and their pursuit of sky-high profits is setting the public against renewables as such , because the people are facing an unnecessarily large increase in energy costs .
It is certainly not easy to secure sufficient energy at acceptable prices , but we can at least get close to it .
In my opinion , the answer is , among other things , to push for a balanced energy mix , from renewables to nuclear , and to reject extreme viewpoints from both sides .
Only in this way will we win the trust of EU citizens , whom we are here to represent , after all .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council needs to look at the fact that Europe 's production system has no defence against the volatility of oil prices on the markets , because futures markets are being held hostage to sophisticated international financial speculation , meaning that prices now have very little to do with the fundamental principles of supply and demand .
The Council must set itself the goal of providing the European Union with a practical instrument with which to create a regulated market , open to selected traders and managed by a completely trustworthy European partner .
This is the thrust of an Italian Government proposal to create a European oil exchange aimed at establishing a stable oil market , which would be of huge benefit to businesses and consumers .
Speculators ' enthusiasm for commodities is influencing oil prices , which are no longer based on the spot market , since the cumulative effect of advances and speculative manoeuvres ends up determining supply and demand in the real market .
A European exchange would transform the current ' non-market ' of paper barrels into an efficient , regulated and monitored real market based on real barrels of oil .
We ought to discuss this with the Council as well .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that the European Council is discussing the topics of energy security and innovation simultaneously .
Undoubtedly , energy security cannot be discussed without including innovation .
Naturally , we believe that the construction of a north-south pipeline in addition to the east-west one is important , but this will not even come close to solving the problems arising from the issue of energy supply .
What is more , dependency will not be reduced significantly ; it is only the direction of dependency that will change .
Dependency can only be minimised in the long term if we shift emphasis from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources from now on .
It is precisely in the spirit of these that I notice a lack of emphasis on the topic of renewable energy among the priorities for innovation .
In this regard , there are two things in particular that we must mention : on one hand , that renewable energy sources must be affordable , meaning that the population must not be given additional burdens for using renewable energy .
On the other hand , dependency outside the European Union must not be allowed to turn into dependency within the EU , that is , the less developed new Member States , including Hungary , Poland and the Czech Republic , must be allowed to catch up in terms of renewable energy sources with those old Member States that are currently major powers in renewable energy sources , such as Belgium , the Netherlands , or Austria for that matter .
Only through a close integration of energy security and innovation can we avoid the approaching energy crisis that would also affect Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , there will be no social progress without growth and no growth without energy .
Energy is at the heart of the European social pact for prosperity .
Fifty per cent of our energy supply comes from outside the Union .
We urgently need to diversify supply and make it more secure and more ' non-carbon ' .
This is our energy , and it is the security that we owe our citizens .
This leads me , President-in-Office , to call on you too to support the commitments we have made internationally with the ITER , or fusion , project .
This technology is secure , it is sustainable , it is free and it is infinite .
The European Council , as the highest political authority , would do well to support this project in its dealings with the international community .
This brings me on to the subject of research and innovation .
Since the 1980s , the research and development framework programmes have been Europe 's instruments for intervention .
EUR 53 billion have been earmarked for the period 2007-2013 .
What stage have we reached ?
We have been waiting for four months , Commissioner , for your communication on the revision of the seventh research framework programme .
Mr Barroso said : ' Less red tape ' .
He is quite right .
We are caught in an administrative stranglehold , and those engaged in research are turning away from European programmes .
I would like to draw your attention to the urgent need not only to simplify future procedures but also to settle past conflicts , because we have a problem of trust with the research institutes .
In this connection I should like to thank Commissioner Geoghegan-Quinn for her outstanding work .
Relations with industrial policy are disappointing , and we must assess them .
The joint technological initiatives , after a shaky start , are making a really positive difference in terms of the recognition of industrial needs .
Finally , how are we to structure our European space ?
The European Research Council must become a proper organisation in order to make our research truly European .
This is the Europe of results which our fellow citizens of Europe expect .
( ES ) Mr President , yesterday our group held an alternative energy summit in which we demanded binding 20 % energy efficiency and 30 % renewable energy by 2020 .
Instead of focusing on our demands in detail , something that some of my colleagues have done , I would like to emphasise a point without which the targets above are not possible : infrastructure .
The question is : do we really want a European market where a third of the energy provided is renewable energy ?
If the response is yes , should we not be talking about binding 10 % interconnections by 2020 ?
The implementation of the renewable energy targets requires a network with a greater degree of meshing , intelligence and , above all , interconnectivity in order to manage its variability properly .
However , we are far from achieving the 10 % target set in the European Council in Barcelona almost a decade ago .
Nine states have still not reached this target today ; I am sure you would agree with me that if we want to be successful , we need this target to have the same degree of adherence as the previous ones .
Therefore , I would like to convey our group 's desire for much more ambitious conclusions from the next summit to the President-in-Office of the Council ; conclusions that talk of 30 % renewable energy levels , 20 % efficiency and 10 % interconnections , all of which are binding .
I would also just like to touch on the subject of innovation : another area in which we would like to see more ambition in the Council conclusions is innovative government procurement .
In my group we understand the awarding of contracts for innovative products , processes and services to be one of the key elements for boosting innovation in the market place .
We are especially interested in promoting and analysing its link with European associations for innovation within the EU framework for innovation .
This is another item that the Council ought not to ignore .
Mr President , investing in energy infrastructure is to me the starting point in fulfilling our policy goals , ensuring that our citizens and businesses have access to secure and affordable energy in a functioning internal market and achieving the Commission 's ambitious energy infrastructure package , which I see as a positive step .
However , we should be pragmatic as well as ambitious .
Instead of pouring buckets of euros into grand projects , we should focus on identifying and financing smaller , cost-efficient and pragmatic projects that can make a significant difference , such as better interconnections .
I think we should consider EU project bonds as a solution to encourage needed investment in infrastructure .
But , overall , this crisis forces us to adopt a reasonable , open and integrated approach to our energy policy : first , by taking into consideration all components of the energy mix without considering them - or at least some of them - morally unacceptable , and secondly , with an integrated road map , reconciling our sometimes contradictory climate , supply security and competitiveness targets .
( PT ) Mr President , we already know that deepening the single market will mean greater liberalisation and , therefore , increased monopolistic concentration , to the benefit of the largest economic groups in the European Union 's more developed countries .
We would like to make plain our opposition to this route in areas , like those relating to energy , that are strategic to economic and social development , particularly that of the countries on the periphery .
However , the most serious issue is that everything mentioned here by the Council and Commission - not least on strengthening so-called ' economic governance ' - ignores the reality of social problems , of worsening inequalities , of unemployment , of social exclusion , and of energy poverty .
This last is growing exponentially in some countries with the rise in electricity and fuel prices .
Economic policy and energy policy should have a central goal : social progress and improving our peoples ' living conditions ; however , what is happening is the opposite .
This , therefore , is the reason for the indignation that we can see growing in the streets in many of our countries , and now in Tunisia and Egypt too .
We express our solidarity with the peoples of those countries and we want their rights to be respected , specifically by the Council , which should take a clear position on all this .
Mr President , the extent to which the EU needs ' energy energising ' today is obvious if we look at the energy security issue , the geopolitical situation around us and energy policy itself .
The Union should not be - as in the case of Egypt and Tunisia - failing to keep up with events .
To quote my colleague Mr Gahler , however , the US is one step behind the events , the Member States are one step behind the US , and Brussels is one step behind the Member States .
Four years ago we had a serious energy crisis , and in 2007 we adopted an energy security report in this House .
Four years later we are at the very initial stages of a common energy policy and energy security .
It is very important that this Council , this forthcoming summit , translates the change from words into action .
We need physical security , and not only plans and documents and words and papers .
The time has come to wake up .
What if something bad happens in geopolitical terms in northern Africa and the Middle East ?
A great tectonic change is taking place before our eyes .
Oil now costs USD 100 again .
If , in the worst case scenario , the Suez Canal should be blocked , how prepared are we as a Union to ensure security of supply ?
Where are we ?
After four years of lost time , we are not prepared for the next energy crisis if it happens .
For that reason the key expectation is that the European Council should provide a real change in terms of a genuine internal market for energy and genuine security of supply in a material and physical sense .
( DE ) Mr President , the first energy summit in the history of the European Union will take place on Friday , because , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Union has direct responsibilities in this sector for the first time .
I agree with Mr Barroso that energy policy may be the European Union 's next big integration project .
There are very many aspects to this , and President Buzek has always said that we need an energy community in the EU .
Where this summit was concerned , there were many hopes and expectations that the European Union 's strategic questions with regard to energy supply would be answered .
What are the strategic questions ?
Yes , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , they include the EU 's dependence on energy imports .
They include the enormous amount of energy that is still being wasted , and there are also the negative consequences of the current energy system on ecosystems and in particular on the Earth 's atmosphere .
When I look at the Council conclusions , I have to say that this energy summit is going to be a huge disappointment , because it will not answer any of these major questions .
It has actually been poorly prepared in terms of the common vision that we need and it has also been poorly prepared in terms of the coherence of the resources and instruments that we use .
I would like mention once again that yesterday , at the alternative energy summit of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , a five pillar concept was proposed for how we can answer these strategic questions , how we can reduce energy imports and energy wastage and , of course , how we can eliminate the negative impact on the environment .
The proposed means for achieving this were through the development of renewable energies , through energy efficiency and through the use of information technology to interlink these different energy sources .
That is an innovation summit .
I have not heard of information technology being used as a strategic factor before .
I therefore believe that we need a technological revolution , and this summit ought to be setting us on the right course .
However , I have the impression that it is going in the wrong direction .
( EL ) Mr President , the forthcoming meeting of the European Council will be set against the backdrop of the continuing capitalist crisis and stiffening competition between the monopolies , both within the European Union and between the European Union and other imperialist centres , for energy and innovation .
These are two vital sectors for capital .
Large areas , such as the Middle East , Asia and Africa , are the scene for stiff imperialist competition and intervention to control wealth-producing resources and energy transportation routes , which is causing tremendous poverty , harsh exploitation and repression , in collaboration with the bourgeois classes at home and to the detriment of the people .
This reactionary policy is giving rise to popular uprisings , such as those breaking out right now in Egypt and other countries , thereby proving that the people are the protagonists of history .
The Greek Communist Party expresses its solidarity with the people protesting in Egypt .
It calls on the people to express their real support and solidarity .
The basic priority of the summit , which is not formally included in its agenda but which will be discussed , is the EU 2020 strategy .
Priorities in terms of implementing reinforced economic governance will be moving in the same direction .
( PT ) Mr President , I have no doubt that this Council will be very important , essentially for matters relating to the recovery of Europe 's economies , in particular energy and innovation .
I therefore cannot fail to stress that , basically , this Council is part of the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy : it is part of that half - that side of the coin - that is the side of growth , competitiveness and economic recovery .
However , because this is so important , I should like to make an appeal here , which is why I have taken the floor .
In addition to subjects as important as energy and innovation , I call on this Council to debate and draw up a solution to the financial crisis that the European Union is experiencing .
I believe that we do not have time to waste .
Moreover , if we cannot expect a solution to this problem from Friday 's Council , and even if we have to wait until March 's Council meeting for it , it is essential for the Heads of State or Government to prepare to make the stability fund more flexible , starting on 4 February , along with preparing the relaunch of the European economic government .
I believe that this matter is fundamental and cannot remain on the margins of this Council .
Now , if you will permit me , I would like to make another point about this Council : I hope that it will also draw up a European Union strategy for the Mediterranean ; I hope that it will draw up a response to the situations currently being experienced in Tunisia and Egypt .
In other words , despite the importance of the issues of energy and innovation , I hope that the issues of the financial crisis and of the political crisis in North Africa will be tackled by this Council .
( NL ) Mr President , I would ask members to take a look at Mr Van Rompuy 's invitation to the next Council meeting .
In it , he says ' We are going to talk about energy , and I would particularly like to focus on energy supply and energy security ' .
However , the Council is engaging in the wrong debate .
Energy supply and energy security are important , of course they are , but primarily only within the framework of a more global objective , and in particular within the framework of an energy system which will be completely independent and completely sustainable in the long term .
Obviously , I agree with many of the things that have been said , but I would like to steer the debate some way further ahead to the future .
Although he is not with us right now , Mr Reul , the Chair of our Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , has said that politicians should not put forward too many new proposals .
Well , he is wrong about that .
It is the task of politicians to have a vision for the future and to formulate objectives accordingly .
Our objective should be to switch entirely to renewable energy by 2050 .
It is not just a few individual politicians or a number of political groups that are saying that .
No , scientists are saying that that is perfectly feasible if we start doing the right things now to enable us to achieve this objective by 2050 .
There is , then , the question of energy efficiency , as well , as many members have pointed out .
Incidentally , Mr Barroso has said many good things about that and I hope with all my heart that the Commissioner in charge will be able to deliver the goods .
Moreover , we need to make huge investments in renewable energy : locally , at district level , but also in a number of special major projects , such as the North Sea Ring and major projects relating to solar panels .
Finally - and that is where Europe has a very special task - we need an energy network which will ensure that all of that becomes a reality .
It is the responsibility of the European Union to provide the funding and the Council ought to make decisions next Friday .
( RO ) Mr President , the energy summit may put the European Union back on track for economic growth .
In its ambition to become the most sustainable global economy it must devise a new energy vision for Europe .
A coherent , Community approach is required for both production and efficiency .
Production means sources , transport and distribution .
The Black Sea and Caspian Sea regions have new energy sources which can be developed over long periods of time .
New transport routes can be created in this region .
The Southern Corridor and , in particular , the Nabucco pipeline are of paramount importance in this respect .
The Danube Strategy can also help develop new gas or oil supply routes .
We cannot discuss a common policy without having a common energy network .
Interconnection between national networks is the first step towards a single internal energy market .
Energy efficiency is a must .
Steps have been taken in this direction , but the Union needs to implement the action plan in this area in the years ahead .
Energy efficiency will have a huge impact on economic growth , the methods used to cut CO2 emissions and on creating jobs in areas such as IT , construction and services .
With regard to the situation in North Africa , we must ensure that the action proposals put forward by the Council will guarantee a peaceful transition in this region and that the new organisations will assume power democratically .
( PT ) Mr President , energy and innovation are very important issues , which are fundamental to the Europe 2020 strategy , and can contribute to smart , sustainable growth , and to creating more and better jobs .
In fact , energy and innovation are areas in which my country , Portugal , has been making large-scale investments with good results .
In recent years , Portugal has doubled its investment in R & D and has reached the top five in terms of renewable energy : 31 % of electricity consumed already comes from renewable sources and this figure is expected to be 60 % in 2020 .
However , as has already been said , this Council cannot ignore what is happening in Egypt : a popular revolution .
Nor can it ignore the financial and economic crisis .
The eurozone Member States in the greatest difficulties are doing what they should by adopting austerity measures , which are needed in order to contain the deficit and calm the markets .
These measures require great sacrifices from families and businesses .
As for the EU , is it doing what it should ?
I do not think so .
The European response in the face of attacks on the euro by speculators - because it is through sovereign debt that speculators are attacking the single currency - has been piecemeal , late and ineffective .
The diagnosis has been made and the prescription is well known : the European Union must improve economic coordination , and make the European financial stabilisation fund stronger and more flexible , so that it can buy the public debt of the countries under the greatest pressure from the markets .
In other words , we are facing global problems requiring a global response .
That is also what the public expects from the upcoming European Council .
( NL ) Mr President , special times call for special policies and , certainly , now that we are trying to haul ourselves out of the crisis , it is a good thing that space has been found on the Council 's agenda for energy and innovation , specifically .
They are key factors for European competitiveness and also for employment in the near future .
We have had enough figures and reports .
We now have to move forward and make progress .
The field of cross-border infrastructure and interconnections , in particular , is where we are very much lagging behind .
We should now move on with new instruments , such as project bonds and use European Investment Bank guarantees to make greater efforts to enable investment .
The second point , obviously , is innovation .
The European Scoreboard on Innovation was published this week and you see there that some countries are lagging behind .
This is understandable in a time of crisis , but should we not be mobilising other instruments , as well ?
The structural funds , for example , which require public co-finance to bring initiatives to completion .
At precisely the time when we are almost totally failing to do this , a lot more emphasis needs to be placed on public investment and innovation .
The Minister has also suggested that .
This kind of innovation should move things forward without us immediately having to be ready to inject more money .
That would definitely help us achieve the 2020 objectives of sustainability , smart action and getting people into work .
I wish you success .
( RO ) Mr President , at the European summit on energy taking place on 4 February , the European Union needs to reach agreement at the highest political level on priority measures aimed at establishing the internal energy market and developing the energy infrastructure , as well as on measures for reducing energy consumption , boosting energy efficiency and promoting renewable energy sources .
We need at least a 10-year action plan which will provide both solidarity among Member States in the event of any serious energy supply disruptions and a boost to energy security through diversification of energy supply routes and sources .
The Union must modernise its energy infrastructures and provide interconnections between Member States ' energy infrastructures .
In this context , I must stress the geostrategic importance of the extended Black Sea region for the European Union 's energy security .
The common energy market must operate to serve ordinary citizens , for whom the price of energy needs to remain affordable , and help make European industry eco-efficient both by providing jobs in the European Union and developing the industrial sector .
( SL ) Mr President , in the field of energy , we have set ourselves objectives which cover all three pillars of the common energy policy : competitiveness , sustainability and the security of supply .
In order to achieve these objectives , we have already adopted two extensive packages : the first being the climate and energy package and the second being the liberalisation package .
For this reason , I do not think that we need any new legislation in the field of energy ; instead , I think we should focus more on implementing the existing legislation .
What is the use of putting additional requirements down on paper , and ever more stringent requirements at that , if we fail to implement the existing ones ?
We need to improve the Union 's credibility , which is why I am saying that we do not need any new requirements to improve energy efficiency .
Businesses and households need to make decisions according to market conditions .
So far , improving efficiency has been regarded as the most economical measure , a win-win situation , as it were , and I really see no need for new binding targets .
We must also create an environment which will encourage investment in infrastructure .
It is the market that has to act , not public funds from European and national budgets .
We have to avoid government subsidies and non-market mechanisms which lead to the centralisation of the economy , hamper competition and stifle creativity .
Energy is part of the ETS and carbon price must be the main driver of development .
In the field of energy , we also need improved cross-border coordination and strategic planning for new infrastructure .
That is why the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators or ACER , which will begin work in March in Ljubljana , should receive all possible support to carry out its tasks effectively .
Mr President , I support in principle the idea of a European competitiveness pact , making provision for harmonisation of the retirement age and , especially , speeding up the mutual recognition of academic and professional qualifications , as well as better coordinating research and development efforts .
I stress the need to create a fully integrated European energy market by 2015 .
Can I hope that , in four years ' time , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania will cease to be isolated energy islands where gas supplies are concerned ?
We expect a real breakthrough from the Hungarian Presidency in developing an integrated European network of gas , oil and electricity infrastructures and interconnections from the Baltics to the Adriatic Sea .
I also appeal to the Council to safeguard sustainable local production of electricity by creating equal conditions for competition , both for EU and non-EU producers .
It is also time that the problem of carbon leakages in the electricity sector was addressed at EU level .
Finally , it is regrettable that the EU Foreign Ministers failed to agree on the clear condemnation of sectarian attacks against Christians in Egypt and Iran .
Two weeks ago Parliament provided a solid basis for taking a strong , united position on this dramatic issue .
The European Council 's failure to react in time is bound to create an impression that defending traditional Christian minorities outside Europe is not an EU priority .
Mr President , first of all , citizens of Arab nations have the same rights to democracy and human rights as anyone else .
I think it is imperative that the policy of the European Union is now supportive of the democratic forces in all countries where we see a change coming .
We shall ensure that this change will take the direction of democracy and human rights because we see a change in the whole European neighbourhood .
We see it in the Eastern Partnership countries as well as in the countries of Northern Africa .
It is a requirement that we are decisive , stable and strong in the message of supporting democratic forces , wherever we can find them , and we shall make them as strong as possible .
Secondly , regarding energy , we need energy efficiency .
We have a lot of programmes in order to achieve that .
But we also need to secure at a European level common grids and systems for the distribution of gas and electricity .
That is one way of using energy sources efficiently .
Secondly , we also need to ensure that we have the production needed to leave fossil fuels and make it possible to have low prices without carbon dioxide emissions .
Phasing out nuclear power is hindering us .
Using our energy sources , together with a common grid and a common energy market , is one way forward .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will be quite frank .
I cannot see any determination , sincerity or dynamism .
Time is running out .
Sometimes I have the feeling that we are still trying to express our wishes to the Heads of State or Government rather than getting down to the nitty gritty of what needs to be done .
We urgently need more courage to have more Europe .
Have the courage to reach agreement on what is necessary , not just on what is possible .
Break with the tradition of always blocking or delaying what needs to be done on internal policy grounds .
Do not draw up lists of what is not possible due to national egoism and protectionism , but of what we need to do together , as Europe , in order to be competitive and to provide the right answer to the crisis .
The events require new acts of solidarity .
They require the next step to be taken towards integration .
They require the swift correction of the structural shortcoming in the monetary union , namely the economic and social union .
I am in favour of the competition pact and I am in favour of the internal energy market , because it can also ensure that prices fall , our independence increases and growth and jobs are created .
However , we must also say ' yes ' to the Research , Innovation and Education Area , in other words to the greater Europeanisation of education and research policy .
I am also in favour of economic governance , provided it involves the Commission , but I am not in favour of a new intergovernmentalism that undermines the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mr President , the European Council is expected to approve that no EU Member State should remain an energy island after 2015 .
As a rule , interconnections are absent in those Member States where the natural gas sector is dominated by an incumbent operator .
Any progress on infrastructure that would allow new-party access is very slow because vertically integrated monopolies invest mainly to further consolidate their domination , while it is hard to attract new investors to a closed market .
Implementation of the EU Gas Directive - i.e. full ownership unbundling - is the only effective and reasonable way to encourage infrastructure investments ( in this case in Lithuania ) , introduce competition and speed up integration into the EU internal energy market .
However , it is absurd that an EU Member State is being threatened , or even discriminated against , for implementing the EU legislation while the EU itself seems to stand aside .
Therefore I would ask you , colleagues , the Commission and the Council , to use every opportunity openly to express disapproval of pressure being put on a Member State to waive implementation of the EU acquis ; and to consolidate support for it at the European Council meeting .
I should mention , too , that the implementation of the EU Gas Directive in Lithuania is closely followed by other Member States where conditions are similar .
Without this access , the goal of achieving a fully integrated and functioning EU internal energy market by 2014 will be undermined .
( HU ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Hungarian EU Presidency that this extremely important topic is finally being discussed at the highest level in the Council .
Affordable and universally accessible energy is in the interest of all EU Member States .
The European Union must make use of all potential energy sources .
We did miss something , however , which nobody has noticed .
The Hungarian-born Nobel laureate György Oláh has discovered a methanol economy .
There are already a vast number of methanol stations in China but , in Europe , this type of energy supply only exists in Iceland .
There is no methanol-based energy economy in the EU whatsoever , even though it is extremely cheap , since it generates energy from carbon dioxide , water and electricity which can be used for powering cars , generating electricity , heating and other applications .
Mr President , one of the issues to be discussed at the European Council is improving the framework conditions - whatever they might be - for research and innovation in the European Union .
There is of course a distinction between invention and innovation , and between these two and patent applications .
However , if you were to look for the geographical source of any or all of these , you would not see an even geographical spread throughout the world .
You would find a disproportionate number from certain countries of the world with direct or historical ties to Europe .
Now why should this be ?
Could the reason provide a clue to the framework conditions being sought so earnestly by the Innovation Union ?
Whatever could be the explanation ?
Well , when we have dismissed climate , something in the water , habitual diet and nappy training in a cold climate , whatever else could remain ?
Well I am afraid I am stuck for an answer .
But whatever it is , we must make sure that we do not discard it out of ignorance .
( HU ) Mr President , the energy summit on 4 February could be a real breakthrough , where words and deeds can finally meet .
Tabled before the Council is the issue of the strategy and , at the same time , that of the infrastructure required for its implementation .
I hope that the outcome will confirm our expectations , and on 4 February we can witness the creation of a real common European energy policy .
If you would allow me one final thought , Mr President . I would like to state that I welcome the correspondence between the European Commission and the Hungarian Government on the matter of the Hungarian media law .
I am glad that the dialogue is following the procedural course usual in such matters .
This should reassure everyone who has a stake in the resolution of the issue .
I am convinced that the case could be closed within a few weeks .
Any further malicious and unfounded political attacks will be redundant .
I hold the belief that it is this that is in the interest of the EU , and not that which was unfortunately demonstrated today in a speech in this House .

( LT ) The coming decade will be crucial for the entire European Union , because the Member States will have to take serious decisions : to replace existing resources and infrastructure and meet increasing demand for energy , which will be essential for European economic development in the future .
This European Council on Energy really is very important .
It may become an historic event if there is agreement on specific principles for the development of the internal energy market .
This would truly enable all 27 European Union Member States to coordinate their actions and focus their efforts on making our economic environment greater and more competitive , on increasing jobs and reducing social exclusion .
I feel that it is very important for specific calendars to be set , which would allow energy islands in the Member States to be reduced or eliminated .
To achieve this it is particularly important to muster political will and solidarity and to ensure that we develop not only projects that are commercially attractive , but ones that are necessary for the European Union .
I believe that it is also very important to set binding schedules for Member States , so that they comply on time with their obligations to implement these projects .
Although investment decisions usually depend on market players , political decisions are also of huge significance in establishing a stable and transparent investment environment .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , this debate clearly confirms that both energy and innovation are absolutely crucial for the future of Europe and the future of the European economy .
Clearly we would all agree that , if we take the right steps now , not only can we make an important contribution to economic recovery in the short term , but we can also make our European economy much more competitive in the long term .
I also agree with all of you who called for concrete deliverables and for concrete actions to be taken .
The Commission is therefore pushing very hard to have very clear targets .
We would like to have a real internal market in the field of energy by 2014 .
We must finally unlock the potential of the internal market in this very important field of the economy .
To give just one figure : if we do this right , consumers can save EUR 13 billion by having the possibility of getting electricity from a cheaper provider .
This is more than EUR 100 per year per consumer , and this is just the beginning .
Therefore we need to push the European Council to take real ownership of the internal market in the field of energy and to exercise ownership in relation to the very important transposition of the legislation , not only at European level but also at national level in each and every Member State .
I listened very carefully to our MEPs from the Baltic countries .
I think it is high time to overcome the situation whereby we have isolated energy islands .
Therefore 2015 is the right time for finalising the work on this very important project and getting our Baltic Member States connected to the real European grid .
If there was something with which I did not completely agree , it was the statement on Barack Obama 's State of the Union address .
I listened to this and I must say I felt that it was very much inspired by what we do here in Europe - what we suggested in the EU 2020 strategy .
He spoke about energy efficiency , the importance of education , the new impetus on protection of the environment , and the reduction of poverty .
These are precisely the goals we have set for ourselves for the next 10 years .
I really believe that we are leaders where environmental policies are concerned .
You can check the position of the European Union in all environmental summits , and see the energy invested in bringing the whole world onto the right course in this particular field .
Concerning our goals - our famous 2020 goals - we are doing quite well regarding the reduction of emissions .
We are also doing quite well in increasing the share of renewable resources in all our energy production .
But it is true - and I have to admit this here - that we are lagging behind in meeting the targets for energy efficiency .
Therefore we , as a Commission , will monitor development in this field very closely and we will have a review of the targets in 2013 .
I can promise you that , if the results are not ambitious enough , we will seriously consider imposing legally binding targets for this field as well .
We all know that the cleanest energy is safe energy .
Concerning the comments on the innovation economy , here I think it is very clear that we have to raise the level of innovation priorities and innovation policies .
We have to unlock the potential that has existed in Europe in this field for many years .
We can see that , as regards closing our innovation gap with the USA and Japan , we are not doing as well as we would have expected to .
We can see how emerging economies are closing on us , so we have to focus on this area as much as possible .
We have to analyse the real causes of our lack of ambitious progress .
One of them has been mentioned , namely the problem of red tape , bureaucracy and over-complicated rules .
Therefore the Commission has already suggested - and this was adopted last week - a simplification of the rules for the Seventh Framework Programme for all innovation policies .
I think we will all have a good opportunity in the context of the next multiannual financial framework discussion to improve the way in which we execute and implement European programmes , because we will also be discussing financial regulations .
We have to look very carefully for a balance between appropriate control and the necessary flexibility in programme execution , so that we do not create additional red tape in relation to programmes which are especially important for the promotion of innovation policies in Europe .
The economy will , of course , be discussed as well .
The February European Council meeting will be a meeting of transition and a search for a comprehensive approach to the current economic challenges in Europe , whether in relation to the eurozone or in the field of improved economic governance for the whole European Union .
I can assure you that the Commission is relentless in proposing measures to stabilise the situation in the financial market and in seeking long-term solutions .
We believe that all this must constitute a comprehensive response which will allow us , finally , to move out of reactive mode and to plan for long-term measures and a long-term strengthening of the European economy .
Regarding comments on Treaty change and on the setting-up of the permanent European Stability Mechanism , the Commission is convinced that the Treaty provides the right framework for further reinforcement of economic governance .
It is quite clear that to do this outside the Union framework raises political and institutional issues which will have to be very carefully examined by the Commission .
I am sure that the leaders will discuss this issue too in Friday 's European Council meeting .
The situation in Egypt and Tunisia was discussed this morning in the College of Commissioners .
There was clear support for the legitimate aspirations of the people of Egypt and clear confirmation that the Commission stands ready to step up its assistance to Egypt and its people in this transition .
The discussion on the situation in Tunisia and Egypt will follow and I am sure that my colleague Cathy Ashton will be able to address it in more precise terms .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I should like to thank the speakers for all the comments and interventions .
I witnessed an extremely valuable discussion here in Parliament , which will contribute to Friday 's discussion by the heads of state and government on energy and innovation issues .
I wholeheartedly understand Parliament saying that what we are doing for energy or innovation is not enough .
We are very committed to the Lisbon Treaty 's provision on the formation of the European internal energy market ; we are greatly committed to moving in that direction .
Of course , please encourage us to do more in this field .
I do not want to go into details because I think Vice-President Šefčovič was very detailed on all the aspects of the future common energy policy in Europe .
The same for innovation .
We all believe that we have to put more things on the table concerning innovation ; the Innovation Union is a great investment in the future .
A strong Europe cannot live without strong common policies and European energy and European innovation policy should be one of those .
My question to Mr Schulz is why he allowed me answer as a representative of the Hungarian Government .
I think Mr Schulz read a different letter from the letter we sent to the Commission .
He said that the Hungarian Government neglected the Commission consensus and was not ready to take it into consideration .
Let me quote certain lines from this letter , beginning with the statement that the Government of the Republic of Hungary is ready to amend the law on the media .
' The modification of the legislation could be considered ' .
' The Hungarian Government is also prepared to examine the possibility of finding other legal solutions if necessary ' .
Finally , ' if the Commission ... still deems it necessary ' after the consultations ' to amend the Hungarian regulation ... , we are prepared to commence drafting these modifications ' .
So , I would just like to inform you that , as is clearly stated in the letter , there is a consultation .
We are ready .
The Commission yesterday said it was pleased that the answer had arrived .
Experts will get down to business and it is our job to find a solution to this kind of problem .
I very much hope that in the future all kinds of discussions will be dedicated to energy and innovation and not mix up the presidency with some aspects of certain political parties .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
This Council is adopting energy and innovation as subjects for debate .
The proposal is to integrate and ' complete ' the single market for electricity and gas .
We are well aware that this stated goal has been synonymous with limits to the Member States ' full exercising of their social role through properly equipped , financed and active public services , and that it has been synonymous with liberalisations and privatisations , followed sooner or later by the inevitable monopolistic concentration at EU level .
There will therefore be no difference in this strategic area of vital importance .
In the midst of this , and as the easiest means of making this route viable , issues are being raised ( demagogically ) relating to the security of energy supply : these are certainly important , and must be considered and resolved , but within a different framework .
Innovation is already seen , above all , merely as a means of giving value to ideas within the market and not as it should be : as a necessary means of helping respond to many of the problems and challenges facing humanity .
However , it has become clear during the debate that these issues are nothing more than a smokescreen for another discussion : that of deepening the disastrous and anti-democratic mechanisms of so-called ' economic governance ' , and of tightening the stranglehold on peoples and countries like , inter alia , Portugal .
The areas of energy and innovation are fundamental to growth and employment .
Energy is a huge project for European integration , as the internal market was in the past .
Europe needs an ambitious vision and a concrete plan in the area of innovation and energy .
I hope that Friday 's European Council will be an important milestone in this respect .
Much has already been done in the area of the European energy and climate strategy , but we need to go further .
We need to stay at the forefront of technology by investing more in research and innovation , building the necessary infrastructure and training more engineers , scientists and technicians .
At this critical moment , when we are experiencing an economic crisis , action is urgently needed .
Moreover , there is a way of achieving this : by radically changing the way that we produce and use energy in our society .
in writing . - ( PL ) The energy summit taking place this week will serve to highlight the importance of energy solidarity .
The most effective ways to ensure the security of energy supplies are a fully common market , a pan-European network , the enforcement of legislation and transparent rules .
Unfortunately , some of the leaders of our countries do not understand this .
Instead , they prefer to rely on their own national solutions to energy matters , and to bargain with suppliers from third countries .
We should therefore take note of the recent calls by European energy companies to liberalise the market and implement EU energy legislation in full .
We must be sure when preparing the Infrastructure Package that the European projects in which we want to invest will be selected on the basis of clear and transparent criteria .
When creating a pan-European network , we must also place particular emphasis on investment in countries which have very poorly-developed and outdated energy infrastructure , as Mr Barroso said .
The market will not take care of this by itself ; public measures are needed .
We cannot afford a two-speed Europe in the field of energy . Thank you .
For the European Union to achieve its proposed targets , the main priority is to implement properly and quickly the Third package for Electricity & Gas markets .
Development of the energy infrastructure plays a key role in ensuring the internal energy market 's operation .
In this context , I want to stress that particular attention must be focused on the funding for this infrastructure for the timeframe up until 2020 .
The European Commission must present specific figures on the investment requirements and submit as soon as possible the new instrument for funding the energy infrastructure .
In addition to the measures that need to be taken by the European Commission , it is important to strengthen the European Union 's partnerships with international financial institutions with a view to identifying innovative financial instruments.A suitable funding framework also needs to be created , particularly through improving the rules for allocating costs for cross-border projects or technologically advanced projects .
in writing . - ( PL ) I believe that at its forthcoming summit on 4 February , the European Energy Council should aim to ensure that all energy sources , both traditional and non-traditional , are treated equally .
Particular emphasis should be placed on native energy sources , including mineral fuels ( coal and shale gas ) , in order to guarantee energy security for the EU .
Use of these sources , with appropriate EU support , will be a decisive factor not only for the security of energy supplies , but also for the EU 's competitiveness and employment levels .
At the same time , I would note that by ensuring appropriate investment in the EU 's energy infrastructure , we guarantee the further development of the Member States .
I hope that the European Council 's conclusions will be an accurate reflection of the debates that have taken place to date on the 2050 objectives , and that they will not be published before the debate on these objectives , which is due to take place in March 2011 . Thank you .
There are currently 27 energy markets operating in the EU .
The lack of interconnection between them is resulting in failure to achieve the EU 's objectives for economic competitiveness and energy security .
The lack of a single integrated market means that EU energy policy is unable to provide effective solutions to the problems linked to the fall in Europe 's oil and gas reserves , the rise in crude oil and natural gas prices , the increase in global demand for energy and global warming .
I welcome the announcement from Commissioner Oettinger regarding the ambitious deadline proposed by the European Commission , stating that 2015 will be the deadline for completing the internal energy market .
I also welcome the intention to interconnect the 27 Member States ' gas and electricity networks and create a suitable infrastructure for the EU to achieve its objectives .
I hope that the Commission 's commitment will be understood by European leaders as a call to put Member States ' real long-term interests at the forefront .
It will only be possible to initiate the creation and strengthening of the single energy market and common policy in this area by making a firm decision as soon as possible .
These are the only factors which can safeguard everyone 's energy security in the medium and long term .
It is shocking that Christians throughout the world continue to be persecuted and murdered .
It is an indictment of Europe that the foreign ministers of the Member States in the Council cannot manage to respond to this .
They treat the will of Parliament with contempt .
The EU must do something .
I call on the Council to show responsibility for the basic right of freedom of religion , to swiftly draw up an implementable strategy to protect Christians throughout the world and to establish a separate unit for intercultural and religious matters in the European External Action Service .
These things need to be done now , not some time in the future .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have comments to make on two matters : 1 .
Energy policy : The current path that our energy policy is on will take too long to reach the goal .
By means of simplified and accelerated procedures with regard to the development of energy infrastructure , the EU can make important progress in setting its course - although this must under no circumstances be to the detriment of citizens and it must not undermine the Aarhus Convention .
Transparency and traceability in the work are necessary prerequisites .
It goes without saying that SMEs , with their capacity for innovation , must be involved as equal partners .
2 .
The financial crisis : The world of the financial markets turns much faster than the Council has reacted up to now .
In order to counter the resulting general uncertainty felt by citizens and in the financial world , swift and decisive action is required .
During the forthcoming European Council summit , planned for 4 February , the Heads of State or Government will discuss two topics ; the Community 's energy policy and research and development .
The key issues regarding the first topic will be energy efficiency , renewable energy sources and security of supply ( a matter of particular importance for Poland ) , whereas the key issues regarding the second topic will be international scientific cooperation and streamlining EU science programmes .
I have the impression , however , that the summit , which has been convened under the slogans of energy and innovation , will turn into a conference on current affairs - both those within the European Union ( economic policy ) and those seemingly further away ( the political situation in Tunisia , Egypt and Belarus ) .
It is proving to be the case that the EU must deal with a rapidly rising number of problems , and the problem will not be solved even by more frequent EU summits , as proposed by the EU President , Mr Van Rompuy .
The EU must soon find answers to a number of questions , such as whether funding for the European Financial Stability Facility should be increased , how the Member States ' economic policy should be coordinated to ensure that the Facility is not needed in the future , and , finally , how we should react to events with a strong international dimension to ensure that the EU 's voice is heard .
It will not only be figures , that is the energy indicators to be achieved before 2020 , that will be of key importance when formulating a response , but also the genuine political will of the Member States .
Europe consumes one fifth of the world 's energy ; how much time will be devoted to energy at Friday 's meeting in Brussels ?
The problem of the European Union 's energy policy was raised during the debate on preparations for the European Council summit to be held on 4 February 2011 .
Energy security is a priority area , and the establishment of a common energy market should be a common European objective towards which we must strive using integrated measures .
Alternative energy sources , which are starting to play an ever-greater role in Europe , were a further key point in this debate .
The development of modern technologies and green job creation are closely linked to energy policy .
Particular attention should be paid to the need to extend the European Research Area .
These are ideal examples of measures that fit in with the ideas behind the Europe 2020 strategy , which prioritises innovation and the development of scientific research , as well as green job creation .
Europe should integrate its forces in this area too .
Situation in the Mediterranean , in particular in Tunisia and Egypt ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the situation in the Mediterranean , in particular in Tunisia and Egypt .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , we have all been watching very closely the recent events in Tunisia and more lately in Egypt .
The people in both countries have voiced legitimate grievances and aspirations and they expect a proper response not only from within their countries but also from their partners , including the European Union .
Their message is clear : their political systems have reached a point of no return , and change must come now .
I take this opportunity to express my admiration for their dignity and courage and , in the light of what we are seeing now on our television screens from Egypt in particular , I call for calm and restraint and dialogue .
I am going to begin by talking about Tunisia .
The changes that have taken place have been remarkable and have paved the way for more democratic development of the country .
Despite many challenges , we can already see the positive developments in Tunisia , where efforts have been made to meet the demands of the population .
The transitional government has taken some important steps , in particular by freeing political prisoners and allowing freedom of expression , as well as prosecuting members of former President Ben Ali 's family for corruption .
Furthermore , three independent commissions have been set up and have begun their work : the Commission for inquiry into corruption and misuse of public funds ; the Commission for inquiry into abuses during the repression in the course of the latest events ; and the High Commission for Political Reform .
I have taken note too of the most recent government reshuffle in response to popular demand .
The government has received the support of the main opposition parties and the main trade union - the Tunisian General Labour Union .
Peace and stability is important to allow Tunisia to put in place democratic and transparent elections and effect vital political , economic and social changes .
The European Union is there to support the country and its people at this difficult moment of transition , and we have responded immediately - not in order to impose our views or ideas , but to offer our help and to work together .
I spoke last week with the new Minister of Foreign Affairs , Mr Ounaies , following his appointment , and we met together today in Brussels .
We had a substantial discussion here - the first place that he has visited since taking office - on the best way for the European Union to support the transition and assist the Tunisian people .
He confirmed today the request for support from the EU in the preparatory phase of the elections and in the observation of future elections .
We are about to dispatch an experts ' mission to Tunisia to assess the electoral legislation and provide legal advice to the transition authorities on it , and last week EEAS managing director Hugues Mingarelli was on the ground in Tunisia discussing people 's needs with them .
As for other forms of assistance , we have increased the allocation for cooperation with civil society .
This will be combined with a reorientation of our assistance programmes to help the people more directly .
Liberal policies alone cannot bring the needed economic and social welfare and wealth distribution for all the Tunisian people .
So we are going to review with Tunisia our priorities , to take account of the new situation and adapt our assistance to their social needs .
Today the Minister conveyed to me details of the concerns that they have and the plans that they have , so that we will be able to respond , together with other international partners .
I offered concrete support , initially in the areas of electoral support ; governance and transition to democracy ; support for civil society and NGOs ; support for the rule of law and judicial reform ; economic governance and the fight against corruption ; economic and social development ( including support to impoverished areas in the centre and south of Tunisia ) .
We are also ready to consider , with the Member States , mobility-related measures and increased market access .
Working-level contacts are well underway on all these issues and we will continue the dialogue .
I plan to travel to Tunisia the week after next .
As for the Tunisian authorities ' request that the assets of Mr Ben Ali and people closely linked to his regime be frozen , we have already taken the initial steps .
We accelerated procedures to allow the Foreign Affairs Council on Monday to adopt a decision on restrictive measures , with a view to imposing an assets freeze on persons under inquiry for embezzlement of state funds in Tunisia .
The Tunisian authorities have communicated to us a list of persons who should be the object of these measures .
As I indicated , our managing director Hugues Mingarelli travelled to the region last week .
He had discussions with the preliminary government and the presidents of each of the three newly established commissions and met with civil-society representatives .
I want to welcome too the European Parliament initiative to send a delegation to Tunisia .
I believe it is vital that the Tunisian people see the strong support of the EU , and in particular the European Parliament , in what is a critical moment of transition towards democracy .
We need to strengthen all possible people-to-people contacts and reach out to civil society , and that includes supporting NGOs , professional associations and student exchanges .
We now have an opportunity to strengthen the partnership between Tunisia and the European Union on the basis of an affirmation of democracy and economic and social reform .
I hope we can build on the mutual respect and trust among our respective peoples to ensure stability and a democratic and prosperous future for Tunisia .
In that context I look forward to the upcoming free and democratic elections and the establishment of the new government .
I have agreed with the Tunisian Foreign Minister to resume negotiations on Advanced Status shortly , with a view to their conclusion once a new democratically elected government is in place .
Finally , the Foreign Minister described the atmosphere as an atmosphere of reconciliation .
I hope that we will be able to work with Tunisia to move that atmosphere forward towards a new , freer democracy .
I will now address the situation in Egypt .
Just over one week ago we witnessed the start of an extraordinary movement there .
Anti-government protests - clearly inspired by the events in Tunisia and beyond , and organised mainly through social media and word of mouth - have , I think , taken the whole world by surprise .
The great strength of this popular uprising is that it is happening across Egypt .
Hundreds of thousands of people , young and old , men and women , are taking to the streets , demanding their legitimate political and socio-economic rights .
The protests have spread from Cairo to Alexandria and Suez and further across Egypt and the crowds have continued to grow in size and diversity , with protestors united in their demands for regime change and for the observance of fundamental human rights .
The initially relatively peaceful protests have become increasingly violent , with the police firing teargas and rubber bullets and using water cannons .
We are concerned that live ammunition may also have been used .
Like all the honourable Members here , I deplore the considerable loss of life during the demonstrations and my thoughts go out to those who have lost their loved ones .
The large number of injured and arrested is also a cause of great concern , and all parties have to show restraint and stop the violence .
We have prepared for the Foreign Affairs Council on Monday with our conclusions calling upon the Egyptian authorities to immediately release all peaceful demonstrators who have been detained .
Freedom of expression and freedom of assembly are fundamental human rights for everybody , which the state has a duty to protect .
The imposed restrictions on media , including the Internet , are unacceptable and I urge the Egyptian authorities to restore all communication networks without delay .
Through nationwide demonstrations , the Egyptian people are expressing their wish to see change .
Hundreds of thousands have gathered in each rally across the country .
It is of the utmost importance that these voices are listened to , now , and that the situation is addressed through urgent , concrete and decisive measures .
The time has come for orderly transition and a peaceful and far-reaching transformation .
The authorities must seek , and take seriously , an open dialogue with the political forces .
It is important that civil society plays a crucial role in that dialogue .
The Egyptian authorities must move forward quickly through a broad-based government leading to a genuine process of substantial democratic reform and paving the way for free and fair elections .
We will offer our full support to an Egypt that strives for transformation to be more democratic and more pluralist .
We have a shared interest in peace and prosperity in the Mediterranean and Middle East region .
What we must do now is adapt and reinforce the means at our disposal to support the necessary political , economic and social reforms .
Our cooperation already has democracy , human rights and the rule of law as constituent elements and we have to refocus and strengthen that work .
For me , politics is about changing things : about helping people shape their own lives .
Across the Arab world , we are seeing lots of potentially positive change , driven by the demands of people .
As the European Union , our offer to the region and to the people is solidarity and support to put the reforms in place .
We are a union of democracies - we have a democratic calling , so we will back this process of change with creativity and with determination .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , whatever the result or outcome of the situation in Egypt , I believe that we are safe in saying that there will be a before and after the events that have taken place in Tunisia .
It is my opinion that we should not be looking for culprits in this House as this crisis has caught the European Union on the wrong foot , however I feel that we ought to draw some conclusions on the matter .
Firstly , the European Union needs to be more visible , it needs to speak with a unified voice and to avoid any cacophony ; it is for this reason that we have created the European External Action Service and the figure of the High Representative .
Secondly , we need to draw on the lessons offered to us by complacent policies with the enemies of freedom , from Belarus to Cuba and with the Mediterranean countries in between .
We need to ask ourselves if there really is more stability , more prosperity and more democracy as the Barcelona Process intended .
Thirdly , Mr President , I feel that we need to distinguish between what the European Union needs to do in the medium term and what it needs to do in the short term .
In the short term - I think that Baroness Ashton has drawn up a road map - the European Union needs to offer resolute support to these transition processes so as not to frustrate these friendly countries ' hopes for freedom .
It is also our duty , Mr President , to warn them of the risks involved in these processes , so they are not hijacked by the enemies of free societies .
In the medium term , Mr President , it is important that the European Union reflects deeply on a strategic approach to reforming our neighbourhood policy as we also requested of Mr Füle yesterday in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
All of this must be done , Mr President , whilst bearing in mind that often it is more difficult to maintain the balance of freedom than to shake off the yoke of tyranny .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the current events in Tunisia , Egypt and other countries in the region , must remind us that stability without freedom is , if not a mere illusion , at least an unsustainable reality .
We must also remember that a revolution or a social upheaval is a guarantee of change , but it is not a guarantee of change for the better .
I hope that we will find the inspiration to assist this process in order to make it a process which brings change for the better and not for the worse .
Deep analysis is needed of the situation in both Tunisia and Egypt ( and not only there ) , since we have to understand whether we did the right things in the past with a view to avoiding these crises .
What steps should we take in the future in order to anticipate or avoid similar crises ?
And lastly , what could we do in order to make sure that the present crisis will move things towards freedom for the peoples concerned and stability for the region , while avoiding any shift towards more , or another type of , instability and another type of totalitarianism or oppression .
We need to adopt a preventive and proactive attitude in this respect , and that requires strategy .
Certainly our messages were correct in terms of balancing the key word ' reform ' with the key words ' order ' or ' stability ' .
But the devil is , precisely , in the detail , and indeed it is the feeling of many of us that we have not yet addressed the details , and that we have not shown enough vision or enough strength in addressing the challenges .
Another important factor is our capacity to talk to all valid actors , including the Islamic forces , in such a way as to be able to integrate all of them into a positive process .
We hope that the Commission and the Council will be able to shape such a strategy in the future and we would be happy if they could tell us more about that .
Mr President , I believe that the events taking place at the moment in Tunisia , and especially over the last few hours in Egypt , are both historic and very tragic .
We are now hearing that hundreds and hundreds of people have been injured in the last few hours .
I am making this point above all because I see a similarity between what is happening at the moment in the Middle East , in North Africa , and what happened in Europe in 1989 .
That is precisely why I am surprised , astonished and disappointed at the way that Europe is currently making exactly the same mistakes as it made in 1989 , and I wish to make that clear .
It is incredible , Mr President , that we , the so-called democratic continent , have still not managed to offer our unreserved support to the masses on the streets - masses who are calling for nothing other than our support .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , I have not heard Baroness Ashton offer our support yet , either yesterday or today .
Why , Baroness Ashton , has Europe reacted so feebly ?
In point of fact , we have hardly reacted at all .
You reacted , and then Germany , France and the United Kingdom also issued a communication without consulting each other , as if Europe did not exist .
I have to say that the only satisfactory European speech came from outside the Union , namely from the Turkish Prime Minister , Mr Erdogan , who told Mr Mubarak that he should listen to the demands of his people and that he should therefore step down .
That was the only decent response to be heard at European level .
( Applause )
I believe that the speech that you are making today is very important for the people on the streets , who may even be fighting for their lives .
I believe that Europe has made two mistakes in recent days .
Firstly , we do not realise just what an historic moment this is , and , secondly , and much more importantly , we have misjudged the situation .
We are afraid - and that is why there is this misjudged communication - that an Islamist regime will come to power after the elections .
Well , let me tell you that I am not afraid .
I have confidence in the people of Tunisia and in the people of Egypt .
( Applause )
They are the ones who want democracy , and the fact that the Copts and the Muslims are now marching shoulder to shoulder is proof enough of what they want , which is a truly open democracy .
I shall give you a second example to show why we should not be afraid to call for open democracy in these countries .
You all know about Mohammed Bouazizi , the man who in fact sparked off the revolution in Tunisia by his self-immolation .
Well , Baroness Ashton , on Mr Bouazizi 's coffin there was no green flag of Islam .
There was the red flag of Tunisia , and so these are not Islamist revolutions that we are seeing at present .
Quite the contrary , they are revolutions for freedom .
( Applause )
Therefore , now that thousands of people have been gathering in Cairo for almost a week , and now that there are demonstrations in Jordan , Yemen , Syria and Algeria , I call on you , Baroness Ashton , to change the European Union 's position .
I would like you to speak on our behalf and say clearly today , in this House , that the European Union is 100 % behind the people of Egypt and their demands .
We want President Mubarak to finally listen to his people and , by stepping down , free his country so that it may enjoy democracy and freedom today .
That is the message I would like to hear in the response that you are about to make .
( Applause )
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , you are appealing for calm .
However , call a spade a spade !
It is Mr Mubarak 's troops which have brought terror to the square , today , in Egypt , not the demonstrators !
So , do not appeal for everyone to be calm .
Ask Mr Mubarak to stop attacking the demonstrators , because he is doing that so that he can then say : ' I am going to restore order amid this chaos ' .
That is the trap he is setting for us , and all we can do is say to both sides , ' Calm down ! '
No , emphatically not .
We must tell Mr Mubarak to calm down , and the best way to calm things down is for him to clear off , to get out .
Then there will be calm in Cairo .
Did you see that the people who came with knives were Mr Mubarak 's policemen ?
It was poor people , brought by bus this morning from the depths of Egypt , who caused the trouble .
This must be said , Baroness Ashton , and we must not turn a blind eye .
There is something that amazes me about you : today you understand everything about what happened , about what was going on in Tunisia three weeks ago .
However , when , three weeks ago , we in the European Parliament took the step of calling on you to halt the negotiations on the upgrading of Tunisia because of the dictatorship , you told us that that was not possible .
Now , today , it is possible .
You are a last-minute resistance fighter .
That makes everything clear .
I therefore ask one thing of you , Baroness Ashton : tell us where , in the case of Tunisia , Europe has invested its money .
Tell us which firms have received European money ; tell us which of Mr Ben Ali and his wife 's companies were supported by European money .
You can tell us .
This Parliament has the right to know .
Secondly , Baroness Ashton , since you say that you are now going to support the people of Tunisia , I would ask you to ensure one thing : that there is equality of opportunity in the democratic process during the transition .
If there are new elections - as you know , the Tunisian Constitutional Democratic Rally ( RCD ) has money but the opposition parties , which have been prohibited for years , do not - the European Union must play its part in supporting democratic fairness and equality .
In the case of Egypt , Baroness Ashton , one thing is clear today : if we do not manage to support the Egyptians in the liberation process , the peoples of the Middle East , the Arab peoples will once again turn their backs on us , at a time when we have an extraordinary situation on our hands , a situation that you also failed to mention , Mr Verhofstadt : in Gaza , a demonstration has been held to support the Egyptians , and Hamas has prohibited that demonstration .
That is proof that the wind of freedom is now blowing against the theocracies in the Middle East and in the Arab countries , too , and that it is our job to help them .
We have spent years whining , when the only choice was between dictatorships and theocracies .
Well , Inshallah !
There is a third possibility , which is freedom and the fight for freedom against dictatorships and theocracies , and it is our role as Europeans to support those leading this fight .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question ( Rule 149 ( 8 ) )


Mr President , with all due respect to Mr Verhofstadt and Mr Cohn-Bendit , I should like to say to the High Representative that I have very strong objections to what has been said by the two gentlemen .
This whole situation reminds me of Iran .
Please tread carefully in handling North Africa .
This part of the world is not Europe .
The question is : can you not recall what happened in Iran ?
Do you not see any similarities ?
Do you not agree that we have to secure an orderly transition here ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mrs Tzavela , I would not dare to give you a history lesson , but I would like nonetheless to point out that , in Iran , it was the West , the United States , which supported the Shah of Iran and that , until the very last moment , even under the Bakhtiar Government , we were on the wrong side , and we gave all the arms to help the Iranian theocracy win .
That is exactly the point I wished to make to you : if we fail to support those who are fighting for freedom , then they will end up in an impasse and the other side will win .
That is precisely the lesson we learnt from Iran , Mrs Tzavela .
The lesson we learnt from Iran was summed up by Mr Gorbachev : ' History will punish those who arrive too late . '
I am asking that , for once , Europe does not arrive in this region too late .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , France , of course , nurtured the Ayatollah Khomeini and flew him back to Tehran .
But , on another issue , Egypt has been a republic since 1956 but Mubarak is only the country 's third President .
In Tunisia , Ben Ali was only the second leader since independence 53 years ago .
When the political landscape offers such little hope of change , inevitably frustrations boil over - as we now see with the hurricane of change blowing across the region .
My group , the ECR Group , calls for a genuinely democratic and peaceful transition in Egypt .
Today we see a worrying trend towards violence .
It is hard to see how Mubarak can credibly play a role in that transition other than by stepping down .
Tunisia also remains in ferment , and the longer that lasts the greater the danger that Islamists will seize the political initiative .
Tunisia may have been authoritarian and corrupt , but it was profoundly secular and pro-Western ; we must remember that .
Indeed this is also a danger in Egypt , where the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood is seeking to fill the political vacuum as we speak .
The radicalisation of Egyptian politics would be a disaster for that country and for neighbouring Israel .
But it could also have grave implications for the operation of the Suez Canal .
The EU 's diplomatic efforts in Tunisia and Egypt must be focused entirely on ensuring stability and order , and resisting those who would wish to spread violence and fear as we see today .
To build a liberal democracy in these countries with no such traditions , the EU , the USA and our political think-tanks in Europe must now place significant resources behind moderate democratic politicians and new parties who must be committed to democratic pluralism and free and fair elections and , unlike the Muslim Brotherhood , be prepared to relinquish power if defeated at the ballot box .
This is a huge challenge and of course we may now be witnessing an historic ' fall of the Berlin Wall moment ' in the Muslim world .
There are already good democratic role models in Muslim-majority countries , such as Indonesia , Turkey and Bangladesh , for Egypt and Tunisia to emulate .
Hopefully , in future the choice in the Muslim world will not be between secular tyranny and Islamist theocracies but instead enduring democracy .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( FR ) Mr President , I would simply like to address Mr Tannock in order to denounce his attitude towards those who are demonstrating today , and also expand on what Mr Verhofstadt and Mr Cohn-Bendit have said .


This is a popular revolt because the people are subjected to abject poverty .
Hence the leaders that we have supported , albeit for the sake of ensuring a certain amount of stability and averting the danger of Islamism , exercise a reign of terror and keep the people in poverty .
I should therefore like to ask you if you agree that the people have the right to revolt when they are being kept in poverty .
( Applause )
Mr President , I think I made it very clear in my speech that I do not want a secular tyrant or an Islamist theocrat running any of the countries in our neighbourhood .
I would , of course , like a liberal democrat prepared to stand for free and fair elections .
I think that the economic situation and high levels of unemployment in Tunisia and Egypt are a serious problem and we must do all we can to address that .
But that is not the issue here .
The issue basically now is to see an orderly and peaceful transition in these countries and not a breakdown in law and order .
We want to see stability , peace and , of course , democracy in our neighbourhood .
Let me just note , Mr Tannock , that your favourable reference to liberal democrats created a lot of happiness in the middle of the room .
You may have some explaining to do later on .
( Laughter )
Mr President , I did not particularly wish to revisit the past , but I am hearing some surprising speeches .
I think that in recent times , for months now , we were practically the only ones , along with a few MEPs from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , to call for a debate on the situation in Tunisia .
As Mr Cohn-Bendit rightly said , there are indeed many last-minute resistance fighters .
We could say a lot about the past , but we said it in our resolution and we think that we should focus first and foremost on the future .
First of all , we must avoid interfering in any way in the internal affairs of these countries .
It is not up to us , as Europeans , to say what the composition of these countries ' governments should be .
The Tunisian people acted alone to free itself from a dictatorial regime .
We must allow it to express itself and support it on the road to democracy .
Anyone following the situation in Tunisia knows that the past is not yet dead and buried and that there are people pulling strings and plotting behind the scenes .
Today , the violence happening in Egypt also shows that things are difficult .
So , yes , do strongly condemn all the violence , and do not just call for it to be scaled down , as you did in the case of Tunisia .
Police violence is always unacceptable : it is as unacceptable today as it was in the past ; it is as unacceptable in Tunisia and Egypt as it is elsewhere .
Let us ask the Tunisian authorities and the Tunisian people what they expect without imposing anything on them .
You reviewed your discussions with the Minister of Foreign Affairs , but you added , without seemingly having been asked , that you wanted to increase market access in Tunisia .
That is rather inappropriate , in my view , as there has been no shortage of help from the European Union in that area .
Everybody appears to be waking up today to the corruption of Mr Ben Ali 's regime .
Yes , economic liberalisation in Tunisia has benefited the Ben Ali and Trabelsi families thanks to the European Union 's help .
Yes , the European Union must be firm with regard to all human rights violations .
The European Union has lost a great deal of credibility in these countries .
Yes , finally , we must support the democrats and condemn all dictatorships .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the old order is changing in the Maghreb and this crisis raises a multitude of problems that will not be easy to solve .
There are risks as well as hopes .
It is possible that secular authoritarian regimes could be replaced by aggressive , destabilising Islamic fundamentalist theocracies .
We should remember what happened in Iran : it is hard for democratic development to go hand-in-hand with revolution .
There are certainly lessons to be learnt from Iran .
Another danger is that the economic crisis in the area is likely to worsen , resulting in even greater youth unemployment and large influxes of migrants that Europe can no longer cope with .
These events are a sign that our Euro-Mediterranean policy is inadequate and show that the cooperation policy implemented so far is not up to the task of creating the conditions for development and democracy .
What has happened is not due solely to the economic crisis , even though it has been severe , but to the lack of social stability , in other words the lack of vehicles to represent the people 's interests , such as trade unions , a free press , political pluralism , a voluntary sector , the rule of law and equal opportunities for everyone .
Supporting the countries of this region in their journey should be at the heart of Europe 's policy , alongside economic and trade assistance .
This is the way to create true stability : not the stability provided by authoritarian regimes , but stability founded on social consensus , participation and democratic institutions .
Mr President , foremost in my mind at the moment , as I prepare for the ad hoc delegation to Tunisia tomorrow - which I am delighted to be part of - is the well-being of the Tunisian people and the need for all of us to remember how important it is and why we respect their cultural values and their identity , as we help them build a new future based on the rule of law and democratic ideals .
People expect change and they expect aid without strings .
I am so glad that Mr Cohn-Bendit has followed up the point I made in the delegation committee this morning about exactly what has happened to the EU money over all these years .
The EAS representative there said that it was spent on reforms .
What reforms ?
If there were adequate reforms , the people would not have revolted in the way they did .
Can we have some truthful answers ?
We need to push the provisional government to investigate where that money went and make sure that any EU money in the future is rightfully spent .
Mr President , the Arab world is our partner in the Union for the Mediterranean .
In all our involvement with them we have always advanced the principles of pluralistic democracy , freedom of the media , of expression and of assembly , respect for human rights , an independent judiciary , and good governance .
But we have always maintained that these principles should be realised from within , not imposed from outside .
The people of Tunisia succeeded , from within , in defying repression , a police state and torture , and in winning freedom and democracy .
The Tunisian authorities must respect the will of the people and proceed without delay to a process of democratisation , with accountability in cases of corruption or repression by the cronies of Ben Ali .
For similar reasons the people of Egypt have defied killings , arrests , tear gas and bullets and have demanded bread and freedom , dignity and emancipation .
Beware : democracy does not mean elections .
It means much , much more than this .
We unequivocally support the people of Egypt and call on their current leaders to listen to the wisdom of their people and not to become an obstacle in responding to their aspirations .
To our European officials , the Council and the Vice-President / High Representative , I say this : it is disappointing to listen to President Obama , or Hillary Clinton , speaking boldly and on time , with you , as always , playing second fiddle and barely audible .
( FR ) Mr President , there are indeed times when one has to know which side to choose .
I have been told this many times within the European Union .
Today , the side to choose is quite clear : as my colleagues have said , it is the side of freedom , it is the voice of the people .
Here as I speak , the museum in Cairo is in flames , fighting is breaking out in the streets , and I believe that , in the case of Egypt at least , we have not been clear enough .
President Mubarak has to leave , that has to be made clear .
President Mubarak , as he is today - and I respect his long struggle - is incapable of leading the political transition ; it is madness to ask that of him and to let the Mubarak clan square up to the ElBaradei clan today on the streets of Cairo .
We must shoulder our responsibilities in this matter .
I should also like to say to you that , over the last few days and nights , I have not stopped thinking about the mistake we made .
We made a spectacular mistake : we supported corrupt regimes in the name of stability , with no thought for social justice or the peoples ' aspirations for freedom .
( Applause )
This is a mistake that we must rectify , and now is the time to do so .
The second mistake , I am afraid to say , ladies and gentlemen , is that we have failed to understand political Islam .
I did not say ' we have failed to accept political Islam ' !
There is a difference between terrorists , fundamentalists , and some Muslim brothers .
It is up to us to see the difference , to enter into dialogue , to set aside those who we do not want , but today we have paved the way for these fundamentalists .
We have paved the way for certain terrorists !
It is time to review these positions and , lastly , we must hold on to the past achievements of these countries , of Tunisia , Egypt and so on .
I am talking here about the countries ' secular structures and about women 's rights , of which there were many in these countries , in secular structures and constitutions unrelated to Sharia law .
Democracies can be built with extremely diverse parties .
Let us not throw the baby out with the bath water .
Let us hold on to this idea of a secular state and of respect for different religions and beliefs and for political diversity .
( Applause )
Mr President , I think the issue of great urgency today is the state of play in Egypt .
In 2005 I was the chairman of a small observer mission for the elections there .
We were asked to go for the first round and then for the second round , but the first round was so chaotic and impossibly badly run , so corrupt , that we decided not to return for the second round .
Egypt is a country where for 30 or so years a dictator , in the person of Mubarak , has assumed absolute power in a particularly brutal , tyrannous and arbitrary rule and , while we all recognise the extraordinary evolution on the streets of Egypt , we also recognise in Mubarak 's reaction somebody who feels he has got support , not only in Egypt but elsewhere .
Now , we recognise too that the European Union does not have the Sixth Fleet .
We are only capable of projecting moral power , so when Baroness Ashton spoke , very softly , at the beginning of this debate , she unfortunately did not carry a big stick as well .
So we have to speak softly , yes , but also with one voice and I think the problem for Europe at the moment is that it is not speaking with one voice at the level of Cathy Ashton and other leaders .
This has been referred to earlier - the prime ministers of Britain , France and Germany issuing separate statements .
Let us speak together .
Let us get it absolutely straight where we stand - in support of democracy and human rights , not only in Europe but around the world , and especially at this time in the Mediterranean .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I would like to repeat the call for you to provide us with the list of recipients of EU money in these countries .
There are well-founded fears that the Ben Ali clan and his enterprises are also profiting from EU money .
I believe that we need to review our own work in this region .
We need clarification of how our money is being used and a clear change of course .
For this clear change of course , what is needed first of all in Tunisia is a new Head of Delegation .
I would like to read you what he wrote to us today in an e-mail :
( FR ) Europe 's strategy in Tunisia does not need to be reviewed .
We will have greater freedom in our choice of interlocutors and partners , but the sectors for intervention and our agreements with the country are proving to be even more relevant today .
I think it is incredible that the Head of Delegation writes that we do not have to review our policies vis-à-vis Tunisia .
I call on you to take the responsibility to change the Head of the Delegation .
If I may add one point concerning what was mentioned by Ms De Keyser ; I think it is also time for you to support women in transition .
For example , why not hold a big conference with your support where you go and support women for transition , highlighting their role and supporting them in order to strengthen and underline the laic and secular process in these countries .
That could be a feminist agenda for you .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , political powers throughout the world are gripped by the mass protests in Tunisia and , in particular , in the strategically important Egypt .
Various scenarios are possible , ranging from a peaceful takeover of power by the pro-democratic forces to economic chaos and the outbreak of armed conflict , and even the use of nuclear weapons cannot be ruled out .
The situation is in constant flux and is hard to predict .
The Arab societies , which for years have been deprived of fundamental rights such as freedom of speech or the right to take part in free elections , are determined to bring about a change of power at all costs .
The European Parliament should reach a common position and take steps to ensure that the entire region is not destabilised .
We must not forget the resolution adopted recently by our House on the persecution of Christians , in which Egypt was also mentioned .
We should consider taking more tangible measures , and send an observation mission to Egypt .
( ES ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the European Union needs to revise its neighbourhood policy , as it is clear that we have given the impression of being more concerned with reaching free trade agreements than with the development of peoples and their human rights .
The problem , Baroness Ashton , is not the European Union 's position today on the Ben Ali or Mubarak regimes , but the position that the European Union took the day before yesterday , which did not show the slightest support for the changes that the people have demanded on the streets .
This is the problem that the European Union has to resolve : that we are not showing any support for the changes that the people are demanding , not only in Tunisia , but in Morocco , Egypt , Jordan and Yemen ; a huge number of people that can no longer take autocracy or a crisis that affects the weakest .
This is the revision that the European Union has to make ; it has to be at the forefront of the circumstances through changing the direction of its neighbourhood policy .
( NL ) Mr President , it is not surprising that the exciting political developments in Tunisia and Egypt are being closely watched in the Islamic Republic of Iran .
Both the Iranian Government and the opposition are supporting the voices on the streets .
Interestingly enough , both are claiming the credit for this Arab popular uprising .
The Iranian regime is hailing the arrival of the revolutionary wave which originated in its own country in 1979 and which they believe is now spreading across the Arab world , while the Iranian opposition considers itself the instigator of the mass popular protests in Tunis and Cairo .
Whilst the pragmatic Arab camp in the Middle East is nearing imminent collapse , the Iranian leadership has more cause for optimism than the opposition .
The European Union should not turn a blind eye to this threat .
A radicalisation of the Arab world is definitely incompatible with a dignified life , which is what the Tunisian and Egyptian protesters justifiably say that they long for .
The Islamic Republic of Iran should by no means be seen as a model , but as a cautionary tale .
( NL ) Mr President , what is happening now in countries like Tunisia and Egypt is an immensely important development .
People are rising up against dictatorial despots and that is a good thing .
The big question , of course , is what is going to follow in the wake of these events .
There is something of a paradox when it comes to democratisation in the Islamic world , where more democracy often leads to more Islamism , which in turn leads to less democracy .
Obviously , we from Europe should support the democratic process .
However , that support should be given to genuine democratic forces and we should never intentionally assist an organisation such as the Muslim Brotherhood in establishing a theocratic dictatorship in Egypt by giving it the EU 's support .
Otherwise , we will end up with situations such as that which we are now witnessing in Iran playing out across the whole region .
Let us therefore be prudent in our choice of partners .
After all , Ben Ali and his party were still members of the Socialist Internationale until a few weeks ago .
Now that the wind has turned , though , he has been expelled from it overnight .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , be prudent in the future , be careful in your choice of partners and do not make things easy for the Islamists .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , our response to the events in the Arab world must be based on our concept of humanity .
Every human being , whether Muslim , Jew , Christian or of no particular faith , has the same value and the same right to live in dignity .
If this is the case , then it also means that the people in the Arab countries have the right to live in freedom , in a democracy and with a way of life that respects human dignity .
Today , therefore , it is our duty , our responsibility and an important task for the future for us to say to the people of the Arab world , who are peacefully standing up for freedom and democracy , that we are standing in solidarity at their side .
We express our solidarity with the peaceful Muslims in the Arab world .
( Applause )
We made the mistake once before of closing our eyes in relation to totalitarian Communism because we said that we need stability .
We must not make this mistake again today , because stability also involves freedom and democracy , and that is something we should support .
If what we are hearing at this time is true - I did not previously know that shots were being fired in Cairo , and previously the army was also being restrained in both Tunisia and Egypt - that the army is moving in with violence , then this can only last for a short time .
In Europe , we had the uprisings in East Germany in 1953 , in Hungary in 1956 , in Czechoslovakia in 1968 , and then came Solidarność .
Freedom will prevail in the end , and therefore to all those who are using violence today we must say : stop shooting and give the people freedom by means of free elections .
We ought to put all our efforts into supporting this in word and deed , including in this House .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , some people say that you cannot learn from history .
However , we should nevertheless try to do so .
With regard to the heckling concerning Iran - and Mr Cohn-Bendit has already responded to that - I would like to mention once again what happened in Iran at that time .
We supported a dirty regime .
We more or less tolerated the secret police , who at that time were working against people and torturing people .
The United States , together with the United Kingdom , overthrew Mohammad Mossadegh , who wanted a peaceful revolution .
We have made some progress in this regard now , but we have still not come far enough .
I believe that we need to say very clearly - and in this regard I agree with my fellow Member who has already mentioned this - that we need to be on the side of the people who started and stepped up this revolution - and this was not the Islamists .
Let us be pleased about the great opportunity presented by the fact that the revolution was not started by the Islamists but by the people on the street , by ordinary citizens , who were dissatisfied with social injustice , the economic situation and the lack of democracy .
That is what happened here .
Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , let us look at ourselves with a self-critical eye because part of our neighbourhood strategy has collapsed as a result of this .
Furthermore , part of our neighbourhood strategy was based on there being stability .
We need peace in the Middle East .
We expected peace in the Middle East to rest with the dictatorships and the dictators and that is not possible , nor is it acceptable .
We therefore need to speak and express our opinion clearly .
Peace in the Middle East will be lasting only if it is based on democracy and not on dictatorships .
Therefore , Baroness Ashton , we must express our opinion loud and clear .
I know that you are known for your gentle approach , but in this regard I agree with my fellow Members that we need to be loud and clear .
You need to speak so loudly that you drown out many of the voices of our foreign ministers , sometimes perhaps even so loud that we do not hear the voice of Hillary Clinton , but the voice of Catherine Ashton .
That is what this Parliament expects .
Take this also as proof of our confidence in you that we expect you to be very clear in what you say .
( BG ) Mr President , the protests in Tunisia and Egypt triggered by anger at and intolerance of rising youth unemployment , brutal police methods , corruption and authoritarianism , as well as contempt for human rights , the freedom of speech and democratic principles , are challenges also facing the other Arab countries which are already wanting change .
The events in Tunisia , which was regarded as a haven of stability and economic security , are strikingly similar to those which initiated the downfall of the Soviet bloc in Eastern Europe .
They are providing the spark which heralds the collapse of the Arab pseudo model of stability and will trigger democratic changes in the region .
The demands are clear and the Tunisian and Egyptian peoples would not agree to any half measures .
Many of the prerequisites for the transition to democracy are already gaining ground , such as an active , well-organised civil society , a free press , respected opposition figures and existing political parties .
However , we need to revise completely our current foreign policy , Baroness Ashton .
The European Union should make a strategic choice , striking a balance between its political and economic interests and the democratic values which unite us .
Europe must demonstrate that it stands squarely behind democracy and not merely supports stability in the region .
The reason for this is that when change comes , people will remember who was on their side and who upheld the already impossible status quo .
Mr President , 60 years ago revolution in the Arab world meant the end of European colonial rule .
The second revolution in the Arab world is happening now in front of our eyes .
This is the moment when the European Union has to choose whether it stands on the right side or on the wrong side of history .
The task is to help foster an independent civil society in the Arab world .
Our budget in the EU must be reviewed to address the urgent needs of Tunisia , which has suffered from a 23-year-long autocracy .
The majority of the Tunisian people have no trust in this temporary , unelected government .
A truth process in Tunisia is already beginning , but the European Union needs a truth process itself , so great has its negligence of human rights and democratic values been in the Arab world over the years .
This is truly the time for human rights .
Mr President , I do not share the opinion that an ongoing uprising in Egypt is dominantly driven by forces longing for democracy of a European style .
I see the current riots and chaos as a revolution for change that is motivated by striving for a better life .
But the crucial question for us Europeans is the threat that the dramatic situation could be abused by radical Islamists .
If there were such a dramatic political change , Europe , as well as America , would lose a moderate Arabic ally and the Egypt peace treaty would be endangered .
Egypt can quickly and easily turn into a regime that is hostile to Europe , Israel and America and become close to Hamas .
The position of the EU should stay firmly on the side of those who are striving for freedom and who relentlessly support free elections .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , obviously the overwhelming majority in Parliament supports the uprising in Egypt and that is , of course , quite right , although there are a few exceptions , as we heard just now .
However , I think , and you should agree with me , that politics means being prompt and timely and I believe that all of us here must accept that we did not see what was happening in Egypt over recent decades .
Where were we all , when billions of dollars from the United States were being channelled into Egypt to support this regime ?
We are with the people of Egypt protesting for their rights to prosperity , health and education .
That is why Parliament should continue to provide its unanimous support .
I should mention that we must keep the Palestinians in mind during this process , so that the Palestinian people do not become the victims .
Those of us here who represent Cyprus , one of Egypt 's neighbours , are monitoring events extremely closely and , I repeat , we support the rights of the Egyptian people in this uprising .
( IT ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , as many have said , it is certainly desirable for democracy to be established in North Africa , just as we have democracy here in Europe .
However , there are also risks that we must face up to .
We all remember the attack against Coptic Christians that took place over Christmas , right there in Egypt .
Our fear , Baroness Ashton , is that we might one day end up with an Islamic dictatorship in North Africa .
From this point of view , it is vital for Europe to be on guard so that we do not get into a situation where there are hostile countries in North Africa which , we must remember , has many trade links with Europe .
There is no doubt that in the current economic crisis our economies will not react well to this destabilisation .
We should also bear in mind that this destabilisation is certain to have repercussions on immigration , especially into southern European countries .
I therefore call upon the Commission and the High Representative to be vigilant over these matters .
( NL ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , stop being so naïve .
Mr Guy Verhofstadt , stop being naïve , as well .
After all , what the Muslim Brotherhood wants is sharia and sharia is not democracy .
The most important opposition party , the Muslim Brotherhood , wants war with Israel .
Baroness Ashton , you have not said a single word about that .
You are pretending to be naïve here , when you call for a better future for Egypt , but at the same time refuse to acknowledge the dangers which Islam represents . Because Islam and democracy cannot coexist .
I would like you to communicate that loud and clear , because I do not want to see a naïve Madam Ashton going to Egypt with the wrong message .
Madam Ashton , be alert to the dangers which await Egypt and us and communicate them .
Warn the Egyptian people that sharia means disaster , a disaster for all of us .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) . )
Mr President , the question I wanted to ask the honourable Member was : how can democracy flourish in societies where there are no institutions and histories of democratic tradition ?
Democracy does not just pop up in an unfertile field .
We keep talking about creating democratic states without having worked on creating the democratic institutions upon which democracy flowers .
( NL ) Mr President , I can only agree with Mr Deva .
Of course , democracy is not going to pop up just like that , but I do not see any other alternative for Egypt .
Indeed , I am unable to single out anyone in Egypt who could take over the leadership .
It is , after all , up to Egyptians to choose their own leaders .
What we can do is call on the Egyptians to elect , not the Muslim Brotherhood , but secular leaders .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Baroness Ashton , I may have been hard on you in the past , but I have to admit that this business must be making your life very complicated , so I hope that what I have to say may be able to help .
The first thing I want to state very clearly is that the role of States is to protect their citizens , not to run their lives .
When a government run people 's lives instead of protecting them , it stops being a government and becomes a regime .
This is what happened in Tunisia and in Egypt , because political situations that began with the profound idealism of winning independence had been regimes for many years .
Our task is to defend the liberty and democracy in the hearts of those who are today defending it in the streets .
The second subject I want to mention concerns us , the European Union .
We need to admit that we do not have a political strategy for the Euro-Mediterranean region , which means admitting that the Barcelona Process and the Union for the Mediterranean have failed .
It is a pretence : these are just political games that serve no purpose and have achieved nothing .
We need to act decisively on this .
We need to begin to develop this strategy : we need to plan it and we need to carry it through , as we did for Eastern Europe and as we did for the Balkans , although they had to be forced into it .
If we do not have this strategy , it will make no difference whether or not we speak with one voice , because our words will be meaningless .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Baroness Ashton , I get the impression that you are not yet sufficiently aware of what is going on in the Mediterranean region .
I have to say that the slowness of the EU institutions in addressing the Mediterranean question can only be explained by a lack of awareness of the situation and an inability to sense the changes that are afoot .
We are coming to the end of a political and historical era in which Europe 's policy towards the South has been muddled and counterproductive .
The economic crisis , difficulties faced in migrating and the lack of changeover among the ruling classes have created an explosive combination that is affecting Tunisia and Egypt now , but is likely to spread to other countries .
To address some of my fellow Members also , I would say that we will not get away with thinking that all we need to do is to simply give our support to the demonstrations that are currently taking place .
Europe needs to show greater political maturity .
To do this , we need to retune Europe 's political antennae .
Europe 's foreign policy needs to come out of its semi-secretive mode and take a leading role on the international stage in supporting the democratic transition processes currently underway .
In particular , we need clear policies in a number of areas : a new partnership and neighbourhood policy , and a new security policy for the Mediterranean region ; greater willingness from the whole of Europe to address the Mediterranean issue ; and a policy of joint action so that Europe will be acting in the region alongside other players , such as the United States and Turkey .
We need a major change of course and this calls for an act of considerable humility on the Commission 's part in reopening the debate on foreign policy towards the Mediterranean and taking a fresh look at the Union for the Mediterranean , whilst at the same time ensuring that Europe has a role within it .
This is crucial for Europe , and we need to be fully aware of this .
( FR ) Madam President , the world is shifting and changing , and nowhere is this more true than in the Arab world , where , may I remind you , 40 % of the population live below the poverty line and young people have the highest rate of unemployment in the world .
The Arab peoples aspire to development and democracy , and as the two go hand in hand , in Tunisia as in Egypt , these peoples have taken their destiny into their own hands in order to impose the change to which they are entitled .
Moreover , in spite of all the acts of provocation - as we have witnessed again today in Cairo - and all the difficulties , nothing and no one is going to stop this movement .
In the case of Tunisia yesterday and Egypt today , we have heard one voice , that of the United States , which has resolutely sided with the democrats .
I believe in Europe , but I also believe that it is meaningless unless it too resolutely sides with the democrats at every turn .
It would have been my dream for Europe to have seized this opportunity ; I would have loved it .
It did not do so .
This is not only on account of the role you played ; it is also because of the overcautiousness of its leaders , who too often prefer to stand still rather than to act .
More than 20 years after the fall of the Wall , we are witnessing a historic change .
I urge you to get to grips with it so as not to miss this opportunity to make world history .
Madam President , everything I wanted to say has in fact already been said , so I will limit myself to one question to the High Representative .
Today Mr Blair , the former British Prime Minister , whom you probably know , had a lot of praise for the Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak .
Today on CNN he said , ' Mubarak is immensely courageous and a force for good ' .
Mr Blair also warns against a rush to elections in Egypt .
Now Mr Blair is currently envoy in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process , which is supported by the European Union .
What do you think about the statements of Tony Blair ?
Madam President , the great danger for Egypt and the other North African countries is , of course , that the overthrow of their governments will not usher in Western-style liberal democracy but rather Islamic fundamentalist rule and a new dark age , such as we saw in Iran .
Nevertheless , there is a certain satisfaction to be derived from the prospect of oppressed peoples overthrowing their undemocratic and unrepresentative governments .
All governments , even tyrannies , ultimately derive their power from the consent of the people that they govern .
And you can repress people for so long and so much , but there is always the possibility that they will rebel .
Now there is a parallel here with Britain , where successive governments of all political colours have consistently betrayed our country and surrendered our rights of democratic self-determination to the European Union .
Under Magna Carta , the English have the right of lawful rebellion .
I wonder just how far they will have to be pushed before they are driven out on the streets like the Egyptians .
Madam President , we should all applaud the fall or impending fall of repressive regimes , but perhaps only when we know - or are pretty certain about - who or what is likely to replace them .
Tunisia , like Iraq and Egypt , was a politically repressive regime even by Middle Eastern standards , but it was also , by Middle Eastern standards , a secular , even socially liberal , one .
There is a danger that a socially liberal autocracy might be replaced by a socially repressive autocracy or even a socially repressive democracy .
Those who expect a cosy and civilised transfer of power in all or any of these countries might think again .
If we should see civil wars , atrocities and the destruction of the economies of these countries , we might give good advice and our populations might send aid , but I hope that we do not regard it as our job to send our troops there to be killed .
It is certainly not our job to rescue the populations of these countries and bring them into Europe .
( PT ) Madam President , the world , and Europe in particular , cannot remain indifferent to the strength of an intense movement of popular opposition taking place in several countries of North Africa and the Middle East , or fail to acknowledge the importance and legitimacy of these demonstrations .
We must give any people aspiring to democracy and freedom nothing short of our total solidarity , as , in fact , we did for our friends in Eastern Europe in the recent past .
We are currently experiencing a rare moment in history : one of those that change its course and construct new realities .
Objectively , it must be pointed out that Islamic extremism has been emerging as a political - and not religious - response to some of these problems , fed by and as a response to social exclusion .
The future of this region needs solid , tolerant democracies that respect minorities and in which the state is promised to all and not abused by the few .
Next to us here is a part of the world that must take advantage of this moment of rebirth to go further down the path towards peace and social progress .
It must prove that in this neighbouring region everyone can live together in peace and mutual respect , irrespective of religious faith , political choice or ethnicity .
Madam President , I am concluding . Baroness Ashton , instead of just a few leaders acting together or in isolation - in Portuguese we say ' it is hard to be the priest in one 's own parish ' - what is needed is for Europe as a whole to take a leading role in aiding these reforms and to find a new paradigm for the Middle East that avoids radicalism and respects human rights , and women 's rights in particular .
( NL ) Madam President , at this very moment , violent confrontations are under way between pro- and anti-Mubarak protesters .
We have to send out a clear signal to Mr Mubarak and call on his supporters to withdraw immediately and prevent unnecessary bloodshed .
What is happening in Egypt has come as a surprise to us all .
We should approach this as an incredible opportunity and an opportunity to help this region evolve , after years of political and economic stagnation , into a true democracy , with opportunities for all .
Here , I am thinking , above all , of the millions of young people who are hungry for more freedom and the opportunity to develop .
The impact of this cannot be underestimated .
Some are speaking of a 1989 moment for the Arab world , but whether or not that is the case remains to be seen .
The European Union could show a little more willingness to give a significant boost to the transition process and , of course , I would have liked - as other members have already said - to have heard you speak on the matter .
We should very soon make it clear that this transition process must begin immediately and that , Mr Mubarak , clearly , no longer has any legitimacy to lead or govern the process .
We must therefore , as soon as possible , set a timetable , a clear agenda , of the measures and reforms that should lead to the first free and transparent elections in September of this year .
That , for example , means making amendments to the constitution , to the electoral laws and to how the media report political issues , so that all candidates are able to present their campaigns to the people .
All democratic forces should be brought to the table , as soon as possible , to steer this in the right direction and Europe should play a positive and constructive role in this .
At the same time , we must be aware of the complexity of the situation .
The army , for example , is being applauded for its moderating and decisive role .
It has received a lot of praise for that , but it is also a very important player economically .
If we want to implement genuine democratic reforms , then economic reforms will also be necessary , and that is not going to be easy .
( NL ) Madam President , I have listened with great interest to what Madam High Representative and my fellow members have had to say .
Many of you have said that you are totally surprised by what is happening in Tunisia and Egypt .
I shall take the liberty of saying that I am amazed by such statements , because we have actually known for a long time that these were not exactly democratic regimes and that , instead , they were authoritarian or very authoritarian regimes which kept their peoples under their thumb .
We chose not to tackle this situation head-on , because we thought that this would be the best way to guarantee stability in the region and across the Mediterranean .
Yet , we have proof , once again , that supporting authoritarian and corrupt regimes for the sake of stability and preventing chaos usually ends in instability , chaos and the loss of great opportunities for the future .
I hope that we will be sensible and that we will support the democratic process in a sensible way .
In connection with that , I would ask that you pay special attention to supporting a range of political parties , both in Tunisia and in Egypt .
These are weak parties .
In recent years , they have hardly had any opportunity to structure themselves .
They will , therefore , need every help to play their role in what will hopefully be fair and rapidly forthcoming elections .
Madam President , the particular point I want to make is that on too many occasions we have seen the sanctuary of our free societies in the West abused by extremists who eventually return to their home countries , hostile to our values and bearing revolution .
Yesterday was the 32nd anniversary of the return to Iran from Paris of Ayatollah Khomeini .
We know where that has led .
Rachid Ghannouchi , who has advocated the annihilation of the state of Israel , has just returned to Tunisia after two decades in London .
He regards the leadership of the Palestinian Authority as illegitimate ; he supports Hamas .
Hamas , of course , is an offshoot of the Muslim Brotherhood , the one well organised political group in Egypt .
Such organisations build their power base by responding to the everyday needs of the people and they then consolidate their power through terror .
We must take stronger measures to prevent the incubation of extremism in our own capitals and do more to reach out to legitimate civil society in places like Egypt and Tunisia with well focused assistance , including well controlled financial assistance .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with what has already been said by my colleagues from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
However , I would like to stress the fact that the recent events in the Mediterranean have astounded us all , because until a few weeks ago they were completely unforeseen .
The External Action Service led by Baroness Ashton seems to have been caught by surprise and in my opinion is now demonstrating a poor response capacity .
Right now , I am wondering if it is worthwhile spending so much money on a service organised the way it is today .
Once again , we are seeing the total lack of a European presence on the Euro-Mediterranean scene .
We uphold the right of all peoples to decide on their own government and their own ruling class through free , democratic elections , not through actions imposed by brute force and extremism .
As has been said , it is time that stability and democracy went hand-in-hand .
Therefore , we are now using all legitimate means to strengthen democracy and political pluralism , with respect for the rule of law , human rights and citizens ' safety .
The whole world , and we Europeans most of all , need a Mediterranean that is at peace .
The European Union must change its own policy and strive without further delay to provide adequate aid and collaboration to help bring about the necessary socioeconomic development in all Mediterranean countries .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Tunisian democrats have given us an exemplary lesson in maturity in recent times .
Therefore , in these moments of tension that we are living and in light of the massacre that is occurring in Egypt , we would like a unified voice in the European Union so that we can truly put a stop to this massacre and so that these winds of freedom can truly bring about a profound change towards democracy in Egypt too .
In the case of Tunisia , however , we still have time .
Here in Parliament , tomorrow we vote on a resolution - there is going to be a delegation in the country - and our support , our democratic guarantee is also very important in these moments , particularly in Tunisia , then in Egypt and all those countries that are demanding more freedom .
There is still a great deal that we can do , as the costs of an economic collapse caused by a break-up and revolution of this nature must be kept to a minimum .
There are too many enemies that want to turn Tunisia into a model that is totally different from the one we want .
Tunisia has turned into a model and what we are seeing is , in reality , the end of a post-colonial era and the start of true independence .
Therefore , the economic situation of Tunisia is an opportunity - aside from the aid that Mrs Ashton has mentioned - for the Central European Bank to take a position so as not to miss an experience that could be vital for the future of the Mediterranean .
It is essential that this decision is taken with a degree of urgency .
Madam President , right now , as we stand here , citizens in Egypt are being trapped and attacked in Tahrir Square and the army and the police are reportedly attacking instead of protecting .
In their peaceful protests Egyptians of diverse backgrounds ask for respect for human rights and democracy , political reform and good governance , and socio-economic development .
Perhaps these demands sound familiar to you as they are precisely the goals of EU programmes in the Middle East , and in Egypt specifically .
The Commission alone has spent a total of almost EUR 3 billion on this in the past 15 years .
As the people 's demands are already in line with our policy objectives , why is it so difficult to make a strong EU statement quickly ?
The need for a strong , proactive Europe is more urgent than ever .
As the sun of freedom and democracy rises over the Middle East , clouds of division are hampering European unity and the ability to take responsibility .
I urge you to look at what is happening as we speak and to act in unequivocal support of the people .
Their rights and the EU 's credibility are tied .
Another phenomenon consistently present in the relations between people and dictatorships is communication and information technologies .
The Tunisian Government ranked among the most severe users of censorship , surveillance and filter technologies to repress citizens .
European companies , such as Vodafone and French Telecom , have had a strong presence in Egypt and in killing the connections by flipping the switch and shutting Egypt down .
I would like to see an inquiry into the role that European companies played in the violations of human rights by hampering free expression , a free press and access to information and creating an environment in which human rights violations could go undocumented .
( PL ) Madam President , Mrs Ashton , in my opinion the European Union made several mistakes in its past relations with Tunisia and Egypt .
We made a mistake as far as Tunisia is concerned when we failed to speak up after Ben Ali won the presidential elections in 2009 .
I should add , by way of a reminder , that he won 90 % of votes , but that the elections were neither free nor democratic .
The same was true when the Penal Code was amended in Tunisia , putting an end to the activities of non-governmental and human rights organisations .
We cannot afford such a policy of passivity and inactivity when it comes to the measures to be taken by Europe in the region of North Africa today .
It will be very hard to return stability to the region if we do not play an active role and demonstrate our determination to achieve this goal .
Governments which respect human rights , freedom of speech and the media will only return to power in North Africa if we take an active and determined approach to events in these countries .
Thank you very much .
( FR ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , a year ago we were debating in this House the European Union 's relations with Tunisia , and I said at the time that the social achievements of which the Tunisians were so proud should be accompanied by political progress .
Moreover , we have seen over recent weeks that there is political progress at least in the sense that the incipient revolt is the extremely clear and obvious expression of a desire for freedom .
The situation in Egypt is similar , even though things are moving fast .
We do not know what the outcome will be , and in the future there will undoubtedly be other places which will demonstrate this desire for freedom just as clearly .
At the same time , as we have seen tonight , some of us fear that this wind of change will not necessarily lead to secularism or to the continuation of a secular state , to moderation or to stability .
I believe that we must be aware of the fact that it is indeed possible that , in the coming weeks and years , this region will not experience political regimes that are both stable and inspired by freedom and moderation .
That is entirely possible , and I believe that we must be prepared for that eventuality too .
I would therefore encourage Baroness Ashton to perhaps steer the Union 's strategy back on the course plotted by the Commission in 2005 in its report for the Barcelona summit .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , until now I had suspected that peoples were always ahead of their political elites .
Today I am quite sure of this .
May I first of all pay tribute to the courage and determination of the Tunisian and Egyptian peoples .
They have reminded us that the values that we stand for in the world - human rights and democracy - are not values exclusive to the West , as some proclaim , but rather are universal values shared by all .
Europe , in my view , can no longer continue to make mistakes in this part of the world , shilly-shallying as it does from wrong analyses to misguided projects .
These peoples are expecting a response from us that is equal to their courage and aspirations .
They are not asking for charity but they are certainly asking for solidarity , and even more so for responsibility .
In these uncertain times , nobody wants chaos , but nobody should have to accept the status quo any longer , either .
We must support the hope created by the events in Tunisia and Egypt in order to help affirm and establish democracies that will benefit these countries and their populations , but which will also benefit us , and I believe that you have expressed this forcefully , Baroness Ashton .
I shall conclude by quoting what a poet once said : ' The world sleeps from a lack of imprudence . '
These peoples , quite rightly , have been imprudent in calling for their freedom , but I hope above all that they will have awakened our consciences .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , I would ask you to be more courageous .
Go to Cairo before the Council of Foreign Ministers .
Speak with the government representatives and with the opposition there .
Come back to Brussels and tell your colleagues what you have seen and heard .
Set the agenda and do not listen to 27 different opinions , with which it is then very difficult to actually do anything .
When Mr Mingarelli goes to Tunisia - something that I view very positively - inform us so that we are aware and so that the public is aware that Europe has a presence there .
I first found out that the American was there and only then did I hear that Mr Mingarelli was also there .
You are the foreign minister for Europe and I would earnestly advise you , on the one hand , to be our foreign minister . On the other hand , as foreign minister for Europe , you must not jump through every hoop that people put in front of you .
Comparisons have been made here today with 1989 , and I think that is right .
I believe that Tahrir Square in Cairo in 2011 is equivalent to Alexanderplatz in Berlin in 1989 .
A revolution is taking place there .
However , if we recall the revolution of 1989 for a moment we will remember that we had the same dilemma then .
We wanted freedom , stability and democracy , and we overlook the fact that this process , the transition from a stable dictatorship to a democracy , is rarely peaceful , orderly and stable .
From this point of view , diplomacy , organisation and caution also have their place .
That should not distract us from the fact that we are extremely pleased about this revolution .
It is a revolution against the dictatorship and for freedom .
I do believe that Europe can dictate the setup in these countries .
However , our joy needs to be apparent , but one thing is also clear , and that is that , even with limited influence , it will certainly not be possible to build a state with Mr Mubarek .
With the violence today in Tahrir Square , the last vestige of legitimacy for this ruler in Egypt has been lost .
Madam President , this moment has been a long time coming .
It is being led by both the old and by those who have known nothing other than Mubarak in Egypt .
Our response has been to say that Egypt should not be destabilised any further than it is ; that the people of Egypt be delivered a government of their choice through their free will .
Well , that is right , but it is not enough .
And then from the floor of the House today I hear warnings of an Islamic tsunami that is waiting to come and destroy us all .
All you do by putting forward those arguments , I am afraid , is argue for a totalitarian regime thinly disguised by a very thin layer of democracy , and you do not place any value on those people who have paid with blood and paid with their lives both in Tunisia and Egypt .
They paid with their lives fighting for the freedom of their countrymen and they will not value your freedom any less .
Those on the streets , despite being very large in number , are a vocal minority who actually represent an even larger silent majority .
High Representative , this is not a time for limp wrists .
Have strength in your stride , send a clear message : Mubarak must go now .
( MT ) Madam President , there is no doubt that Europe could have done considerably more to help the Arab world and its countries on their path towards democracy .
However , if there is to be one positive outcome of the dramatic events that we have witnessed , then it must certainly be that the Arabs have taken control of their own destiny in order to better their situation .
After all , history is replete with examples of interventions on the part of Western countries that did more harm than good .
We must , therefore , do away with the idea that we have to run to the rescue each time that things need fixing , and dictate and preach to others on how to manage their affairs .
Today we should ask ourselves what can be done from now onwards in light of the events that have taken place .
In my opinion , there are two things that need to be done .
First of all we must intervene with all the vigour we can muster , and with all the help that we can offer in order to improve the democratic environment in these countries , and to strengthen democratic institutions in particular .
This way they can flourish , and at the same time drive out new extremists and dictators .
Secondly , we must ask ourselves where we went wrong .
We have to ask whether our Euro-Mediterranean policy was all words and no action .
Where was the Mediterranean Union in all of this ?
Is Europe ever going to stop reacting and decide to take action instead ?
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is time that Europe made efforts to give the Tunisian people and their transitional government concrete support and to re-launch a Euro-Mediterranean dialogue that has been badly neglected in recent years .
The explosion of anger among the young people and the poor in the Maghreb and Egypt has been caused by the inequitable distribution of wealth and restrictions on people exercising their fundamental freedoms .
North Africa is fired up and is demanding more democracy , better economies , more participation and more employment , while looking in disbelief at the old continent of Europe , which is immobile and unable to grasp the social transformation that has taken place in the region or to develop genuine policies for progress and peace .
Europe needs to be pay closer attention to human rights and democracy and must promote more dialogue , more collaboration and more genuine economic assistance .
Europe must open its doors and its heart to North Africa , so that the Mediterranean can become a sea of peace .
There must be no more rejection of migrants through violent collaboration with countries like Libya .
What we need is more investment , more openness , more aid and more of a Euro-Mediterranean policy .
History demands it of us .
( PL ) Madam President , we cannot compare Tunisia 's domestic situation to that of Egypt .
The underlying cause of the mass protests was the same , but they have entirely different implications for the international situation .
The grass-roots changes in Tunisia , caused by public support for Ben Ali running out , may mean the chance of a better future for this country .
In contrast , a certain amount of caution must be employed when assessing the situation in Egypt .
In spite of his feudal rule , Hosni Mubarak acted as a guarantor of stability in Egypt .
If he is overthrown now , given that the lack of suitable conditions to date has meant that no democratic opposition has formed - and this is a point I would like to stress - it would appear that Egypt may be pushed into the arms of extreme political groups linked to the Muslim Brotherhood .
The international consequences of such a turn of events should be considered .
A possible alliance with Hamas , a hard-line policy towards Israel , intensified persecution of Christians and an exacerbation of the situation in the region - are these possibilities better than stability under Mubarak ?
While recognising his fundamental flaws , as well as the legitimacy of the protests against what has been happening under his regime , we should give thought as to what the optimum solution would be in this situation , and what approach should be taken by the European Union .
( ES ) Madam President , the events taking place in Tunisia and Egypt are very significant and it is possible that these processes of change will spread to other countries in the Mediterranean region , which is a region of the highest importance to the European Union .
These countries are right on our doorstep and we have numerous strong ties of friendship with them .
In the last decade , the European Union has been unable to persuade their authorities to undertake the necessary reforms .
In the last parliamentary term I myself stressed that stability could not continue to be used to justify a lack of change , but rather that these countries needed profound political , economic and social reforms .
Now change and reform are being demanded by the people on the streets .
Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the fact that the Council finally paid attention to these events on Monday and has taken a position .
I too have the impression that the transition process in Tunisia is headed in the right direction .
However , the wider perception is , unfortunately , that the European Union has been almost absent from these processes in recent weeks .
We have heard several speeches by President Obama , we have heard statements from Secretary of State Clinton , and we have even heard about contact between the Tunisian Army and representatives of the US Army ...
The Union 's visibility has been in no way comparable .
The Treaty of Lisbon 's new mechanisms should have been more active and visible , including the President of the European Council .
Baroness Ashton , I welcome your trip to Tunisia in two weeks ' time , but I also believe that we must improve our capacities for prediction and reaction .
Do we want to be a major global player ?
We need to start with being relevant at regional level , as a minimum .
( RO ) Madam President , the European Union is monitoring very closely the situation in Tunisia and is supporting the Tunisian people 's efforts aimed at a peaceful transition to democracy .
The initial measures taken by the transition government in Tunisia are heading in the right direction .
We call on the new authorities to implement fully the commitments made regarding governance , respect for the rule of law and basic freedoms , as well as economic and social reforms .
I think that all these reforms are one of the best ways of investing in Tunisia 's future and helping it establish a stable democracy .
Europe is seeking a stable partnership with Tunisia as part of EUROMED and must mobilise all the instruments it has to facilitate the transition process , create strong democratic institutions and encourage the emergence of an active civil society involved in implementing the reforms .
It is in our particular interest to have a stable , prosperous and democratic Tunisia with which we can develop beneficial mutual cooperation based on common interests and values .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , what needs to be done now has already been said many times - in this regard there is broad consensus .
Our resolution is clear with regard to Tunisia , but with regard to Egypt we will have to expand it as necessary by means of oral amendments .
I think there are grounds for self-criticism .
Our executives in Brussels and in the Member States held on to the status quo for too long .
If we had taken our own principles seriously in day-to-day politics in relation to the universal nature of human rights and democracy , we would have had to speak clearly to Tunisia and Egypt about their blatant shortcomings .
We knew that the action taken against Islamists and fundamentalists was not aimed solely at these groups , but also at any criticism of the relevant government policy .
It is still not too late .
The call for democracy and human rights is neither interference in internal affairs nor can it be denounced as something that has contributed to destabilising the situation .
No dictatorship , no authoritarian regime is stable in itself .
With our current policy we have therefore simply gained time , but not stability .
Tunisia and Egypt serve as examples for others .
Everyone knows of others in the region .
Many people are afraid to mention them by name .
To my mind , Saudi Arabia is a possible candidate , for example .
This situation requires political leadership by the High Representative .
However , the 27 do not have differing interests .
If your judgment is right , do not wait until the last diplomatic sceptic has re-briefed his foreign minister .
What Senator John Kerry said the day before yesterday and Barack Obama said this evening with regard to Egypt should also have come from you .
Emancipate yourself in the interests of the Union so that the EU itself , and no one else , will formulate its policies for the future in its own neighbourhood .
Perhaps you could even go to Tunisia and Egypt next week and then report back to us the week after next in Strasbourg .
Madam President , together with everyone else in this debate , I share deep concern for the peaceful protestors in Egypt , particularly in the light of the further violence of today .
I want to record in this debate concern about the continued closure of Al Jazeera , which Europe has been silent on so far , and the arrest of six Al Jazeera journalists , as well as the need for us to engage with the IT companies , Internet service and mobile phone providers , including Vodafone from my own country , on the choices that they made in Egypt during the course of the last weeks .
I also wish that EU leaders had said before what they are saying today .
President Sarkozy said in December 2007 : ' I 'd like to tell President Mubarak how much I appreciate his experience , wisdom and moderate vision . ... President Mubarak is for us a friend . '
Today he calls for a transition .
Or there is Alistair Burt , UK Foreign Office Minister , saying he wanted stability in Egypt more than anything .
William Hague , declining to say how soon he would like to see elections taking place , is now calling for transition .
Finally , I agree with Baroness Ashton , our High Representative .
Europe is good at transitional justice , at elections and democracy building , at civil society development .
Whatever the wrongs and the baggage of the past , she and we should see this as a crisis in the region but an opportunity for Europe to devote our resources to building respect for democracy and human rights .
These are not values that we are imposing from Europe .
They are demanded on the streets of Tunis and Cairo and it is our duty to listen .
( PL ) Every revolution entails the risk that the demands of the people for democracy and bread will be appropriated by enemies of a rule of law based on lawful and real democratic foundations .
We have no guarantee that the revolt in Tunisia , Egypt and other countries in the area will not become a pretext for the seizure of power by Islamic extremists , as happened in Iran .
The moment of truth is also approaching for the European institutions .
The European Union has every opportunity finally to play the role for which it was created .
It should provide effective support for the pro-pluralist political powers .
It should also revise the neighbourhood policy , since it is very obvious that the way in which it has been conducted to date has resulted in it being exploited to hold up the governments of corrupt rulers .
A substantial portion of the money earmarked for the development of neighbouring areas and of freedom , democracy and prosperity should reach the citizens of these countries by means of close cooperation with non-governmental organisations and the academic and cultural communities .
Support for projects aimed at young people and women 's associations should also be a priority .
Mrs Ashton , the European Union 's policy to date in this region of the world has ended in a fiasco .
We should take a risk and support an Egypt without Mubarak , on the path to a pluralistic , secular republic of Egypt which respects its minorities .
It is already time for Mubarak to go ; his time has passed .
He wasted the time he had .

( asking Mr Howitt a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) ) You raised some comments by President Sarkozy and Mr Burt .


I do not know whether you were in the Chamber earlier when a colleague referred to the statements by Mr Blair concerning Mr Mubarak .
Could you confirm whether you agree or disagree with Mr Blair ?

Madam President , I reiterate what I said in my speech , namely that there is much baggage from the past , which all of us should reflect on and learn lessons from .
But that should not stop us , as a European Union , from engaging with Egypt and the Arab world to support democracy and human rights , and I expect my colleague , despite her different views on Europe , to share this view with me .
( FR ) Madam President , many things have already been said , but I would like to echo all the words of sympathy and support that have already been addressed to the peoples of Tunisia and Egypt .
They are a symbol of hope for all those who defend freedom .
My thoughts are also with the victims .
I would now like to say that the European Union , which has been notable for its lack of reaction , as others have said , must indeed support the peoples of Tunisia and Egypt in order to help them successfully open up their countries to reform and establish democracy .
The European Union has decided to support the Tunisian leaders in their efforts to begin a peaceful transition , organise the forthcoming elections in order to win freedom and help the Tunisian people to enjoy the prosperity that comes from development and social peace , and from an economy that gives employment to the young .
I would like to conclude by saying that the Union for the Mediterranean has an important challenge to meet , as the Jasmine Revolution has unleashed a wave throughout all the States of North Africa , the Near East and the Middle East .
It must implement a strong strategy towards these countries .
A word of warning , however : faced with this legitimate democratic movement , Europe must strike a balance between non-interference in internal affairs , support for the legitimate aspirations of these peoples and stability .
( SV ) Madam President , in the European Parliament we have often spoken about respect for democracy and human rights and freedoms , but the truth is , and this is something I am sure we can acknowledge this evening , that we have often given priority to something else , namely political stability and good business relations .
Now the realisation has come over us almost like a thief in the night that people in the Arab world also aspire to and yearn for freedom .
We are now talking a great deal about the risks associated with the transition .
It is clear that they do exist .
There is probably no one here who would stand up and give three cheers for the Muslim Brotherhood .
However , we know that , in the long run , it is freedom and respect for human rights and freedoms that every individual desires and also has the right to attain .
We now need to ensure that the EU is no longer just a spectator , allowing things to happen as they will .
Instead , we must take the initiative and , just as Baroness Ashton emphasised here , try to be involved in building democracies .
It is impressive that the young people have started these revolts , partly perhaps due to the means of communication that are now available .
Therefore , I do not believe that we should read too much into these movements from an ideological or religious point of view at present .
However , whatever they stand for , in the long run it is freedom and respect for human rights and freedoms that must be given priority by us here in this Chamber and by the European Parliament as a whole .
- ( SK ) Madam President , more than two years of monitoring has revealed to us the gradual erosion of democracy , freedom of expression , freedom of assembly and freedom of religion in the countries under discussion .
Election results in these countries provide clear evidence .
Totalitarian regimes do not spring up overnight .
Despite the clear signals , the European Union has failed to take a clear stand on the side of compliance with human rights .
Unfortunately , we are among the last to adopt a common position .
Why did we establish the Mediterranean Union during the French Presidency ?
Did we lack the diplomatic resources for negotiating stability in this part of the world ?
The countries of the European Union have supported these governments for decades , particularly with funding .
The same countries are now beginning to think about how to freeze bank accounts and how to support opponents of these governments .
Is it not the same kind of hypocrisy ?
The situation in the Mediterranean is a lesson for us in the failure to respect human rights .
For example , freedom of religion is not respected and may become a weapon for radicals and terrorists , marking the start of a totalitarian regime .
I say this because there are many other countries which have the same characteristics .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , the debate here in this House , which you have followed with interest , has one common denominator in particular and that is the demand being made of you , Baroness Ashton .
Raise your voice .
Move forwards , be a little more courageous and also be a bit louder .
Stand up for those who , in a modern civilised society , are supporting democracy and freedom of expression and of the press .
Tunisia , Egypt and perhaps a few other countries are about to undergo a difficult change .
They need our support in this , and therefore it is wrong for your primary representative in this country to say that no change to the strategy is necessary .
On the contrary , we need the Mediterranean strategy and perhaps the Middle East strategy , or perhaps a rethink on coexistence beyond the Mediterranean , and of course the top priority and something that needs to be done very quickly is the adaptation and preparation of , and support for , elections .
It should not have escaped the notice of the primary representative of the EU in this country that the transitional government in Tunisia is now aiming to enter into four international agreements for the protection of human rights , that all political prisoners have been released , dissidents have returned and democratic elections are being prepared and conducted .
We must support this process , and Parliament wants to hear you speak more forcefully on this issue .
( IT ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , this crisis should give us the impetus to find out whether the European Union really wants a foreign policy role .
Foreign policy is a serious matter : it needs strategies , firm objectives and clear alliances .
We cannot continue travelling around the world patting everyone on the back and pretending that everything is going well all the time .
Elections took place in Egypt a few weeks ago and we did not get up in arms because we realised that there was a dictatorship that was fooling all of us .
Now that millions of people have taken to the streets , we are all talking about democracy and human rights .
This is what we want , and we will try to make sure it happens , but we should be careful about following the crowd .
I remember when the Iranian people rose up to get rid of the Shah , and we know how that ended , with a regime that still hangs dozens of people even now .
I hope , for example , that the Egyptian Government will be able to keep extremists at bay and play a stabilising role in the Israeli-Palestinian crisis .
Baroness Ashton , more democracy is certainly needed in that part of the world , but so is more European policy .
- ( SK ) Madam President , we are witnessing enormous tension and conflict between the government and civil society in Tunisia and Egypt , which has inevitably come about as a result of serious , long-term problems in the economy and society that were ignored by the state authorities .
The physical violence during the clashes is at best regrettable , and only confirms the urgent need for external support for a peaceful transition to democracy .
The European Union should therefore be prepared to direct all of its resources towards strengthening the legal state and human rights in these countries , including religious rights .
We do not want intolerant and militant Islamists to get into power .
Within the framework of maintaining good neighbourly relations and regional security , it is necessary to focus on activities aimed at strengthening civil society , creating a healthy opposition and ensuring democratic elections , in order to prevent extremist radial groups from usurping power .
Madam President , the very fact that we are discussing Tunisia - our initial topic - at a time when Egypt has reached boiling point is indicative of how far we are trailing behind reality , even if the title of our debate can be changed with ease .
Our public reactions have been timid , expressing concern and addressing pious appeals for restraint and dialogue in the middle of revolutions , demonstrating a lack of practical sense .
Even the expectations that the revolutions would lead to societies based on our set of values ignore the cultural and religious differences separating those societies from ours .
How to react then ?
First we should realise that this is a challenge asking for a common coordinating answer , not a competition on who demonstrates first the most compassion .
Baroness Ashton , your words will carry the necessary authority with their audiences only if fully backed publicly by the Council in its entirety .
Second , we should start being preoccupied with the end result of those revolutionary movements .
What kinds of regimes will result ?
And , in the end we should respect their right to decide for themselves .
( SL ) Madam President , when the revolution that is currently taking place in the streets of Cairo ends , the Egyptian people will choose a political system and their leaders .
The chances are that there will also be those who will give credit to President Mubarak for the positive role he has played in maintaining some degree of stability in the Middle East .
That , however , is not the point I want to make right now .
The developments in Tunisia and Egypt reveal the marginal role played by the European Union in the Mediterranean and throughout the regions covered by our neighbourhood policy .
We need to reform the European neighbourhood policy , we need a dynamic strategy which will address the resolution of ongoing issues , from Belarus , Ossetia , Abkhazia , Nagorno-Karabakh , Transdniestria , Cyprus , Palestine and Western Sahara .
We need a strategy for the countries of the former Soviet Union in Central Asia and Transcaucasia .
They , too , will be swept by the wind of democratisation ; you do not need to be a prophet to see this coming .
There is a great deal of work here for you , Baroness Ashton . Be ambitious and we will support you .
( FR ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , having mistakenly supported dictatorial regimes along the southern coast of the Mediterranean , supposedly as a bulwark against Islamic fundamentalism , we now need to rise to the challenge presented by these historic events .
Europe needs to revise its current policy on authoritarian regimes and dictatorships .
President Mubarak must step down now .
It behoves us to support the democracies and democratic processes chosen by the people of these countries , not simply to impose our own vision .
Let us listen to their voices , let us exercise humility , let us not confuse secularism and security .
Change is already happening in these countries .
Our financial instruments need to be adapted in order to provide reliable support for the champions of democracy ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Madam President , I think that these two countries and others in this region demonstrate how , on several occasions in recent years , Europe 's leaders have managed to be more on the side of business than on that of democracy , and more on the side of the dictators than on that of the poor .
I am frankly concerned about the current situation in Egypt and about today 's developments , so I believe that we must not show calm but must rather show solidarity .
We must show solidarity with the millions of Egyptians in Cairo and throughout the country who are sick of hunger , sick of oppression and sick of unemployment .
That is why we must say that we have to stand side by side with these people following President Mubarak 's speech today , following the regime 's releasing of its hounds , and following its clearing of the way for violence .
We must not allow a strategy of fear to be created to make them go home .
If we had heard these suggestions 36 years ago in Portugal , we would have gone home .
It is a good thing that we did not go home , because that meant we had a democratic revolution .
- ( SK ) Madam High Representative , the European foreign service has a large number of employees , specialists and analysts .
Our experts should therefore be capable of assessing the social upheavals both in Tunisia and in Egypt in a professional manner , and recommending appropriate steps to you , through which Europe will assist the inhabitants of these countries to overcome problems with unwanted political leaders .
The ostrich-like policy we have displayed so far in relation to the civil unrest in African countries , however , gives rise to doubts over the ability of our foreign service to take action .
Madam High Representative of the European Union , if there is any further delay in mounting a professional response to current events in Tunisia and Egypt , our taxpayers will be justified in wondering why they are paying this multitude of different bureaucrats in the EU 's foreign service , if they are incapable of drafting an immediate and professional response for you to the stormy events in Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , optimists believe that the revolutionary events in Tunisia and Egypt could be the beginning of something like an Arabic Spring of Nations - events like those we saw in Eastern Europe in 1989 , for example .
As Europeans , of course , we should always be on the side of freedom and democracy , and we would be very pleased if that were to be the case .
However , we should not forget that we Europeans and the West as a whole have to a certain extent also entered into agreements with the most unpleasant and most brutal dictatorships in the Arab world .
We should be under no illusion .
Although Facebook , the Internet and Twitter are the modern means of driving a revolution , they do not replace the democratic structures and the rule of law that need to be in place behind the scenes for a revolution to be able to make the transition into a democratic system .
What we Europeans can and should do is to make our position clear and to help to build these democratic structures in order , ultimately , to be able to bring the rule of law as well as a free market economy , which are necessary for a democracy , into these regions .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , let me begin by being absolutely clear .
I do not accept the principle that somehow Europe has been slow or late .
We were the first to make statements on both Tunisia and Egypt .
We began talking about Tunisia on 10 January and I put out statements on Egypt last week .
We were ahead of everyone else .
It is not a contest and it is not a race , but I do not accept that criticism .
Neither do I accept that we were slow to act .
We have been in contact hourly with those in Tunisia and with the people in Egypt , with our delegations , to whom I pay tribute for what they have had to deal with in the last couple of weeks , and also in direct contact with the government and with the services .
You will also be aware of the other issues that we have been dealing with at the same time , so I do not accept that we have been too quiet .
I do not accept that we have not done enough .
I do accept that there is more that we can do .
Did you give me all the tools I need with the Lisbon Treaty ?
Probably not .
Did you give me all the resources I need ?
Probably not , but we will do the best that we can in the context , within which we have the External Action Service and the role that I have .
I am not somebody who can go out and give my personal views .
I speak for the European Union .
I listen to you and I listen to the Member States and I listen to the Commission .
That is the role that you set up in the Lisbon Treaty and that is what I will do .
For some of you who were not here earlier , the Tunisian Foreign Minister was in my office today , making his very first visit outside Tunisia to the European Union because I invited him and because he knows how important we are , not just today but next week and next month and next year .
When I speak to him I speak on behalf of Europe .
He knows that what I say will be backed up by 27 countries , hopefully with the European Parliament 's support and also with the support of the Commission .
That means something to these people .
It means something that when we speak it is one message , not necessarily - as people keep saying - one voice .
It is the same message , whether it is said by the Chancellor of Germany , by the Prime of Minister of Britain , by the President of another country in the European Union , by any of the 27 .
We are saying the same thing .
That is why the Foreign Ministers coming together on Monday , the conclusions that they drew and the press conferences that they gave on all of the issues that we are grappling with , in our neighbourhood and beyond , are so significant to the people on the ground .
We must not lose sight of that in anything else that we do .
I agree with you that we need to be more active on the ground to do more and I absolutely agree that we need to revisit the neighbourhood policy .
I have been saying it for a long time .
We need to make sure that we have a more diversified approach , that we take each country and we work out what it is we want to achieve with the people of that country - yes , to do more with civil society , yes , to focus on human rights and democracy and , yes , to deal with the common foreign policy issues that we have with them .
I agree .
I am trying to do it .
If you look at the work we have been doing in the last two or three months , you will see a common theme in what I have been saying , which has been the need to be more active in our neighbourhood .
It should be our first priority after the setting up of the Service and it needs to be better , smarter and more related to their needs .
I cannot take responsibility for what happened before my time , but I do take responsibility for transforming what I inherited into a strategy for the future that you can be as proud of , as I intend to be .
It starts with what we do now and how much we are able to take responsibility and move forward .
I do not underestimate how difficult the situation is and how fast it is moving .
I agree with those who have also pointed out that democracy is not a moment in time .
It is a process .
You build democracy and you bring out those organisations who can work with people to help them understand their democratic rights , what democracy can mean and what it can do - the transformation of society .
We use that word in the Council conclusions for a reason , because I believe in transformation , not just for today and tomorrow but for the long term .
That is what Europe offers .
It is what Europe offered to our neighbours who became our partners and what it offered to its own members .
It brought about transformation that will last for generations .
That is what we are in the business of .
We are not in the business of knee-jerk reactions and responses .
We are in the business of doing something that we give to the people for their lifetime , for their children 's lifetime and beyond .
And , of course , in all of this I have not forgotten all the other issues .
I am watching what happens in Jordan .
I am in touch there .
I am of course engaged in what is happening in Iran .
The weekend before last I spent in talks with the Iranians and you know how passionately I feel about human rights in Iran because of all the statements I have made , because of all the issues that we have raised .
I certainly have not forgotten the Middle East peace process .
I was speaking with George Mitchell yesterday .
We will see Prime Minister Fayyad tomorrow .
We are engaged with the Quartet .
They meet on Saturday at the Munich Security Conference , where I will chair the Quartet on that occasion .
I have not forgotten any of the other issues .
Neither have I forgotten Albania , where Miroslav Lajčák goes back on my behalf this week to continue that dialogue .
We do not forget everything else that needs to be addressed , nor indeed the issues that we will be debating in this Parliament tonight .
And I am not responsible for what Tony Blair says .
I may share the same language ; I may come from the same political party , but I am not responsible for him and I will not be held responsible for him either .
Next week I go to the Security Council , on your behalf too .
At the Security Council we again have the opportunity to show what the European Union has to offer for these people , for today and for tomorrow .
It is really important that I get your support to do this - not quietly , I can be very loud - but properly with cohesion , with direction , with purpose , with a strategy and a plan so that , when the Tunisian Foreign Minister comes to my office , I give him a plan .
I do not say , it is very nice to see you , come and talk to me in front of the TV cameras for five minutes .
No .
I said to him we are going to sit for an hour and we are going to work through your plan with what I think we can offer you .
How much money ?
What can I do ?
What do I need to change ?
Which instruments do we need to bring together ?
How much flexibility have I got now ?
How much do I need to get ?
What do you need from us , the European Investment Bank , the African Union Bank , the United States , your other partners ?
How do we build the plan ?
Then I met the Yemeni Foreign Minster and we did the same thing : How do the group of countries that are friends of Yemen put together a new development fund ?
Do we do that with the Arab countries with whom I have been talking ?
What do we do ?
In my view , that is how Europe should work , and that is what I do every single day on your behalf and will continue to do .
Now I am hoping that I can shortly leave this debate and ask another Commissioner to take over .
For that I apologise but events in Egypt , as you rightly say , are moving and I can tell you what we have also been doing while we have been talking in here .
We have sent messages , we have spoken to the Deputy Foreign Minister on my behalf .
Messages have now gone in directly .
The security forces have to intervene right away to stop an escalation of violence .
That message has come from me while I am also sitting here talking to you .
They need to take responsibility ; the government is responsible for getting the army in to assist the people and to make sure that citizens are protected now .
Ambulances have to be allowed in and out of the square , because we are hearing that they are not being allowed in .
I am going to speak to Vice-President Suleiman as soon as I leave the Chamber .
The call is being set up now and that is why you have to forgive me and let me go .
There is an ongoing meeting that is trying to work out a road map with the opposition , now that European leaders are busy on our behalf talking to other leaders in the region and getting them to put in the calls as well .
This has to be a telephone tree like you have never seen before of leaders talking to leaders , getting the messages into Egypt .
While all this is going on , we have a crisis meeting going on in my offices to work out exactly what we will do in whatever eventuality we find ourselves .
That is what I have done every single day since this crisis began , with what happened in Albania , with what happened in Belarus , with what we did on Sudan , where our special representative led a task force and where Véronique De Keyser saw for herself on the ground what Europe was doing .
That is what we do .
Could we do more ?
Of course .
Do I wish there were four of me ?
Yes I do .
Do I think that the tools are right ?
No .
Do I think we have made progress ?
Yes .
Do I think we can do much more ?
Of course .
If all you want me to do is pop up and be seen to be alongside everybody , I will not do that .
What I will do for you is deliver what I think Europe was created to do , which is to put democracy and human rights at the heart of every single action we take and support the people of Egypt and Tunisia today .
( Applause )
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the motions for resolutions on Tunisia will take place on Thursday .
The vote on the motions for resolutions on Egypt will take place at the February II part-session .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
Over the last few days the situation in Tunisia and other countries on the southern Mediterranean rim has come to a head .
Dozens of people involved in violent demonstrations against the high cost of living and the country 's lack of a free market have lost their lives .
I would like to take the opportunity to recall that in 1995 the EU launched a partnership programme with the Mediterranean in Barcelona , which aimed to bring about economic , political , military and social cooperation .
However , at present these aims are far from having been achieved .
The dramatic situation in Tunisia demonstrates the urgent need for a European vision for the Mediterranean , or indeed the involvement of the southern rim countries in the current partnership and neighbourhood policies .
The situation in Egypt has grown even worse in just the last few hours .
There have been reports of several people being wounded and killed in clashes taking place across the country between the police and people demonstrating against President Mubarak 's government .
I believe that the path we need to take in these countries ' interests , but in Europe 's interests especially , is that of supporting economic and social reforms capable of meeting the aspirations of much of the population and which ought to bring peace and a gradual improvement in living conditions in the countries of North Africa .
In 1995 , the European Union outlined the ambitious target of creating peace , stability and prosperity in the Mediterranean region .
The Mediterranean countries obtained funding on condition that they would undertake the necessary economic and political reforms .
None of this happened , however .
In most cases the EU 's attempt to help its southern neighbours was rather led by the fear that Islamic radicals might come to power , thus threatening the stability of the region .
Support for authoritarian regimes , as history shows , does not pay .
It did not pay for the United States in South and Central America , and it is not paying for the EU either .
Some critics are quite rightly calling us hypocrites .
We talk about human rights , about the need for social dialogue , and about economic development , and yet for decades we have ignored the fact that Tunisia and other North African countries have been ruled by cruel and undemocratic regimes .
It has to be said that this amounts to a dramatic failure for those who promoted such a policy .
The embarrassing call made by EU representatives for Mubarak to organise democratic elections is just the sad outcome of this failed policy .
The wave of indignation in the countries of Africa and their peoples ' struggles , in particular , those of the peoples of Tunisia and Egypt , demand our greatest attention and solidarity .
In the specific case of Egypt , whose people continue to fight for their social and labour rights , for social justice , for democracy and for freedom , we vehemently condemn the repression that , under orders from President Mubarak 's Government , has been and continues to be directed at the struggling workers and people , and we pay homage to the almost 100 Egyptian citizens killed by state violence .
Just as in Tunisia and several other countries of the Arab world and of Africa , the situation in Egypt is intrinsically linked to the deepening of the crisis of capitalism and the violent antisocial offensive that characterises it , not least in view of the exponential growth of unemployment affecting young people and the exponential rise in food prices .
The recent events in Egypt and the broad social movement that characterises them are also intrinsically linked to the courage , persistence and determination of organisations representing the workers , and of other progressive people 's movements that have been undertaking important actions in the struggle for many years and under very difficult conditions .
We continue to argue for a political solution , found within a framework of strict respect for the sovereign will of the Egyptian people , free from any external interference , manipulation or pressure .
Current events in Tunisia and Egypt may be the key to the future of the entire region .
The societies of this region have not had an opportunity to express their ambitions , dreams or fears openly for a very long time .
We do not yet know what the outcome of the events in North Africa will be .
What is certain is that we should try to exert a greater influence over the development of the situation .
After all , these events are taking place in countries in our immediate neighbourhood .
Europe has in fact had a good deal of involvement in the region we are discussing .
We have known for a long time that local governments have not always met all the expectations of their societies .
The protests were ignited by the problems that most often stoke social discontent - poverty , despair and the arrogance of the authorities .
I do not believe that Tunisia and Egypt are dreaming of democracy as it is understood in the West .
The people are simply dreaming of a better life , and a better life does not necessarily mean democracy .
Do they deserve a better life ?
Yes , they most certainly do .
Everyone has the right to a better life and the right to respect for human dignity , to freedom and to development .
May their hopes be fulfilled quickly and without bloodshed .
Thank you very much .
in writing . - The first conclusion to be drawn from the profound changes taking place in Tunisia , Egypt and elsewhere is that the democratic world was absolutely unprepared for them .
The EU as well as the USA were caught by surprise and still have to improvise in reacting and accommodating themselves to these revolutionary developments .
The same happened 20 years ago when the Soviet Union collapsed .
It turned out that thousands of sovietologists had dismissed in their analyses the latent powerful force which finally disabled the Soviet dictatorship - the will of the enslaved people for freedom .
The current situation has exposed an inherent weakness of the fledgling European common foreign policy .
It has exposed a chronic crisis of the values upon which the EU is officially based .
In Realpolitik , these values have systematically been neglected or undervalued in favour of stability or pragmatic short-sighted relationships .
This is a moment to understand that looking away from the suppression of freedom with the justification of safeguarding stability and economic interests is bound to lead to devastating political mistakes .
Only genuine democracy can provide for a long-term stability .
Relying on autocratic regimes means increasing the bubble of self-deception which will explode sooner or later , resulting in grave moral losses for their democratic partners .
Experts believe that the riots in Tunisia have caused a domino effect .
It is highly likely that the next country in the region to experience change , after Tunisia and Egypt , will be Yemen .
Libya , Algeria , Jordan , Syria and Morocco have also been mentioned .
Globalisation , and the accompanying free flow of information , is opening the eyes of the citizens of these regimes .
They want change , a decent life in a modern democratic state and legislation adopted according to transparent principles .
In situations of this kind , the EU should promote these values and do everything it can to ensure that the Arab countries avoid civil war or the taking over of power by extremists .
I would like to stress that our support must be limited to political measures , and must not include military action .
As the EU , we should support the Arab countries in the peaceful pursuit of reforms .
There is a clear need for dialogue , both with the representatives of the outgoing authorities and with the opposition , including Islamic movements .
The EU needs to be more present in the region , and the entire European neighbourhood policy needs to be revised , which will make it possible to promote democracy more effectively not only in the Arab countries , but also in countries neighbouring us to the east , such as Belarus .
We need effective strategic plans which include appropriate EU financial aid for promoting democracy , civil society and human rights .
I believe that the EU should speak with one voice and express unequivocal condemnation for anti-democratic regimes .
The events taking place in innumerable Arab countries , especially Tunisia and Egypt , are demonstrations that will go down in the history of peoples ' liberation from authoritarian regimes that do not respect the basic rules of a democratic society : the rule of law and the defence of human rights .
I think that it will now be important to rethink the short- and long-term strategies for Tunisia and Egypt in the long process of the transition to democracy , to prevent extremist groups from coming to power .
I welcome the EU mission in Tunisia to evaluate the legal situation in the stage prior to elections and the observation mission for those elections : identical measures must be taken as soon as stability is achieved in Egypt .
Nevertheless , I consider it extremely important to revise the neighbourhood policy , which we have witnessed failing to commit to one of its goals : the promotion of democracy and human rights .
I think that there should be greater diversity of approach in the Euro-Mediterranean agreements , which should have a direct effect on civil society .
Dialogue with Tunisia , Egypt and their neighbouring countries must pursue the aim of guaranteeing democratic stability .
In order to achieve this , strategies must be created and the resources available for the necessary socioeconomic and political reforms must be increased .
in writing . - While democratic progress in the Arab world should be encouraged , the strategic interests of the EU should not be endangered .
The events in Tunisia and Egypt proved that autocracy is not a solution .
Nevertheless , the same events do not guarantee a democratic outcome .
Recent history showed that democratic revolutions can be hijacked by well organised , militant Islam .
The Iranian Revolution of 1979 is a famous example of democratic upheaval that turned autocratic .
We should strike a fine balance between the social policies of President Mubarak and Egypt 's strategic line .
Egypt is a resilient ally , it joined the forces that liberated Kuwait and ensured more than 30 years of peace with Israel .
There is hope and there is danger in the ongoing events in Egypt .
The demonstrators and their legitimate demands are a genuine expression of the need to open debate .
But there is massive potential for oppressive behaviour , practices and policies within Egyptian society .
Female circumcision , approval for public executions , torture and strict interpretation of Islamic law are widespread .
The Muslim Brotherhood is openly promoting this agenda and is credited with 20 % of the electoral preferences .
Caution should be exercised now if democracy is to have a future in Egypt .
The instability in the Mediterranean and Suez gives our arguments about the importance of coal greater significance .
Let us support energy produced within the EU , which is a secure resource .
The riots triggered in the Arab world by young Mohamed Bouazizi setting himself alight do not feature at all any manifest religious or ideological element .
Socio-economic demands are naturally the prime concern at a time when , in Egypt , the rise in food prices has exacerbated the tough conditions in which half of the country 's 80 million population struggle to live , surviving below the poverty line on two dollars a day .
I believe that our attitude towards the events unfolding in the Arab world must take into account , on the one hand , the natural support for the desire for freedom , but on the other hand , we cannot ignore the threats to global stability that may result from the collapse of this region , which is becoming increasingly unpredictable , chaotic or under Islamist influence .
Alarming signs show that many of the protesters do not aspire at all to the Western model of democracy , quite the opposite .
I cannot conclude without thinking about the Russian invasion of Georgia two years ago , when the Western world , taken by surprise , looked on in silence and just ignored it ..
Once again we have crucial developments going on along the EU 's borders , catching us unawares .
Once again , we are not involved in the action , even though this action directly affects European stability in many respects .
in writing . - The first foreign visit which the new Tunisian Prime Minister made was to the European Union .
Baroness Catherine Ashton welcomed the PM and it was clearly appreciated that the EU was the venue for his first foreign visit .
The choice in itself is important since the Tunisian PM wanted to give a clear message of the path he wishes his country to take .
The EU stands for democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and fundamental principles .
It stands for stability and security , in this case in the Mediterranean region .
Tunisia is one of Malta 's closest North African neighbours .
What happens during this transitional period is not only important for my country but also for the region .
Considered a moderate state , I am optimistic that Tunisia 's foreign policy will continue in the same direction .
Also I am hopeful that its domestic situation will improve .
It is important that the EU is visible in its various aid and development programmes which can be addressed to Tunisia .
Countries which embrace democratic values and contribute to stability and security in a region must be appreciated for their endeavours .
That is why it is vital that the EU illustrates this appreciation both visibly and tangibly .
The UN announced yesterday that over 200 people have died as a result of the disturbances accompanying the revolution in Tunisia .
This is the tragic side of the events in the South which have come as such a surprise .
It should compel every one of us to make all the more effort to achieve democratisation of both this country and the region as a whole , particularly since the old order is collapsing before our eyes in Egypt as well .
Unfortunately , there could be no question of the European Union singing from the same hymn sheet .
Let us not delude ourselves that the newly-established EU diplomacy will play a leading role from the outset , when the individual Member States have such strong particularistic interests .
In the case of Tunisia , however , the instruments at our disposal are perhaps less spectacular , but they are capable of producing very tangible results .
They include the EU neighbourhood policy , which is currently undergoing a review , and which should be modified appropriately in the view of current events .
They also include the possibility of sending an EU observation mission , and there is probably no longer anyone who needs convincing of the need to do so .
These are concrete tasks to which the European Parliament must now turn its attention .
in writing . - I would like to echo the admiration expressed during the debate in respect of the courage of the people of both Tunisia and Egypt in expressing their discontent and disappointment with their respective regimes .
By now the unrest has escalated to the point of no return and the European Union must contribute to the transition process that has been sparked off .
There have been some cautious voices calling for sustaining the status quo , especially in Egypt , arguing that overthrowing the regime might lead to a civil war , which in turn might bring religious fundamentalists to power .
I find that it is not our business to foretell the possible developments in those countries .
I would like to remind you that when the Eastern bloc was on the verge of collapsing , there were still some who would not have rocked the boat for fear of future instability in the region .
Let us not make that mistake and instead let us help the people of Tunisia and Egypt to lay the foundations for true democracies in the best way we can .
I am confident that Islam and democracy are not incompatible - Indonesia , a democracy , has the largest Muslim population in the world .
Referendum on the future status of Southern Sudan ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the referendum on the future status of Southern Sudan .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , I will read the statement and then , I am delighted to say , my colleague Michel Barnier will continue the debate and close it for reasons that I think the honourable Members have understood .
We are witnessing what is a historic moment for Sudan and actually for the whole of Africa .
The people of Southern Sudan have waited a long time for the chance to exercise their right of self-determination .
The timely , peaceful and credible conduct of the referendum has been a remarkable success and one of which everyone should be proud .
The preliminary results of the referendum in the 10 southern states were announced on 30 January and showed an overwhelming majority ( 99.5 % ) in favour of secession .
We still await the final results , which will be out in the next couple of weeks .
We congratulate the Southern Sudanese people for the determination , dignity and patience they showed in turning out to vote in such large numbers .
We also commend the Southern parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement for their leadership , and the Sudanese Referendum Authorities for the remarkable job they did in organising the referendum despite the enormous challenges they faced .
This referendum 's success is , above all , a Sudanese achievement but it also reflects the support of the African Union and the AU High-Level Implementation Panel led by President Mbeki , who helped the parties to move forward , as well as the sustained diplomatic attention it received from the international community , including the UN , the US and , of course , the European Union .
Sudan has been high on our political agenda in Brussels during the past months .
We discussed it in the Foreign Affairs Council both in November and in December .
We agreed again on conclusions in the Foreign Affairs Council this week and we will continue to monitor the situation .
More than anything , however , I want to thank Véronique de Keyser , the Chief Election Observer for the South Sudan Referendum , and her team in the EU observation mission , for the important role they played in helping to create confidence in this process among the people of Sudan .
The deployment of a large and experienced observation mission was an important and tangible European contribution , and I thank you most sincerely because I know you personally played such a significant role and it has been well recognised .
We also provided technical expertise and financial support to the Sudanese referendum authorities .
As we wait for the announcement of the final results , I want to reiterate that the EU will respect the outcome of the referendum as an expression of the wishes of the people of Southern Sudan .
We are encouraged by President al-Bashir 's remarks in Juba on 4 January , reaffirmed at the Mini-Summit on Sudan in Addis Ababa on 31 January , that the Government of Sudan will accept the results of the referendum , will be the first to recognise the new state and will extend full cooperation to it .
We urge all stakeholders to continue to exercise restraint and to ensure that calm prevails and that the safety and security of all peoples in Sudan are protected .
While the referendum on self-determination for Southern Sudan was a major success , we cannot afford to be complacent .
Huge challenges lie ahead .
The referendum on Abyei , which was supposed to have been held at the same time as the Southern Sudan referendum , has still not taken place .
We are concerned at the violence that occurred in Abyei on the eve of the referendum and we urge the parties to prevent any further violence and to find a substantive solution to lay the foundation for long-term co-existence between local communities on the ground .
There are other outstanding issues related to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement still to be resolved , including North-South border demarcation and the holding of popular consultations in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan .
We hope the parties will now refocus their energies on resolving these matters as well as key post-referendum issues including citizenship , security arrangements , oil revenues and other economic issues .
We are encouraged that both parties have agreed on a number of principles , particularly to work for two viable states with ' soft ' borders , and to build constructive relations .
However , there is still a lot of work to be done and we will continue to support President Mbeki 's mediation efforts .
We also face an important humanitarian challenge .
Every day some 2 000 people return to South Sudan from the North and they need help to reintegrate into their local communities .
I remain deeply concerned about increased violence in Darfur , leading to the recent displacement of tens of thousands of people , and the severe impact this is having on humanitarian operations .
Three European citizens are still being held hostage .
We also continue to have concerns about the detention of human rights defenders , journalists , opposition politicians and peaceful student protesters .
One of the basic principles of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement was the establishment of democratic governance based on respect for diversity and freedoms , and we want to see respect for fundamental freedoms and genuinely inclusive democratic governance in both North and South .
Looking to the future , I assure you this will remain high on our agenda .
We will continue to engage with both Khartoum and Juba .
We are ready to step up our engagement with Khartoum and prepared to strengthen our dialogue .
We remain committed to providing assistance to the people in the North , particularly in war-affected areas such as the east , the Transitional Area and Darfur .
Southern Sudan will not be stable if Northern Sudan is not stable , and vice versa .
EU Foreign Ministers have said they are ready to look closely at EU support for international debt relief for Sudan , consistent with political progress .
In Southern Sudan , the EU has a significant contribution to make to stabilisation , development and institutional capacity-building .
We are already providing support for basic services and agricultural development - in addition to the significant bilateral programmes of Member States - and we are looking at our longer-term strategy for development cooperation with Southern Sudan .
But we also recognise that Darfur deserves the same high-level attention that has recently been focused on implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement .
So we appeal to all parties to cease hostilities , conclude a ceasefire agreement and move towards a comprehensive and just political settlement , and we will step up our efforts to encourage all parties to engage seriously in the Doha peace process .
Finally , a word on justice : lasting peace in Darfur cannot be achieved without justice and reconciliation .
There has to be an end to impunity .
The Council has repeatedly drawn attention to the obligation of the Government of Sudan to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court .
I believe the EU has an important role to play in supporting a peaceful , stable and democratic future for the Sudanese people , whether in one country or two .
We owe it to the Sudanese people in both North and South to stand by them and offer them support and encouragement at this critical time .
Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the Sudanese Government in Khartoum is giving out positive signals , which include the smooth running of the referendum and a willingness to accept the referendum results in Southern Sudan .
After decades of civil war , I do not think I am exaggerating when I say that this is a historic moment for Africa .
But historic moments are transient - they do not last forever .
If we are to turn the page and move to a new period in history , the actors of change cannot afford to rest on their laurels .
They need to define clear , healthy and viable foundations that will ensure a better future .
Southern Sudan is in a transitional period , as a great deal could still happen between now and 9 July , the date on which it formally gains its independence .
The two states have a lot of issues to resolve .
The question that most urgently needs to be resolved is that of borders .
The status of Abyei remains uncertain .
A solution must be found in order to prevent conflicts emerging .
Then there is the question of the so-called returnees .
What reception will be given to these people ?
Will this young state succeed in integrating so many people in such a short time ?
Stable institutions need to be created - justice , police , the army and a full-blown administrative system - in order to ensure that these individuals can enjoy citizenship , find work and have decent living conditions .
Yet the referendum also constitutes a real challenge for the North : the authorities will need to adjust to a new political reality .
There have already been demonstrations this weekend .
Will the government encourage political , ethnic , cultural and religious diversity ?
One thing is certain : we cannot afford a repeat of past mistakes .
For both countries , the key to success resides in guaranteeing a pluralistic political arena with ethnic and religious diversity under the overriding rule of law .
Only then will these countries constitute true democracies .
I would like to add one last thing .
Economic , social and political interdependence should encourage the authorities in both countries to engage in constant dialogue and cooperation .
For its part , by offering genuine development projects , the European Union will be a key partner in the future of both countries .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , following on from the discussions about Tunisia , Egypt and other countries that are currently calling for freedom , I would like to say that our observation mission to Southern Sudan for the referendum was a wonderful and exemplary experience .
The referendum was exemplary because it was a success , notwithstanding all the doom-mongering .
It was also a wonderful experience because it was apparent that the people of Southern Sudan were voting with tears in their eyes - after waiting for this moment for so long ( more than 50 years in some cases ) , after having lived through civil war - and were embracing the peaceful transition with indescribable joy .
It is true that the coming months will be difficult , but we do need to celebrate this turning point .
I have to say that in the light of the European Union 's instruments and how much I have criticised other election observation missions that did not enjoy a successful outcome , the mission that I took part in was a real blessing .
Southern Sudan is set to become the fifty-fourth state in Africa on 9 July .
It currently faces a number of challenges , as outlined by Baroness Ashton .
Firstly there is the oil in the Abyei region , located on the border between North and South , but for which no clear boundaries have been defined and which did not have its own referendum .
A solution needs to be found for Abyei , but at the moment the question is still pending .
Violence occurred in the area during the referendum , as was also the case in the Unity State and South Kordofan .
This region has the potential to destabilise the whole country .
Then there is the issue flagged up by Mariya Nedelcheva - whom I would like to thank for her participation in the observation mission - and by Baroness Ashton : citizenship .
The people of Southern Sudan who lived and worked in the North , sometimes even owning property , have fled to the South in tens , even hundreds , of thousands .
They will probably now have to be reintegrated in the southern economy .
They do not trust the North , they do not know whether they will be able to keep their jobs - almost certainly not if those posts are in the public sector - which is a serious problem .
Lastly , there is the problem of the International Criminal Court .
Salva Kiir , the president of Southern Sudan , wants to seek cooperation with the North , provided that it recognises the result of the referendum .
He has already succeeded in persuading President al-Bashir to visit the South , where he was formally received in Juba .
This was astounding , representing reconciliation and a new era .
Salva Kiir tells us that if he were to sign the Rome Statute today , he would be required to arrest President al-Bashir the next time he comes to visit .
He questions how they could cooperate under those terms , how they could achieve the much-vaunted North-South reconciliation . ʻDo not ask us to do that , ' he argues .
Obviously , we are committed to the International Criminal Court , but at the same time we realise that North-South cooperation is the key to peace .
So I fear that there are lots of problems to be resolved .
As I said , the mission was a wonderful experience , but Sudan remains one country until 9 July .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , for over twenty years we have known that the population of Southern Sudan does not want Sharia law imposed by Khartoum .
Hence a civil war which has taken the lives of over two million people .
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed in 2005 put an end to that war .
Last week , the will of the Southern Sudanese people was formally expressed : independence , secession from the North .
But wanting is not enough : the country also has to be able to manage that independence on a day-to-day basis .
The new state does not yet have a formal border with the North .
Nor do we know how the profits from oil extraction will be shared out .
Thousands of people are still moving from the North to the South .
As yet the potential for development remains fairly unclear , given the limited resources in Southern Sudan on the one hand and the incredibly low levels of education on the other .
Essentially , this new state will have to be created from scratch .
Although the creation of a new state is primarily the concern of the people of Southern Sudan , independence will trigger some fundamental changes .
Henceforth , any conflict between North and South will be an international issue , rather than an internal problem , as it has been in the past .
So for the UN Security Council , the rules will change .
We urgently need a clear strategy identifying the main political and economic priorities that will bring the people of Southern Sudan out of extreme poverty .
Whilst respecting the right of all nations to self-determination , as the established primary donor , the European Union has to be able to meet the expectations of people on the ground .
The European Union should also take on the mantle of leader of all those who will be working in partnership with the new state in the Herculean task of reforming this part of Africa .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , we are bearing witness to the birth of a new state .
I am very pleased about that , but I have concerns , as well .
After all , Southern Sudan is one of the poorest countries in Africa .
It is also a country with a great deal of oil in its territory .
Moreover , it is a country to which a lot of people are returning , refugees without anywhere to live , without food and without jobs .
That is a recipe for disaster and even a recipe for armed conflict .
Unless those who control the oil resources in Southern Sudan and the ports in the northern part of the country through which that oil has to be shipped come to an agreement , then indeed , as my fellow member Mr Goerens has said , an international conflict will break out .
So , what can we do ?
Europe must establish a presence there and must stay there .
Why not send a Eupol mission to Southern Sudan to help establish the rule of law and give this country a fresh , new opportunity of its own and , who knows , that country might well prove to be an example to the rest of Africa .
I very much hope that that will be the case .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I have never doubted that Sudan 's partition is the only way to guarantee peace , justice and development for Southern Sudan .
I am therefore delighted that southerners voted with such overwhelming determination in favour of a sovereign , independent future .
The fact that more than 99 % of voters favoured secession is a damning indictment on Khartoum and President Bashir 's decades of efforts to conquer and subjugate the Christian and Animist South to hard-line Islamism and Sharia law .
Southern Sudan should now be the EU 's number one humanitarian development priority .
The referendum is not the end of the process but the start of it .
Southern Sudan needs to be sure of the EU 's total and unswerving commitment , and one of the things I call upon the High Representative to ensure is that all EDF money should now be transferred to the new state immediately , even before they ratify Cotonou .
I also call on all 27 EU Member States to immediately recognise this new African nation on 9 July as decreed in the CPA .
Without it , all the progress that Southern Sudan has made in recent years will be in vain .
Another war would have unimaginable consequences for Africa as a whole .
Finally , I hope that steps are being taken to ensure that the personnel and financial resources allocated to the EU delegation in Juba are adequate .
I also trust that the High Representative will be able to visit Southern Sudan shortly .
I am also excited , particularly as a British citizen , that the new government in Juba is committed to recognising the independence of the Republic of Somaliland - the former British Protectorate of Somaliland - and I am convinced also that many other African and European states will shortly follow thereafter .
I would also like to recognise in the gallery Dr Francis G. Nazario , who is head of the Southern Sudanese Mission to the EU and shortly will become its ambassador .
Perhaps you could stand up , Dr Nazario and the Southern Sudanese delegation , who are also sitting up there .
( Applause for Dr Nazario and the Southern Sudanese delegation )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , will the situation now improve for the people in Southern Sudan or is the split more in the interests of the West so that we can get control of the oil reserves ?
In any case , the South has huge challenges ahead .
Without a functional infrastructure and with the current disastrous economic situation , civilian assistance and humanitarian aid will be needed for a long time .
Unfortunately , the danger of violent conflicts has probably not been eliminated for certain .
However , experts believe that this cannot be resolved by military means .
On the contrary , a focus on military means prevents a real solution to the conflicts being found .
The necessary civilian assistance can be provided much more efficiently without military involvement .
The transfer of civilian tasks to the military hinders the sustainable development of civilian structures .
An example of this is Darfur .
A massive military apparatus has now taken over the tasks of humanitarian and development organisations there , something that has been sharply criticised by these organisations .
Our demands are that the focus be on purely civilian conflict management and assistance measures , in other words a reduction of the UN mission to the civilian components and no potential use of EU battle groups .
In addition , in terms of a development perspective we call for Sudan 's debt be written off .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , every sign indicates that the result of the 9 January referendum in Southern Sudan will be virtually unanimous support for independence .
That is perfectly understandable , or reasonable , and , indeed , should be welcomed .
After all , Southern Sudan has recently left behind it 23 years of civil warfare with the Arab north , in which 2.5 million people were killed and more than 4 million driven out .
That is without even mentioning the slavery in the north , to which possibly hundreds of thousands of Southern Sudanese women and children fell victim .
Against this historical background , it goes without saying that this youngest state in the making could do with any international assistance it can get in building up its institutions .
Now , that process certainly requires a reliable police force .
Just last week , I received some worrying reports in connection with that , that is , reports of serious malpractice in the new police academy in Rajaf .
I would therefore call for European attention and efforts to help address this , but also , equally , to assist with all the urgent state affairs which Southern Sudan will be facing .
( DE ) Mr President , there are two things that I brought back from the trip to Sudan : firstly , a belief in the viability of Southern Sudan and , secondly , the fact that there is no alternative to this belief in the viability of Southern Sudan .
However , as in the case of a small child , it is also necessary to support this young state until it is able to be independent .
That is simply what the international community is called on to do .
I would like to address two points .
Firstly , debt write-off .
As an Austrian MEP this is of particular concern to me because , after all , Austria is the largest creditor in the Paris Club .
I believe that we have to lead by example here and , even if it is a task for the Member States , it is nevertheless very important that , under the supervision of the European Union , there is excellent coordination of the Member States .
The second point that I would like to mention here is the situation of stalemate that we find ourselves in : on the one hand we have the arrest warrant from the International Criminal Tribunal and on the other there is also the will and the need to pay out money from the 10th European Development Fund .
I think that we need a swift but very pragmatic solution here .
( PL ) Mr President , we are very pleased that the referendum in Southern Sudan has passed off so peacefully .
Our observers are united in their praise for what they saw during the observation mission .
They have also given a positive assessment of the referendum itself from the viewpoint of the standards we promote .
The referendum was credible and well-organised , and it gave voters the opportunity to make their views heard .
The importance that Southern Sudanese citizens attached to this referendum was also plain to see , with a turn-out of 60 % being achieved by the fourth day .
This is clear testimony to how determined the people are to achieve self-determination .
President Bashir has often been criticised by this House , but this time we should give him credit for the statement he made on 24 January in Juba , to which Mrs Ashton referred .
He announced that he would recognise any decision made on the basis of the referendum , even if that meant the secession of Southern Sudan , and everything points to the fact that those living in the region have made their wishes extremely clear .
I would echo the wishes and hopes voiced by others that , if Sudan is in fact split into two countries , they will enjoy a peaceful co-existence .
It is now important for the peaceful atmosphere that reigned during the referendum to be followed by a peaceful period during which the results can be announced and the two states can undergo transformations .
Many observers are afraid that the current wave of riots and democratic demands in several countries , including Sudan , could become an excuse to freeze the peace process and will make it impossible for ambitious plans to be put into effect .
The outlook in some quarters is positive , on the other hand , for example in the African Union , which is known to be ready to recognise the independence of the new African state .
We must also be aware that the referendum is not the end of the matter , and that ultimate success means realising the wishes of those living in Sudan .
As we know , their wishes may be granted on 9 July 2011 , when the independence of Sudan will be proclaimed , and only then will we be able to celebrate the end of this bloody and long-standing conflict .
( RO ) Mr President , after four decades of civil war , with a toll of more than 2 million dead and 4 million refugees , Southern Sudan 's secession is a response to ethnic and religious intolerance , in the wake of the 2005 report and the referendum which took place a month ago .
The sides involved have agreed on this separation , and I firmly believe that this will speed up and facilitate Southern Sudan 's acceptance into the international community .
However , there is a risk of a domino effect on a continent traumatised by wars caused by artificial borders inherited from colonial times .
This is why the six-month period of transition towards the clean break is crucial in terms of defining the new state 's future path .
On the one hand , it is faced with military and strategic challenges , the resurgence of violence among former military leaders of the secessionist movement , interference from some militia , privatisation of internal security , border incidents with Muslim Sudan and the issue of dividing the oil revenues with the latter .
On the other hand , there is a great humanitarian problem , and I think that the European Union must get involved in this on a major scale .
Otherwise , we will be faced with a disaster which will fuel the instability in the region .
In Sudan one in ten children die during the first year of life and one in seven die before they reach the age of five .
There is limited access to drinking water and healthcare services , while four fifths of the population are illiterate .
Half the population in the south is under 18 years of age and , if they escape the clutches of child mortality , they are at risk , due to poverty and the lack of prospects , of ending up as cannon fodder in the conflicts which may undermine the new state 's independence .
I hope that the European Union will take into account how complex this issue is .
( FR ) Mr President , I am delighted that the people of Southern Sudan have been given the freedom to choose their future .
I am proud to be able to say that the final undisputed outcome has been obtained thanks to strong support from the international community and the European Union .
We are approaching an historic turning point : establishing lasting peace and a new state in a country which has lived through nearly 40 years of civil war in the 55 years since its independence .
This marks a new era , the era of negotiations between North and South on the issues that need to be resolved in order to implement the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement : citizenship , defining borders , deciding whether the Abyei region will be held by the North or South , sharing oil resources and debt matters .
The European Union will , of course , need to support both this political process and the new state 's development .
The international community and European Union must not forget about Northern Sudan , just as we must not forget Darfur , where the conflict is far from resolved and where violence has increased considerably over the past 12 months , with over 270 000 individuals forced to leave their homes and more than three million still living in camps .
( ES ) Mr President , the European Union 's fundamental principle is democracy and , given that the vast majority of Southern Sudan 's inhabitants have democratically voted in favour of independence , the European Union must give its support to the immediate creation of the new state .
We have to do so because , amongst other reasons , democracy is the foundation for stability , security and prosperity in Africa , as well as in the Mediterranean .
In the same vein , I would also stress the international importance that the right to self-determination is taking on as a tool for international relations : we have seen it in Kosovo and we are now seeing it in Southern Sudan .
The International Criminal Court itself has concluded that democratic independence processes are perfectly legal under international law .
The establishment of borders is returning to where it has to be : democracy .
Therefore , in order to strengthen the Union itself , the EU must also be prepared to recognise the right to self-determination of any European countries - such as Catalonia , Scotland or Flanders - that democratically opt for independence .
( NL ) Mr President , these are apocalyptic times .
From Mauretania to Oman , people are in flux .
All over the world , thousands are dying in natural disasters .
In America and Europe , the dance around the golden calf of the euro and the dollar is getting wilder all the time .
Christians are being persecuted in many countries .
Nobody knows when the end of the world will come , but the Bible commands us to be watchful and ready .
However , in the midst of this global tumult , we are witnessing a wonderful development : the birth of Southern Sudan .
After many years of oppression and war , the people of Southern Sudan are being freed from slavery .
The people of Southern Sudan are being liberated from the house of slavery which is headed by the internationally wanted criminal Omar Al Bashir .
That is a cause for great thanksgiving and joy .
I warmly congratulate my Southern Sudanese friends present here today on this .
I pray that this new country may have wisdom , so that law and justice can flourish there .
May it be a country where mercy and faith meet together .
May it be a nation where peace and justice are intertwined .
I would specifically ask the Commission , represented here by Mr Barnier , to recognise the new state of Southern Sudan immediately , that is , as soon as possible .
Follow up on that recognition with action .
Support Southern Sudan wherever possible .
Make this country a priority of your foreign policy .
I am looking forward to a specific response from you to my request .
Mr President , this is an opportunity for the Sudanese people , of both North and South , to concentrate on growing their economies and using the wealth that their oil resources can bring to feed and educate their people , but we must also help , and do so without delay .
Currently 80 % of southerners have no access to toilet facilities .
One in ten children die before their first birthday .
In the poorest parts of the South , less than one percent of children finish primary school .
Every year Sudan exports billions of dollars of oil .
If North and South can arrive at a diplomatic and peaceful solution - and they can - then both parties can use their rich natural resources to haul themselves out of their dreadful poverty - the poverty that plagues their land - with some help from their friends .
Of course the future of both governments will depend on issues such as border demarcations , the sharing of oil revenues and the status of Abyei , the disputed oil-rich border region between North and South .
I urge the High Representative and the Commission to encourage rapid diplomatic negotiations between North and South to resolve the remaining issues in as short a timeframe as possible and , most importantly , to keep this item high on the European Union 's agenda .
I look forward to welcoming parliamentarians from both sides , representing their states in their own right , to a future meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly of the ACP countries with this Parliament before too long .
It will be an indication that they have arrived at statehood .
I think it is something we should encourage sooner rather than later .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to break up this joyful atmosphere .
It is true that we have come to the end of the phase begun in 2005 , during which diplomacy helped to ensure that events unfolded in the best possible way .
However , there are still many unresolved problems .
This is a young country and will be a young country once secession has taken place .
It is a country that still needs to establish its borders , address the issue we have heard mentioned several times of the conflicts in the Abyei region , the issue of the oil pipeline , which is the most important thing in that country , and also the international aid system .
I would therefore like to make a very simple point to the Commissioner .
There are two or three things that we need to do .
We need to establish a strategy for Southern Sudan , and recognise this new State on 7 February , without waiting until 9 July when the results of the election are made official .
We also need to put our international service into action immediately , and establish a delegation in Southern Sudan .
This is the only way to support a process ; this is the only way for smart , strategic diplomacy to support this country on the path to democracy .
I would note that the first thing that the country needs to do is to draw up its constitution , and Europe can be of great help in this .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I began working at the European Parliament as a political adviser in 1991 and at that time the conflict between northern and southern Sudan was already a recurring crisis .
Finally , after 20 years , it seems we are seeing a bit of light at the end of a long , arduous tunnel .
As Mr Milana and others have pointed out , much still needs to be done , but many of us were preparing for the worst and expecting the civil war to start up again .
I therefore congratulate the north and south of the country on this initial referendum result .
Every day counts now until the declaration of independence .
No-one can allow themselves to put a foot wrong , either in Khartoum , in Juba , in Brussels or at the African Union in Addis Ababa .
For example , the idea of opening an EU delegation with special status until the declaration of independence is definitely to be welcomed .
Sudan is about to teach us , the international community , a wonderful lesson about cynicism and about crises that , more out of a sense of resignation than anything else , we often consider to be unsolvable .
( FR ) Mr President , I welcome the future independence of Southern Sudan and I congratulate the Southern Sudanese people on having achieved it .
As our fellow Member , Mr Goerens , who has been so kind as to approach me on this occasion , has just said , one can have the right not to live under Sharia law .
It is a right that we must honour .
However , I must also point out that there are some populations that are blessed with the opportunity of obtaining the right to such freedom .
Nearby , the people of Somaliland do not have that opportunity .
I would like us also to revise our policy , which , up until now , has consisted in not recognising the efforts of the people of the Republic of Somaliland , who have built a free and democratic Muslim state in the region , but one which we treat as if it did not exist .
Mr President , as regards Southern Sudan , I would also like to say a word on the status of the country .
Southern Sudan is still the poorest country in Africa despite the fact that , during the past five years , it has been able to access half of the oil resources of the whole of Sudan .
I can see that there has been blatant underdevelopment , which , up until now , has largely been due to the neglect and oversight of Khartoum .
However , from now on , I would like the European Union to insist on the need for governance and development , and not to help finance the underdevelopment that is liable to be created in Southern Sudan in the future .
( PL ) Mr President , we should resist the temptation to be over-optimistic during today 's debate .
Predictions of events in Sudan are nothing but crystal-ball gazing .
In spite of all the hopes raised by the recent referendum , it should not be supposed that the matter is already settled .
That is far from the case , and no one knows yet whether the country will be divided according to the wishes of those living in the South .
A further issue is the fact that the southern part of the country is currently united by its dislike of the Muslim North .
When this emotion passes and the time comes for the building of state institutions , the balance between the three culturally and linguistically different tribes will rapidly become apparent .
This issue will be of great significance , and we should turn our attention to it now .
The next question we must ask ourselves , and to which we must find an answer , is as follows : why are we now hopeful of a peaceful end to a conflict which has lasted half a century ?
The answer is clear : crude oil .
Both foreign concerns , without which it would be impossible to extract oil in such a poor country , and the representatives of the two parts of the country have caught the scent of petrodollars .
Let us hope that greed does not blind us , and that our desire to help not only ensures that funding will be provided for state-building measures , but will also allow us to put in place programmes which will benefit society .
- ( SK ) Mr President , prior to the referendum we were very concerned about the accompanying unrest , and I am pleased that the referendum went off peacefully and that it was valid .
However , it is necessary to ensure , as Baroness Ashton said , that there is a proper additional referendum in Abyei , as well as in the region where oil is located .
The observer mission of the European Parliament will also be needed at this additional vote .
Even after the independence of Southern Sudan is declared , it will remain one of the poorest countries in the world .
There are many Slovak NGOs working in the region , and it is important for them to have the right conditions for their work .
I would also like to emphasise the role of the local church and church organisations , as they too deserve our support .
They have set up and are running many schools and medical facilities , and they are highly respected in the region .
I would like to end by saying that , following the break-up of Sudan , we must not forget the minority of South Sudanese who fled to the North in the face of persecution , and have been living there for many years .
If North Sudan fails to recognise dual nationality , as President al-Bashir has promised , Sharia law will apply , and they may become second class citizens .
( ES ) Mr President , we are debating a success story : the fact that , following years of conflict , Sudan has peacefully and democratically made it through to a complex secession process , in accordance with the criteria laid down in international law : the right to self-determination of any population subjected to foreign , colonial or racist domination , and that of any population that agrees secession through a resolution of the United Nations Security Council or an agreement between the parties .
This has also been a success for the European Union , which has supported and monitored the electoral process , as it will be doing soon in Chad and Uganda .
Let us hope that the European Union takes on a leading role within the international community in supporting whatever new state emerges from Southern Sudan 's referendum , in order to solve all the outstanding problems mentioned here , from returnees to natural resources .
Let us hope that the European Union gives its full support .
( ES ) Mr President , I should like to pay tribute here to the end of Southern Sudan 's referendum .
Thanks to a democratic process , a complex society , with ethnic and religious differences , and with serious economic disputes , has brought an end to a conflict that cost two million lives .
I should therefore like to congratulate the principle players in the process and give recognition to the role of the United Nations , which fulfilled its peacekeeping mission .
Moreover , I should like other conflicts to follow this example and I hope that certain states here will lose their fear of principles like people 's right to choice and the exercise of the right to self-determination .
Ambition , obstinacy , failure to recognise minorities and their rights , and failure to accept plurality are the cause of many tensions .
Dialogue and politics serve to resolve these tensions .
Timely recourse to dialogue and politics prevents conflicts , but by denying what is going on and attempting to overcome these conflicts without telling the truth we are on the surest path to ending up with regrets .
( EL ) Mr President , unfortunately I do not share the huge optimism expressed by most speakers in the House .
Firstly , because we must ask ourselves why Southern Sudan in particular acquired its independence ' so easily ' , at a time when the regime in the Western Sahara is as we know it and did not recognise its right to independence .
For me and the Greek Communist Party , the answer is very simple .
Southern Sudan had the good fortune to have oil .
We hope that its oil does not end up being a curse for the people of Southern Sudan , as it was for the people of Iraq and other nations .
There are still serious , unresolved problems .
We believe , unfortunately , that competition between the major powers for this area will increase and we call on the workers of Southern Sudan not to give in to the strategy of divide and rule and to join with the workers in Northern Sudan in creating different prospects for their country .
( DE ) Mr President , in the most recent referendum in Southern Sudan , the people decided that the old , arbitrary colonial borders should fall .
In July , the world 's 193rd state was officially founded .
There were 3.8 million people who voted in favour of an independent state and only 45 000 voted for things to remain as they were : this represents an overwhelming majority utilising the right to self-determination , and it is grounds for great joy .
However , the split alone will not create stability in the country .
Sudan is still a trouble spot , and in the north there is the omnipresent radical Islamism .
In addition to other measures , it is therefore important for administrative structures to be developed , because a new border needs to be managed and also monitored .
This requires an efficient security policy throughout the entire region - in Somalia , Sudan and Southern Sudan .
The High Representative of the EU is called on , together with the international players , to promote security and stability in this region and , above all , to combat radical tendencies and to bravely support Southern Sudan .
Mr President , at last , amongst all the gloom and doom , we have a good news story .
A good news story which I am very proud that the European Union played a very important part in - compliments to Baroness Ashton and her colleagues and also to the Members of Parliament who supervised the referendum .
Of course , the real work is now beginning in making the transition to freedom and nationhood for Southern Sudan .
That is very difficult and the history of the world has shown it has often led to civil war .
However , the European Union can play a crucial role in ensuring that transition takes place , so that the people of Southern Sudan can have the basic human rights which Mr Mitchell referred to , such as education and even toilet facilities .
I think that , in particular , the border and the division of oil resources are going to be crucial issues .
A famous Irish hero , Michael Collins , once said that border land is trouble and always will be .
The European Union , seen as being independent and objective , can play a crucial role in bringing about the transition which is so badly needed .
Thank you very much .
We wish the Sudanese people the very best of luck .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton asked me to listen to each of you , and I have listened attentively .
I would like to thank you for your understanding , as Baroness Ashton had to leave the Chamber for urgent reasons after she had explained her position , as High Representative , on the extremely sensitive issue of Sudan .
In this huge region of Africa , it is clear to see , and , ladies and gentlemen , all your speeches have shown , that what happens in a country may affect all the other countries in terms of development , peace and stability .
It must be remembered that there are nine countries bordering on Sudan .
That is why what has happened with the referendum is so important .
Mrs De Keyser , whose role as Chief Election Observer I would like to acknowledge , recalled , as did Baroness Ashton , the success of this referendum - an exemplary process and a transition that has to be peaceful .
Since she has done so herself , I , too , would like to thank the Members of the European Parliament and others for the good cooperation demonstrated by this process between the European institutions and , in particular , the European Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , several of you have spoken of Darfur .
For my part , I have not forgotten the time when , in 2004 , at the height of the crisis , I , as the then French Minister for Foreign Affairs , went to Al-Fashir in deepest Darfur , and what I heard and saw there .
That is why I am happy that I have been given this opportunity to comment on this situation on behalf of Baroness Ashton .
We are paying a great deal of attention to it and we are , of course , following the developments with great concern for what is happening today , while naturally deploring the many violations of human rights and the kidnapping of United Nations personnel .
That is why we expect all parties to embark on this peace process .
Naturally , we must support this peace process .
This is the objective of our political action , of everything that is being done to create stability and , even more specifically , of our humanitarian aid , of course .
Mr President , I wish to point out that , since 2003 , the European Union has contributed EUR 776 million to humanitarian cooperation with Sudan , in particular to Darfur , which badly needs it , and to Southern Sudan .
I would also like to point out or confirm that the Commission 's Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection department ( ECHO ) will remain proactive , and I wish to thank all the personnel who have worked alongside ECHO with regard to the reintegration of people returning to Southern Sudan from the North in cooperation with the United Nations .
As regards cooperation with Southern Sudan , the European Union will provide more assistance in this extremely specific area in order to promote a rural development and agricultural production capability , which these people so desperately need , so that they are not forever reliant on imports , which are becoming more expensive due to price volatility .
Those who know me know my unwavering commitment to this , today as Commissioner and previously in other capacities .
The Commission spoke about this issue at length in its communication this morning .
Therefore , in the vital areas of rural development , agricultural development , basic services , education and health , the Commission will continue to increase its assistance .
We are currently planning to create special funds of some EUR 150 million for the most vulnerable population groups in Sudan and , naturally , Southern Sudan .
That is what I wanted to say .
Very briefly , I would just like to make three further comments .
On the issue of citizenship , which has been raised by several Members of Parliament , I would like to say that we fully support the work carried out by the Panel led by President Mbeki , which is facilitating negotiations concerning future citizenship and other issues linked to this serious problem of citizenship .
Concerning the international tribunal , the European Union will continue to support the International Criminal Court without any reservations .
Time and again , we have called on all the authorities , in particular those of Sudan , to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court .
Mr President , I would like to say a final word on a subject that several of you have raised , that is to say , debt .
I would remind you of the Council 's latest conclusions , which were very clear : the European Union will support debt relief for this country by taking account , as other partners do , of the progress we are expecting , and which we want to accompany and encourage politically and economically in order to ensure the stability of the country .
These are the answers I wanted to give on behalf of Baroness Ashton .
The debate is closed .
in writing . - The situation in the whole of North Africa is indeed dangerous , yet at the same time hopeful .
The regional characteristics will require a special focus on humanitarian and military capacity in order to provide security and stability .
However , as we have seen that the EU is selling advanced military equipment such as Mistral warships to Russia , has anyone taken into consideration that Russia has yet to undergo such democratic revolutions ?
in writing . - ( DE ) The fact that , in the referendum , Southern Sudan voted in favour of a split was to be expected .
It was also to be expected that this would by no means put an end to the problems in the region .
For one thing , the South is still unstable and it must first prove itself as an independent state .
This may possibly happen before the projected date in July , because the loss of 25 % of the land area and 20 % of the population will not hit Northern Sudan nearly as hard as giving up a considerable proportion of the oil revenue .
For that reason , the EU must help the new state to maintain its independence and to protect its sovereignty , because development aid for Southern Sudan may also play an important role with regard to Europe 's oil supply in the future .
The EU should therefore take a leaf out of China 's book , particularly since Beijing is cleverly linking development aid to the supply of raw materials .
Thus , both sides profit from the Chinese model .
The problem of illegal migration to Europe must not be disregarded either .
An agreement must therefore be concluded with the government of Southern Sudan regarding the readmission of its own nationals who have entered the European Union illegally .
We will then have to watch closely to see whether Southern Sudan is actually prepared to fulfil this agreement .
Appointments of ESA senior executives ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the appointments of ESA senior executives .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner and the honourable Members - my dear ex-colleagues - for giving me the opportunity to comment , on behalf of the Council , on the appointment process of the chairs and executive directors of the new European Supervisory Authorities - the ESAs - and on the principles that should guide the performance of their duties .
The ESA regulations , which we adopted less than three months ago , give no specific role to the Council in the appointments of the chair and executive director of each ESA , which are made by the respective board of supervisors .
Hence , in accordance with the ESA regulations , the chairperson of each ESA is appointed by the board of supervisors .
Furthermore , the ESA regulations give a crucial role to the European Parliament , which has been granted the possibility of objecting to the appointment of those senior executives and of removing a chairperson from office following a decision of the board of supervisors .
Where , then , does the Council stand in this scenario ?
Well , the Council , as co-legislator , has agreed with Parliament to insert in these regulations provisions that aim to ensure that members of the board of supervisors - the management board - the chairperson and the executive director of each ESA are protected by , and bound to , strict independence so as to act solely in the interests of the Union .
I will not quote in full the provisions of those regulations , and more particularly Articles 42 , 46 , 49 and 52 , but their spirit is clear .
This is that neither the voting members of the boards , nor the chairperson or executive director , shall seek or take instructions from EU institutions or bodies , Member State governments or any public or private body , and that these , in turn , shall not seek to influence the chair or the executive director in the performance of their tasks .
The ESA regulations are subject to the staff regulations adopted by the EU institutions .
They also contain a number of key provisions that aim to ensure that the chair and executive director of each authority are selected in the most objective way , on the strict basis of the criteria set out in Articles 48 and 51 of the regulations .
Apart from the managerial experience specific to the executive director 's profile , I note that both those articles list as criteria ' merit , skills , knowledge of financial institutions and markets , and experience relevant to financial supervision and regulation ' .
As far as financing is concerned , the Council placed high ambitions on the ESAs when it adopted the regulations , and I am sure that was also the case with Parliament .
It now falls to both institutions , as budgetary authorities , to ensure that those ambitions are translated into the appropriate means each year , on the basis of the Commission 's budgetary proposal .
The Presidency also attaches great importance to all Member States fulfilling their obligations towards the new authorities .
For the Council , as co-legislator , it is essential that all the provisions of the regulations are implemented completely and faithfully .
We expect the European Commission , as the Guardian of the Treaties , to ensure that this is indeed the case .
As the honourable Members will be aware , the Commission is also entrusted , in recital 55 of the regulations , with the responsibility of drawing up a shortlist of candidates to steer the process of selecting the first chairperson of each authority .
Parliament and the Council agreed to this starting procedure when adopting the regulations .
I hope that the chairpersons will now be able to start their work .
It is of primary importance for the new agencies to be up and running as soon as possible .
They are an essential part of the EU 's response to the challenges posed by the financial crisis .
We cannot afford to wait , and I am sure I can count on the full support of Parliament to ensure the smooth establishment and running of the new agencies .
As a result of the good cooperation between Parliament and the Council , the EU has a brand new supervisory authority structure .
It is our common responsibility to ensure that ESAs get down to business as soon as possible .
As the representative of a Parliament-friendly Presidency , I am fully commited to working in maximum harmony with the European Parliament , and I also hope to be able to work with a Parliament that is a faithful partner .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has had a new supervisory system for the financial sector since 1 January .
This system , combined with the fundamental reform of the regulation of the markets and financial operators will enhance financial stability in the Union and , I believe , will expand opportunities and lay solid foundations for the financial industry , which is extremely important in our countries .
I would like to begin by congratulating the European Parliament on the key role it has played in this process for several years .
That we now have a more effective supervisory system for the financial sector and are drawing on the lessons of the crisis in this area , as in others , is largely due to the European Parliament .
We are now approaching the final stages of the creation of this new architecture of the three European Supervisory Authorities with the appointment of their chairpersons and executive directors in the next few days .
Ladies and gentlemen , these appointment procedures were conducted with complete transparency and in full compliance with the regulations that created the authorities as well as other rules governing the appointment of the heads of the regulatory agencies of the Union .
Approximately 275 applications were received for the six posts I have just spoken about .
They were all considered carefully and objectively .
The roles allocated to the different stakeholders , to the European Parliament , to the board of supervisors , and to the Commission itself were scrupulously adhered to .
In the future , we will continue to ensure that the process is transparent and properly planned so as to enable the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ( ECON ) of the European Parliament to play its very important role to the best possible effect .
This Parliament has made , and continues to make , big demands of these authorities , and I think it is right to do so .
It is making demands that I can understand .
Like Parliament , the Commission takes the view that the chairpersons and executive directors of these authorities must be chosen on the basis of merit , experience , independence , their commitment to Europe and their knowledge of issues linked to the supervision and regulation of financial markets .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is the spirit in which the selection procedures under way have thus far been conducted on the basis of the applications we have received .
In addition , since Parliament and the Council decided , in Article 68 of the regulations creating these authorities , that the chairpersons and executive directors would be subject to the rules applicable to the staff of the institutions of the Union , the Commission has ensured that that is what is happening and that , in this area as in others , the regulations are being complied with .
Ladies and gentlemen , you have expressed concerns with regard to the salaries and the maximum age of the senior managers of these authorities .
In this respect , we have explored all avenues in order to obtain maximum flexibility and this issue may , if necessary , be re-examined when the functioning of the authorities is reviewed , which is scheduled for the end of 2013 .
I also endorse the intention of this Parliament to achieve the optimal gender balance at the head of these authorities .
In the preselection procedure the Commission rigorously applied the principle of equal opportunities on the basis of the applications that were registered .
I note in this regard that , in the latest process for the appointment of the executive directors , which is ongoing and has not yet been completed , two very able women are in contention for a post as executive director .
I fully agree with Parliament that we need strong authorities , which are independent of political or other interference .
The chairpersons , executive directors , and voting members of the different boards must be completely independent and act solely in the interest of the Union .
Parliament and the Council have enshrined this principle in the regulations creating the authorities , in particular in Articles 42 , 46 , 49 and 52 , which Minister Győri referred to just now .
The Commission , as the guardian of EU law , will totally and fully assume its responsibilities to ensure that these Articles are rigorously complied with .
I would add that the Commission will be present in the governing bodies of the authorities and that , in this regard , it will , of course , be vigilant so as to ensure that any decision that is taken in the interest of the Union .
As regards the composition of the board of supervisors , the Commission has already highlighted the legal necessity and the political importance of ensuring that these boards are composed of the heads of the competent national authorities .
I have personally written to the authorities to clarify this point , where it needed clarifying .
Some national authorities have since modified their representation .
Others still have to do so .
You can rest assured that the Commission will keep this point under very close scrutiny and will be inflexible .
The composition of the boards of the authorities must fully respect your wishes and those of the legislator in general , and I will personally see to it that the heads of the national authorities are actually present at least , and I repeat , at least twice a year in accordance with Article 40 of the regulations that created these authorities .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I endorse the intention of this Parliament to ensure that these authorities have the necessary financial and human resources to perform their duties in a credible fashion .
The budgetary authority can count on the technical support of the Commission to ensure coherence between , on the one hand , the responsibilities assigned to these authorities and , on the other hand , naturally , the resources allocated to them to assume these responsibilities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is now essential that the procedures to appoint and confirm the chairpersons and executive directors of these authorities are completed successfully .
These authorities need to get down to work .
I can assure you that , every day , I have proof of the usefulness of these new authorities , since we currently consult them on an almost daily basis .
The tasks that these authorities have to assume in cooperation with the European Systemic Risk Board are of the utmost importance .
We wanted them to be fully operational from 1 January .
It is now the responsibility of each of us , in our own particular role , to allow them to perform their task swiftly and under good conditions .
To achieve this , they need the full support of your institution .
I wish to reaffirm here that , for its part , the Commission will ensure that the intention of the legislator is fully respected and that these authorities work exclusively and solely in the interest of the European Union .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Mr Barnier , this debate right now is not a legal debate ; it is a true political debate .
It is a debate on the future of financial regulation in Europe .
It is the culmination of one aspect of the work conducted by Parliament , with the Council , under the guidance of the Commission .
I am therefore going to be quite clear .
For us , it is not about indulging in some sort of revolution or showing our biceps just for fun .
It is about ensuring that the spirit that presided over the agreements between the Council and Parliament is , in fact , respected .
It is not a lesson in law .
The texts do not matter .
We know the texts .
What matters is the way in which these texts will be put into effect .
In this regard , I would like to thank the Commissioner for the clarity of his speech .
We have never sought to call the Commission into question , and the words spoken by the Commissioner are totally in accordance with the wishes of Parliament .
We are talking here about a political act that consists in saying : ' These institutions have been established , so we must give them the concrete resources to function properly . '
Yet , I think that we do not simply have doubts but also suspicions about the way in which these provisions have in fact been implemented by a number of Member States , by those that wish to unravel European supervision and prevent financial regulation at European level .
That is what we are speaking out against , because we believe that , if that had been the case , we would have been cheated in the negotiations on supervision .
The negotiations were long ; they were difficult .
Everyone made compromises .
The Belgian Presidency did some remarkable work and the Commissioner provided extraordinary impetus .
Today , we could be faced with institutions without effective power : due to the low status of the staff appointed ; due to the fact that the Member States did not choose the best , and perhaps because the salaries were not attractive .
In any event , today Parliament needs a concrete answer .
Minister , I am bound to say that , despite the friendship that I feel for you , having sat on the same bench , in the same group and on the same committee as you , the letter , which I have seen and which , I admit , is only a first draft , is inadequate .
I will give you the response of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
It is simple .
You say , on behalf of the Council , that you fully endorse what the Commissioner has just said .
I can tell you that , for us , this will be a satisfactory declaration .
The statement made by the Commissioner is precise .
It deals with problems of human and financial resources .
Your letter needs to state : ' We agree with virtually everything the Commissioner said ' .
Mrs Győri , this is very important .
We agree with virtually everything the Commissioner said in plenary this evening .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , why are we here ?
Mr Barnier said that we are here because the European Parliament has succeeded in establishing European supervisory authorities that are worthy of the name .
That was not part of the Council 's programme .
It was not part of the Member States ' programme .
The Commission , too , had doubts about how long we would actually persevere with regard to the establishment of this new institution .
The Council will understand - it will have to understand - and the Commission will , too - possibly even of its own accord - why we are concerned .
No , this European Parliament - and this is a statement that I find applies to all party groups , not just to us as Social Democrats - will not allow national games to be played that undermine the powers of these new supervisory authorities .
That is why we are interested in the appointment of staff , of course .
We have rights in this regard - we have to be consulted .
There are one or two things that in fact give us cause for concern .
We receive lists of individuals and we receive lists , which when we look at we cannot actually tell whether a gender criterion has been applied .
We are given proposals for candidates , which when we consider - and I say this with all due respect to the people concerned - we do not see anyone that we believe could not do a decent job .
These are clearly good people who have already shown in their jobs that they can do their work well , but the people that have been presented to us are not people who , on the basis of any authority that they may have demonstrated in their past work , can actually say to the national supervisory authorities where they would stand in the event of a conflict .
Where there is European supervision , national momentum comes to a standstill .
That surprises and annoys us , and it must call us into action .
No , these procedures are unsatisfactory , and I ask myself why , for example , we cannot take the same approach as we are taking with regard to those responsible for OLAF , where you are of course interested in the opinion of this House .
Why can we not do that ?
We still have another opportunity with regard to the executive directors .
You can still demonstrate that you are interested in the opinion of the European Parliament .
You still have another opportunity .
I would urge you both - President-in-Office of the Council and former fellow Member Mrs Győri and Commissioner Barnier , to take this opportunity .
You can take on board the objections of this House .
You can tell us very clearly how you want to work with us in future .
You can tell us very clearly what goals you will support in the 2013 reform and how you will equip the institutions .
You will also be able to make it very clear whether you are interested in our opinion in respect of those members of staff that are still to be appointed .
I therefore ask you in all earnestness in the interests of Europe to provide these rules quickly .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , thank you for being with us this evening .
We are well aware that there was limited time available , so we thank you even more for having begun to answer us .
I think it is important to put our motivation clearly into perspective , as my fellow Members have done .
What motivates us is that we have fought collectively for months to ensure that there is a ' before the crisis ' and an ' after the crisis ' , that , in this internal market , which has facilitated the expansion of financial services and banking activities , and we are entirely in favour of all the cross-border work done by the sector , common rules and supervision are brought into line .
To be frank , during the negotiations - and with the support of the Commission moreover - it became very clear to us that we were being troublemakers .
We saw all too clearly that there were some Member States that wanted to remain in control of the supervision and did not want anyone to poke their noses into their business .
Mrs Győri , you tell us that the Council has no say in the appointment of these officials , which is legally correct , but some Member States are lying in ambush .
Moreover , the Commissioner pointed out that his departments had to tell some countries to send pre-eminent people .
Therefore , this Parliament is doing its work , in trying to ensure independence , resources and the resolve to move forward .
We are , of course , aware of our responsibilities .
We , more than anyone else , want these authorities to set to work , since we have contributed personally to their emergence .
We have no desire to delay their work ; I am thinking , for example , of the bank stress tests , which are so important .
However , the simple fact is that , as has been pointed out , we will be demanding , we are going to sleep on the issue and take the necessary time to look in detail at what you have told us , each of you in turn , and we will take a decision with a clear conscience .
I would like to thank Mr Barnier for having made some very clear statements and I would ask you , Mrs Győri , not to be naive .
There is a lot at stake .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in my view , this is a question of making the best possible use of the possibilities provided by the law to actually provide strong financial supervision in Europe , and we have our doubts about whether these possibilities are in fact being utilised to the best possible extent in the institutions .
We are seeing shortcomings in the procedure .
As Parliament , we have so far not been able to see the list of candidates in advance , but only the finished result .
It would be very easy to send us this list now for the executive directors .
We quite clearly have a lack of gender equality when it comes to filling the posts , and , due to certain events during the process , we have our doubts about whether the Member States will in fact fill the posts in this institution in the interests of Europe .
That and the other points in our letter entitle us to ask a fundamental question .
However , over and above this there is , of course , also the question of the suitability of the individuals , and in this regard each person has to be assessed individually on the basis of their skills .
We see two major problems with this .
In the hearings , we found that one of the candidates disputed the fact that this was a European institution , but talked instead about a network of supervisory authorities , and even when asked about it he was not prepared to correct this .
We did not receive any clear responses when we asked them whether they were prepared to make all lobbyist contact with the financial industry transparent .
We have sent a letter to all three candidates , and as far as we are concerned the outcome of the vote is dependent on whether we receive clear and comprehensive responses to this .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , the ECR welcomes the opportunity to discuss these issues in the Chamber this evening .
I would like to make it clear that our group believes that all three candidates for chairing the ESA , as presented to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs yesterday , are fully qualified and competent to fulfil the important roles involved .
Any comments I make this evening are purely about the process that has been followed to get to this point .
I would ask , therefore , that future selection processes aim to recruit candidates from the broadest possible pool of talent in order to ensure independent thought and a new diversity in the senior management of such authorities .
To that end , salary scales need to be appropriate to the expected seniority of those roles .
Unnecessary age restrictions , or any other criteria outside technical skills and competence , should be avoided at all costs .
We can do a little better than we have done this time in terms of the process and the transparency that could be applied with respect to Parliament .
I hope that note is taken of this in the future .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I believe there is no need for these agency supervisor posts because I believe there is no need for the agencies themselves .
Is creating another level of supervision called ESMA going to represent an improvement compared with existing supervisory authorities ?
I believe that , by doing this , we are only going to cause confusion about who is responsible for what .
Will the supervisory authority produce regulations suitable for the world 's largest financial district ?
I doubt it .
I think , instead , that the pet theories of the anti-market crowd will be adopted and forced upon the City of London .
The problems caused by financial activity in recent years were due to rule books being either torn up or ignored by those whose job it was to enforce them .
There is no guarantee that these authorities will do anything better .
Moreover , we have been presented with only one candidate for each post - a totally undemocratic exercise .
Of course , it is the same that was used to appoint the President of the Commission , the rest of the Commissioners and the High Representative .
I could go on with a long list .
I encourage you all to vote against these or any other candidates .
Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I will be brief , as I have expressed myself as sincerely and as clearly as possible .
I have carefully weighed each word of my statement , which will be confirmed in writing in a letter that I have co-signed with Vice-President Šefčovič so that things are extremely clear .
In response to each of your speeches , which I thank you for , I would simply like to mention three issues .
The first issue concerns the independence and the authority of the chairpersons of the authorities .
I am very pleased with , but not surprised by , the total commitment of Parliament , which is shared by the Commission , to defend this independence and this authority and to ensure that they are respected over time .
It is crucial and it is what is important for the future , bearing in mind the multitude of tasks and the seriousness of the tasks that these authorities are going to face .
Earlier , the issues of the rating agencies and the stress tests were raised .
These are issues for which we are going to need the authorities and their credibility .
This is the first point I wanted to make , on which Parliament and the Commission , of course , and , I hope and believe , the Council , can agree .
The second point is that of the selection procedure .
Ladies and gentlemen , I remember the discussions at the trilogues , where this procedure was the subject of numerous debates and , finally , of agreement among the co-legislators .
It is what it is and it doubtless has its shortcomings .
I personally brought in the rendez-vous clause to improve it .
I have no reason - and I say this to you in all conscience - to think that it has not enabled good candidates to be selected .
I have no reason to question the motives of the candidates chosen .
After I had received the shortlists and met each of the candidates in person , I personally took responsibility for establishing an order according to what I felt , in all conscience , were the most useful and the most credible criteria .
However , in order to find these good candidates , we relied on the lists given to us and the 275 applications from the regulatory authorities of the Member States .
We have a rendez-vous clause to improve these procedures , which undoubtedly can be improved .
But I would like to say , in all conscience , that , as far as I am concerned , I have no reason to say or to think that we have not selected good candidates , who are capable of living up to their responsibilities .
Finally , there is a third point , which a number of you have raised , which is that of the level of representation of the authorities .
The Commission will always ensure that this representation is in full compliance with the regulations and at the highest level .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to the European Parliament for supporting us in this absolutely crucial issue , which is also one of the keys to credibility .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that is what I wanted to say , before we all retire to sleep on it , as a previous speaker said .
That is what I wanted to give you as an assurance , as a concern , which I would like to express personally on behalf of all the Commissioners , for vigilance to ensure that these authorities succeed .
This will provide genuine European supervision , which will not replace national supervisory authorities but make them work together more effectively , which will have its own powers when facing challenges and risks , which are now clearly transnational .
We needed , and we now largely have , thanks to you , these three radar screens , these three authorities in addition to the European Systemic Risk Board .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is now necessary for everyone to get swiftly to work because , frankly , I note that the markets are moving very quickly , much more quickly than us , in this , our time of democracy , and the authorities need to work very quickly .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , honourable Members , first let me answer the question which came up very often in this debate : will the Council agree to review the appointment procedure in the regulation ?
Well I know that the same recital states , for the subsequent designations of the chairpersons , that the opportunity of having a shortlist drawn up by the Commission should be reviewed in a report .
I also know that Article 81 of the regulation also makes provision for the review by the Commission to be sent to the European Parliament and the Council by 2 January 2014 and every three years thereafter .
So this will give us an opportunity to improve the regulation in due time on the basis of practical experience , and in this spirit I look forward to a constructive dialogue between our institutions to pave the way for the future assessment .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Madam President , the speeches delivered by the Commissioner and me were framed by our respective competences .
We received the letter of the Chair of the Economic Committee , and both of us tried to answer questions fitting into our respective competences .
I tried to convince you that there are guarantees of independence and , in the creation of the budget , the task of the Council and Parliament , as the two institutions having financial responsibility , is to ensure that these institutions are in operating condition .
As such , it seems to me that there is clear task sharing and unambiguous commitment on the part of all institutions .
The letter sent today by the Chair of ECOFIN , Minister György Matolcsy , in reply to the letter sent by the Chair of ECON this morning , was written in this spirit , and I trust that , along with the Commission 's opinion , you will find it to be a satisfactory response .
The Council and the Presidency-in-Office fully support this .
This was the question of Mr Gauzès , which the Commission answered regarding the topics within its competence .
I therefore hope that , after this , there will be no obstacles to Parliament supporting the candidates tomorrow , and the supervisory authorities will finally be able to commence their work .
Three motions for resolutions to wind up the debate have been tabled under Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 : 30 .
Written Statement ( Rule 149 )
This Parliament has made an important contribution to the creation of the new European Financial Supervisory Authorities .
Hence it wants to emphasise its role this evening , also , and it calls on the Council and the Commission to pledge to ensure that the Authorities operate independently and have the personnel and the resources they need .
This applies no matter who is appointed .
The candidates for the posts of chairpersons of the ESAs have , in fact , proven to be competent and professional , and I am sure that they will be able to carry out the role in an impartial and more than satisfactory manner .
I think it is crucial to support the candidates and to ensure that these Authorities are in a position to start work as soon as possible , since there are many problems to resolve and they require immediate action .
It was this requirement which prompted us to create the Authorities and which we shall have to remember tomorrow during the vote .
Agreements on trade in bananas - Repeal of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 on the tariff rates for bananas - Agreements on trade in bananas ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the recommendation by Francesca Balzani on behalf of the Committee on International Trade on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of a Geneva Agreement on Trade in Bananas between the European Union and Brazil , Colombia , Costa Rica , Ecuador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua , Panama , Peru and Venezuela and of an Agreement on Trade in Bananas between the European Union and the United States of America [ 07782 / 2010 - C7-0148 / 2010 - 2010 / 0057 ( NLE ) ] ,
the report by Francesca Balzani on behalf of the Committee on International Trade on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 on the tariff rates for bananas - C7-0074 / 2010 - ,
the question for oral answer to the Council on the conclusion of a Geneva Agreement on Trade in Bananas by Vital Moreira and Francesca Balzani on behalf of the Committee on International Trade - B7-0007 / 2011 ) , and
the question for oral answer to the Commission on the conclusion of a Geneva Agreement on Trade in Bananas by Vital Moreira and Francesca Balzani on behalf of the Committee on International Trade - B7-0008 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament has been called upon to express its opinion on two agreements that have been signed with the United States and with 11 Latin American countries , which will draw a line under a long and difficult affair .
This affair has witnessed the European Union challenged at the World Trade Organisation , and more importantly has witnessed it as the losing party .
It is a thorny issue , as the disputes relate to the principle of non-discrimination in international trade , which Europe has been accused of breaching in the way in which banana imports are organised within the Union .
This is because we have a two-track system in that we apply one system to African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries and a different system to other countries .
This system allowed ACP countries to bring this product to the European market without paying any import duty , unlike other countries , which have to pay a duty of EUR 176 per tonne .
This agreement therefore brings the situation back into balance and most importantly allows ACP countries , which are in a fragile state of development , to export their products to the EU duty-free .
At the same time , the other countries that have signed the agreements will be able to export bananas to the EU subject to the payment of import duties , which however will be gradually reduced over the period 2011-2017 from the current rate of EUR 176 per tonne to EUR 114 per tonne .
However , as well as finally bringing the EU back into line with its commitments as a member of the World Trade Organisation and therefore in some ways restoring its credibility , including as an institution , the most important aspect is that these agreements make allowances for ACP countries in a vulnerable state of development , as they provide for instruments to give them financial support .
These instruments will allow those countries to invest in diversifying their production and will therefore hopefully strengthen their economies .
At present , these measures , worth EUR 190 million , are to be provided until 2013 .
I believe that these agreements are a positive step , not only because they draw a line under disputes in which the EU has been the losing party , with the ensuing consequences in economic and disciplinary terms and in terms of its institutional credibility as I already mentioned , but also because they lead to a balanced solution that respects the needs both of these ACP countries and of European producers in the outermost regions , who certainly cannot be abandoned to unbridled competition .
I therefore propose that Parliament should approve these agreements , whilst asking the Council and Commission for firm commitments .
In the first instance , they should provide , as quickly as possible , for an evaluation of the impact that these agreements will have between now and 2020 - quite a long timescale , therefore - on ACP countries and on European producers in the outermost regions , whose economies are closely tied to bananas .
Secondly , Parliament should ask for a firm commitment to evaluating the effects of the financial accompanying measures earmarked for the ACP countries eighteen months before they are due to end .
This would ensure that those countries could receive further assistance and support measures if necessary , so that they are not left to go it alone and are supported in combating , counteracting and mitigating to some degree any negative consequences that the entry into force of these agreements may have within the European Union due to the price adjustments and hence to changes in the competitiveness of bananas from other countries .
I therefore believe that by resolving a tricky issue this agreement definitely provides a way out that also takes into consideration the needs of those weaker countries which , as I have already said , have always been our main concern , including during the long debate we had in the Committee on International Trade .
I hope they will find strong support and a favourable solution in these accompanying measures , in particular in terms of monitoring and the commitment , which Parliament is asking of the Commission and Council , to look at the impacts of the agreement and the effects of the aid measures , and to extend and increase them if necessary in the future .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( IT ) Madam President , Mrs Balzani , ladies and gentlement , I would like to thank you very much for having given the Presidency-in-Office of the Council and the Council the opportunity to speak on this issue , which is important both from the point of view of international trade and from the point of view of solidarity and development .
I hope to be able to reply to the questions asked by Mr Moreira and to address the misgivings and concerns which Mrs Balzani has mentioned .
If I may , I will now continue in Hungarian .
( HU ) As regards the livelihood of banana producers in the EU and in ACP countries , the Council is aware that banana production is of fundamental social and economic importance to the banana-growing regions of the EU .
The draft regulation stipulates that the Banana Accompanying Measures programme must be evaluated 18 months prior to the programme 's expiry .
However , ladies and gentlemen , as you are aware , the preparation of this evaluation report and any further proposals falls within the competence of the Commission , and not the Council , but I am sure that Commissioner Cioloş will elaborate on this .
The same applies to the impact assessments referred to in the question for oral answer .
The implementation of the Banana Accompanying Measures covering the ACP countries requires an amendment of the regulations on the EU 's set of foreign relations instruments .
In the interest of the beneficiary countries , the Council is counting on the constructive cooperation of the European Parliament in resolving the institutional issues that are currently delaying the adoption of the required provisions .
As regards the distribution of resources allocated to the Banana Accompanying Measures between the beneficiary countries , the Council , in its position adopted in the first reading , expressed support for the draft regulation on the Banana Accompanying Measures , which lays down unambiguous indicators and criteria for distribution .
These indicators are the following : the volume of banana trade with the EU , the importance of banana exports to the economy of the ACP country concerned , and the level of development of the country .
Concerning the POSEI programme , the Commission submitted a draft regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on 24 September 2010 , which lays down individual agricultural measures for the outermost regions of the EU .
The proposal is currently being examined by the preparatory bodies of the Council .
As regards the banana duties discussed under the free trade agreements to be concluded by the Commission with Columbia , Peru and Central America , I would like to stress that the Council has not yet formed an opinion on these agreements , and I therefore cannot relay its official position to you at this point .
The EU began negotiations with the entire Andean Community with a view to creating an interregional association agreement .
The talks were suspended in June 2008 , because the Andean countries could not agree on the objectives and content of the chapter on trade .
New negotiations began in January 2009 with the willing Andean countries , namely Columbia , Ecuador and Peru , in order to reach a multilateral free trade agreement .
After Ecuador suspended its participation in July 2009 , talks continued with Peru and Columbia .
The European Commission closed its negotiations with Peru and Columbia on 1 March 2010 .
The multilateral agreement negotiated with these two countries is open for other members of the Andean Community , including Ecuador , to join .
In the past months , Ecuador has also indicated officially that it is ready to resume negotiations and join the multilateral agreement .
The Council welcomes this decision .
If negotiations with Ecuador continue , the level of ambition of obligations in the field of market opening must reflect the level of ambition of the obligations negotiated with Columbia and Peru .
In conclusion , I therefore ask the honourable Members to give their consent to the conclusion of the banana agreement , and also to vote tomorrow for the proposal to repeal the regulation establishing banana duties .
I am counting on your cooperation and would like to thank you for your attention .
Madam President , Mrs Győri , Mrs Balzani , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I am delighted to note that the main aspects and the general orientation of the Commission 's proposal on bananas have been supported by the rapporteur .
Furthermore , Mrs Balzani gave a very good introductory presentation of the context in which these negotiations have taken place and in which this agreement has been signed .
The Commission unreservedly supports the conclusions of the rapporteur 's draft recommendation and the draft report on this issue .
It is true that the 2009 Geneva Agreements on bananas are very important , and Mrs Balzani emphasised very well the reasons why this is so .
I would also like to point out that these agreements will bring peace on this thorny subject , and that they will also facilitate the Doha process and bring about the conditions necessary for establishing a stable European banana market , one which will be predictable over the coming years .
I would like to come back to some of the most important issues raised by the rapporteur and the MEPs in their oral or written questions , as well as those in the motion for a resolution which forms part of the package .
As regards the support given to European Union producers , I am very aware of the essential socioeconomic role of banana production in the European Union regions concerned - particularly the outermost regions - and of concerns about the economic viability of banana production in these regions .
In a recent report on the POSEI system , submitted to the European Parliament and the Council in September 2010 , the Commission explains the consequences of the Geneva Agreements and the fact that these consequences have already been integrated into the 2006 reform of the system applicable to bananas .
In order to protect European Union producers in a context of increased liberalisation , the budget for the banana sector was increased considerably , and the impact assessment carried out at the time took into account the fact that tariffs had fallen more than had been agreed .
Nonetheless , the Commission has shown that it is willing to keep a close eye on the impact of the agreements on the market and , if need be , to take the measures necessary to mitigate their effects .
On the question of strengthening the position of banana producers in the sector , I would like to emphasise firstly that this question is not unique to the banana sector , but applies to the entire agro-food sector .
These problems in the producer sector - problems with negotiating power and the distribution of added value along the food supply chain - affect other sectors too .
In order to address this , furthermore , as part of the reform of the common agricultural policy , the Commission will table proposals to strengthen producers ' organisations , their role in the sector and their negotiating power .
Moreover , the Commission has created a High Level Group for the Agro-Food Industry bringing together several Commissioners who can table proposals along these lines - because the responsibility and power of the Commissioner for Agriculture is limited , but there are four Commissioners who participate in these groups and run these High Level Groups - a High Level Group with a road map and with proposals , and the Commission will table these in the next few months and years in order to try to respond to this issue of transparency in the food supply chain and negotiating power .
Thus , in this context , banana producers in the sector will be able to benefit from it .
As regards the distribution of financial resources for the ACP Banana Accompanying Measures , as you know , the draft regulation establishing the BAM was approved by the European Parliament on 21 October , and it lays down conditions for the distribution of these resources .
Therefore , the criteria that you have asked for are already in place and , what is more , the results and the distribution of this envelope are already in place .
On this subject , the Commission has worked in close and fruitful collaboration with the European Parliament , and we have reached a good compromise on the content concerning this point .
The draft regulation intended to provide this support for the ACP countries has , moreover , been approved by the European Parliament , and it also defines the allocation criteria for the various beneficiary countries , but in addition provides what you are asking for here - an assessment of the market conditions in these countries , 18 months before the programme expires .
This assessment will give us an indication of whether the adaptation processes are going well , or if we might have to envisage other measures .
As regards the impact assessment concerning the effects of the agreements on banana producers in developing countries and the outermost regions of Europe up to 2020 , I am indeed prepared to contemplate such an analysis if it proves necessary .
However , we must also be realistic about the scope of the study , because it is aimed at a large number of banana-producing countries across the world - as well as a large number of countries in which bananas are a staple food - and it will therefore be difficult to conduct this study and to draw conclusions from it .
Nevertheless , I am prepared to undertake a study of this kind , or to use any data on internal or external studies that the Commission already has at its disposal .
As I have already said , we will carry out an assessment of the effects of the BAM on the ACP countries 18 months before the programme expires .
Finally , regarding the negotiations on a free trade agreement with certain Latin American countries , in particular Ecuador , you will doubtless be aware that the negotiations on the trade agreement with Colombia and Peru and with the Central American countries have been concluded at a technical level .
The agreement with Colombia and Peru can also be applied to other member countries of the Andean Community , including Ecuador , if it wishes to return to these negotiations .
Ecuador has , incidentally , made an official request to return to negotiations on the trade agreement , and the Ecuadorean administration and the Commission are currently examining the possibility of restarting negotiations and thus the possibility of seeking an agreement on the steps to take .
Those are the few comments that I wanted to make in relation to your report and to the issues that you have raised .
I have spoken somewhat at length , but I wanted to answer those questions that I could from the outset .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( FR ) Madam President , one of the provisions of international law is the principle of non-discrimination .
That is very good .
In theory , it cannot be faulted .
The reality is slightly different .
The ACP countries do not pay import duties on bananas if they export to the European Union .
This is an agreement - an acquis - and this agreement changes nothing about this fact .
Non-ACP countries , on the other hand , which until now paid EUR 176 per tonne , will see their import duties fall to EUR 141 .
Reducing import duties by EUR 35 also changes the situation with regard to competition .
The ACP countries , which received greater protection until now , will receive slightly less protection in future .
The Commission negotiated this agreement on behalf of the European Union .
For me , as rapporteur for the opinion , the question is whether it could have acted any differently .
My answer is very clear : it could not .
If it had acted differently , if it had refused to enter into these negotiations , the issue would have been adjudicated by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO .
It is fair to say that the results would have doubtless been different from those achieved during the negotiations being discussed here .
Does that mean that all 's well that ends well ?
Certainly not .
I am rapporteur for the opinion on this agreement , and I am also rapporteur on the Banana Accompanying Measures , and I will present the report tomorrow at second reading .
I will make the following comments on this issue .
First , the budget for the banana sector has been increased considerably .
As the Commissioner has just reminded us , this is very good - I acknowledge that .
This also answers a question by Mrs De Sarnez , who is very concerned about the situation that has just been created for banana producers in overseas départements and in the outermost regions .
Second , another concern that Mrs De Sarnez and I myself have , and that is also expressed within our Committee on Development , is that the downward trend will not end with the EUR 114 , because the Commission is currently negotiating other agreements which will bring the figure down to well below EUR 114 .
There is even talk of EUR 75 .
Therefore , in accordance with the principle of non-discrimination , we will also have to monitor this downward trend , which is very worrying .
Third , as regards the Banana Accompanying Measures - which I will talk about in more detail tomorrow morning - I believe that Parliament has succeeded - and I thank the Commissioner for emphasising this point - in introducing some new things , in particular the impact assessment that will take place 18 months before the programme expires .
That will allow us to look a bit beyond 2013 as well , because I do not believe that the problem in the banana sector will be resolved by 2013 .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , on behalf of the PPE Group , I urge the European Parliament to give the green light to this very important agreement .
We believe that this will facilitate the Doha Round negotiations and also provide an impetus to our bilateral negotiations with the Mercosur countries on a free trade agreement .
We welcome the overall trend towards liberalisation of the global trade in bananas , including the current WTO agreement , as well as bilateral agreements with the Central American and Andean countries , and possibly one day with Mercosur .
The motion for a resolution - and I pay tribute for this to our rapporteur - is a well-balanced one , especially since we have taken into account the interests of our partners from the ACP countries , as well as local European banana producers .
It is my deep conviction that , while we move towards greater liberalisation of the global trade in bananas , we should make sure that we do not wipe out industries or sectors that have traditionally played important economic and social roles in certain European regions , such as the Canary Islands , Guadeloupe , Martinique , Madeira , the Azores and others .
Finally , we hope the Commission will take these concerns into account and will take steps to adjust the support package for domestic EU producers earmarked in the POSEI envelope and , if necessary , take other steps in order to ensure that , in parallel to the trend of liberalisation of the global trade in bananas , domestic EU producers are able to remain on the market and foster their traditional activities .
A good opportunity to do that will be during the discussions on the next EU financial perspective .
Mr President , we all know the meaning of ' banana republic ' .
It is a country in which the large banana-producing companies make and break governments at their will .
When governments inconvenience them by trying to retain minimum government rights or increase basic wages , they even use coups against them .
In these countries , the same companies continue to produce bananas .
The destruction of forests and the environment , the miserable working conditions and the use of pesticides banned in the European Union are daily occurrences .
At the same time , because of these multinationals , 99 % of the bananas we eat are one species , even though there are several thousand species of banana , and this species is at risk of a specific disease as a result of single crop farming .
The measures to support the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries were very important and reducing them would have a serious impact on producers in those countries .
These are very poor countries that need our help .
The European Union is , globally , the biggest and the most profitable banana market .
Over coming years , we shall indeed see these huge multinationals trying to gain absolute control of the EU market by ousting smaller producers , and this is honestly where we need to pay attention .
The Commission needs to be on the alert to ensure that European competition laws are complied with to the letter , so that we can prevent the large multinationals from abusing their dominant position on the market by artificially depressing prices to start with , in order to oust small producers , and then creating cartels and increasing prices , so that they become very expensive to European consumers .
Madam President , as regards the approval of the trade agreements in the banana sector , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will vote against .
These agreements are aimed at opening up the banana market by strengthening the dominant position of the large US multinationals , which already control more than 80 % of the world market .
If we approve agreements of this type , we will be acting against the interests , in particular , of the ACP countries , the outermost regions and Ecuador .
Once again , small producers will be the ones who suffer .
There must be an urgent , radical overhaul of international trade rules to guarantee food sovereignty and the development of local production for all .
The financial measures proposed by the European Commission to support these producers are insufficient .
The European Union must not only ensure that an impact assessment is carried out in relation to these agreements ; it must also amend its legislation accordingly so as to promote sustainable production and sustainable economies .
Madam President , in my opinion , these agreements are not positive .
They provide a demonstration of how small banana producers , in the ACP countries and the outermost regions , have been taken hostage in the agreements concluded in 2009 in Geneva and in the Doha negotiations which are taking place today , agreements and negotiations which the World Trade Organisation desired and imposed .
It is true that the fate of small producers in the ACP countries and the outermost regions counts for very little given the powerful interests which are at stake - not only the interests of the Latin American giants , but also those of the European Union .
The reform of the banana market and the reform of the sugar market are basically expressions of the same inexorable shift towards a large global market , which , unfortunately , is crushing the weakest and most fragile .
Furthermore , Madam President , the compensation measures envisaged will not be enough to ultimately prevent the ruin that lies in store for small planters , nor to lead the ACP countries , which are some of the poorest countries around , towards genuine development .
In fact , we are being urged to sign these agreements in order to save the Doha negotiations .
If only our leaders were urged to show the same willingness to save global agreements aimed at the protection of the environment and the upwards harmonisation of workers ' rights and living standards .
If this were the case , then I believe that people would be much less hesitant about globalisation than they are today .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , this banana is the stuff of war - an EU-inspired trade war with America that has lasted 16 years and has now been lost spectacularly .
The EU has now been fined nearly USD 200 million by the World Trade Organisation and been forced to drop its illegal tariffs - all because of the protectionism that lies at the heart of the EU , in this case protection of French colonies .
May I say that this very banana which I bought today in the European Parliament supermarket is illegal !
It does not conform to EU rules in terms of the length , the width and the straightness of bananas .
What is going on ?
With such barmy protectionism and such silly rules as this , one has to ask : is the European Union crazy or has it merely gone bananas ?
. - ( NL ) Madam President , for decades , the European Union has been pursuing a protectionist trade policy , and that applies to bananas , amongst other things .
The purpose of our import tax is to keep Latin American bananas out , while at the same time we hand out subsidies to exporting countries who are competitively weak .
Most of these subsidies , nearly EUR 300 million a year , go to the outermost regions of the European Union : this is sheer protectionism , over which the EU has had its knuckles rapped many times by the WTO .
The European Union is all too keen to present itself as an advocate of international law and free trade , always ready to wag the moral finger at others .
However , when it comes to the European Union , we prefer to turn a blind eye .
Everything is permitted as long as the unprofitable banana industry on islands such as French Guiana , the Azores and the Canary Islands is protected .
We seem all too keen to tolerate the fact that the European taxpayer is having to foot a bill amounting to hundreds of millions of euros every year on such wasteful subsidies .
It is high time that we abolished this European mismanagement and that the European Union stopped subsidising this economic inefficiency .

( ES ) Madam President , I would respectfully inform Mr Campbell Bannerman that his banana is not from the Canary Islands .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am going to talk about bananas in this plenary sitting and I think that it is positive that bananas are being talked about here .
It is positive because it is important to reiterate the need for EU banana producers to be protected , including those in the Canaries .
I think this because I believe that the conclusion of the Geneva Agreement on Trade in Bananas is not good news for EU producers .
Moreover , there are aspects of the resolution that we are debating today that are not completely satisfactory from the point of view of agriculture and of protecting EU banana producers .
However , I am aware that this proposal originates with the Committee on International Trade , whose criteria relating to several issues are very different from those that I am able to have .
I will therefore assess the positive aspects of the proposal and not the negative ones .
It is positive that it brings to a close so many years of disputes in the World Trade Organisation , thus restoring tranquillity to a sector that needs certainty and stability for the future above all else .
EU producers belong to the outermost regions , which have enormous problems producing bananas - or excellent-quality ones , anyway - and whose banana production is nothing like that in third countries in any respect , including in terms of cost , workforce , the environment or of plant protection safeguards .
From an agricultural point of view , it is important to stress that the agreement is damaging to EU producers .
We are facing drastic cuts in tariffs , from EUR 176 to EUR 114 per tonne and EUR 75 per tonne in the case of the agreements with Colombia and Peru .
Therefore , Commissioner , with all due respect , I can tell you that it is not credible that there were provisions for this drop in tariffs in the financial detail of the 2006 Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) , because it is not true .
The Commissioner said that it was provided for in relation to the Geneva Agreement ; let us bear in mind that this tariff is EUR 114 .
There could never have been provision in 2006 for the tariff to decrease to EUR 75 as there is following these agreements .
I therefore believe that the necessary evaluations should be carried out and it will be confirmed that it is absolutely necessary for the financial details of the agreement to be updated because , inter alia , the Commission already saw the tariff of EUR 176 per tonne itself as low when it was implemented .
EU producers are not , therefore , asking for anything that is not wholly justified , and we in Parliament have an obligation to protect them , as does the Commission .
Madam President , I want to concentrate on fair trade bananas .
The importance of supporting banana producers from the poorest Caribbean nations is absolutely pivotal .
Although EUR 200 million has been designated for African and Caribbean banana exporting countries , we need to look at this matter .
Anyone witnessing how people who work in this sector are treated , particularly by the large multinational corporations , would be quite disgusted .
That is why fair trade bananas are so important - certainly to smaller producers , but also to ensure the better treatment of working people .
Bananas are Scotland 's favourite fruit and , as such , my constituents want to know that what they are eating has been produced to the highest standards and with the utmost care .
I would encourage colleagues to make an effort only to buy fair trade bananas and , if they see that they are not stocked in a supermarket , to complain .
As we have seen tonight , the politics of the trade in bananas is contentious .
We must act to help the most vulnerable workers and the most vulnerable nations in the world .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , European producers often lose out in bilateral trade agreements and have been damaged by the liberalisation of import regulations .
The agreements we will be voting on tomorrow provide for a reduction in the import duties applied to bananas imported from Latin America .
Whilst on the one hand these agreements have helped to resolve a conflict that has been going on for a decade , on the other hand they threaten to leave European banana producers in serious difficulty .
It is obvious that the tariff reductions negotiated with the Latin American countries , combined with the support programme for the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries and the programme of Banana Accompanying Measures threaten to seriously jeopardise European producers ' competitiveness .
Until now , financial support for our banana producers has been provided through the POSEI ( Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ) grants , however the latest reform of POSEI back in 2006 does not cater in any way for these latest agreements .
I think it is important therefore to ask the Council to consider the need to identify suitable instruments and resources to cover European producers ' financial needs , thus improving their situation and at the same time compensating them for any damage they may suffer as a result of the agreements and the lowering of import duties .
I do not think it is feasible for us to look for resources to cover European banana producers ' needs on an annual basis .
I think we need to find a stable , long-term solution to make up for the damage they have suffered from the expansion and opening-up of the markets .
( DE ) Madam President , after many years of dispute between the European Union on the one hand and the Latin American banana producers on the other , an important step has now been taken thanks to the Agreement on Trade in Bananas .
I support this agreement because it also puts an end to the dispute at the World Trade Organisation .
However , the concessions made by the EU and the Latin American banana producers must not cause the general situation of the ACP countries to be forgotten .
Assistance for the ACP countries provided by the EU must be carefully monitored and , where necessary , increased .
The impact assessment called for by the European Parliament is important in this regard and this must be clearly emphasised .
Despite all of the assistance , which is without doubt fundamental and important , there must be no reallocations with the EU budget .
All too often , money made available for particular areas is reallocated and used for other purposes .
This practice must be stopped , whether , as in the current case , it relates to the European Development Fund or other funds , including the agricultural fund , which is frequently under discussion at the moment .
The European Union must remember its responsibilities towards the ACP countries and the outermost regions and be consistent in its actions .
If we now look at this heartening agreement from a global perspective then I have one eye on the Doha negotiations .
The World Economic Forum in Davos seems to have provided some impetus .
The G20 want to conclude the World Trade Organisation negotiations before 2012 .
It remains to be seen whether the words will actually be turned into action .
However , it seems as though the Agreement on Trade in Bananas has added a piece to the big Doha puzzle .
Madam President , a few weeks ago we were going bananas about bees .
Tonight we are buzzing like bees about bananas , and particularly this proposed agreement .
As you can see , it has got a mixed reaction - not surprisingly .
There are benefits , particularly for producers who are going to gain by it , but there are also concerns - concerns about the impact on the environment and particularly concerns about the impact on producers in the European Union .
I think it is very important to take that on board , because the primary responsibility of any body , country or union is to take care of its own producers first .
Only in that way can you actually extend the hand of friendship to others .
The same applies to the proposed Mercosur deal .
There are many in the European Union who feel that it will discriminate against and decimate the beef industry in the European Union , and particularly in my own country .
So we have to be very careful .
Yes , extend the hand of friendship , but not at the cost of our own producers .
( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have already said it in this House and I will say it again today : the outermost regions , and in particular Madeira , my home region , in no way object to the signing of either the Geneva Agreement or the subsequent bilateral agreements .
We all recognise not only their importance but also their inevitability .
However , we all also know that there are winners and losers in these agreements , and the outermost regions are the clear losers in these agreements in particular , and are damaged by them .
What I cannot accept is the insistence on arguing , as the Commission did again today , that the 2006 revision of the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) provided for this situation and that it has , therefore , already compensated producers for what was at stake here , when we know that what was considered in 2006 was a tariff of EUR 176 per tonne , and what we are now looking at is a tariff of EUR 148 , EUR 114 or even EUR 75 per tonne .
What we are demanding is compensation measures .
( PT ) Madam President , by opening - or better still , throwing wide open - the doors of the European market to US multinationals , which now control more than 80 % of the world trade in bananas , this agreement will have serious consequences that even those who are going to vote for it here are not hiding .
European producers in Portugal , Spain , Greece , Cyprus and France , who in 2008 supplied the European market with almost 600 000 tonnes , will be hit hard .
The rapporteur herself admits that the agreement threatens their future existence .
In this context , beyond the substance of the report , it is very serious that the Commission , while acknowledging the effects , is not providing for any specific measures to support European producers , specifically through amendments to the regulation and the budget for the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) adopted in 2006 .
Producers in the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries , who were neither considered nor present during the debating of this agreement , will also be hit hard by its consequences and the palliative measures announced will not prevent these consequences .
Anyone voting for this report must take responsibility for its consequences , and there is no point in coming here to express pious and inconsequential concerns in the shape of questions and requests to the Commission and Council .
Madam President , I will try to reply directly to some questions and points which have been raised .
First of all , we have spoken here about the resolution of a conflict which can be of help to us in a multilateral agreement .
In the case of the bilateral agreements negotiated with the Central American countries and certain Latin American countries , we are talking about a different context , since in this area too , the European Union has had offensive interests and has also obtained things in exchange for what it has offered .
A comment was then made about multinationals and the fact that they are the ones who profit in the ACP countries , and that the financial measures are not sufficient for the ACP countries .
Of course , the European Union cannot make decisions in place of the governments of the ACP countries . It believes that a great deal can be done with the envelope that has been made available if the money is used well .
Furthermore , I think that this is also the case for the outermost regions , or at least those European Union regions which produce bananas .
Mr Mato Adrover and Mr Teixeira , I can show you the figures .
When I say that in 2006 , in addition to the envelope that was provided for POSEI , we made calculations - and I have the figures here - I mean that we provided a tax reduction , reducing it from EUR 176 to EUR 137 in 2009 .
We also said that it was possible that , in the Doha negotiations , the results of which were then unknown , those taxes could fall to EUR 79 per tonne .
It is for that reason that we added 8.4 % to the EUR 245 million provided for the POSEI envelope .
This equates to an additional EUR 22 million per year , which is specifically intended for anticipating a possible impact of this kind .
It is for this reason that , according to the impact assessment , the budget calculated for POSEI in 2006 was much greater than the actual situation in 2006 .
I did not say that we would stop there or that we would not take into account a possible additional need for compensation .
Let me make myself clear : I am prepared to carry out this analysis .
Moreover , if it proves necessary , in the context of the POSEI regulation , which we are now also discussing with the Council and with you , we may contemplate additional compensation .
A good part of the compensation needed has , however , already been covered .
I am proving it here with figures and with calculations taken from the impact assessments .
We have had many discussions with the Member States concerned , and I can tell you that , when I say something , I base it on figures .
Now , what about this money ?
You have talked a lot about small producers .
Indeed , I think that , in these regions , including our outermost regions , we should perhaps give more protection to small producers .
For a start , the POSEI money must be used primarily for small producers .
This is not always the case , and perhaps at some point , when we discuss POSEI , we will have to consider proceeding with a reform , an adaptation , so that this money really is used to help restructure the sector .
However , if this money which has already been allocated to POSEI , together with any compensation , were genuinely used to aid restructuring , then in addition to this compensation , we might also be able to find other solutions for these small producers within a few years .
Rest assured that I am very open to seeking new solutions , possibly in the context of POSEI as well , so that this money is put to even better use .
I would just like to reply to Mr Campbell Bannerman , who has a different opinion , concerning the usefulness of this compensation .
I believe that producers in the outermost regions are also European citizens and taxpayers .
It seems only right to me that we should support them as far as is justified .
With regard to the banana that you showed us , I think that if it had not conformed to the rules that you mention , you would not have been able to buy it .
The fact that you were able to buy it means that its size and curvature conform to European standards .
So , I think I have covered the major points .
In conclusion , rest assured that , in the POSEI discussions , I am always ready to look at how , based on the figures on the table , existing compensation , or possibly other types of compensation , can respond to these provocations .
All in all , however , I think that this is an agreement which , as the rapporteur also said , helps us in many ways and ends a historic dispute .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Mrs Balzani , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would like to thank the Commissioner for having already addressed several questions and concerns .
Still , please allow me to mention some myself .
Many have expressed concern over what will happen to ACP countries .
The proposal for Banana Accompanying Measures has been created for the very reason of assisting and compensating them , and will , as we know , compensate these countries with an annual amount of approximately EUR 190 million for the heavy burdens placed on them by the cessation of the duty-free banana import regime .
The other concern raised was about what will happen if we lower duties even further , and continue liberalisation .
Now let us not forget that the current topic is the conclusion and strengthening of the Geneva Agreement on Trade in Bananas , and the European Parliament and the Council will still have the opportunity to discuss whether they intend to support additional free trade conventions with Andean countries and Central America later , when , of course , the Commission submits its relevant proposal .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the conclusion of the banana agreement will put an end to a trade debate that has been going on for fifteen years , and this is certainly a welcome development .
This outcome will strengthen the EU 's negotiating position in international trade talks , especially in the ongoing Doha negotiations of the World Trade Organisation .
I believe that there is a need for us to continuously keep all those concerns and questions you have voiced here in relation to solidarity - concerns which pertain exactly to the poorest countries - on the agenda , and to look for joint solutions , but to give a green light to this banana trade agreement and the law repealing the previous agreement .
I therefore ask the European Parliament to decide on expressing its consent to the banana trade agreement tomorrow .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think this debate has been very interesting and has partly restated some of the anxieties and issues which we have already looked at in the Committee on International Trade .
I should like to re-emphasise an important fact that I think we lose sight of every now and then .
These agreements represent the implementation of a specific commitment made by the European Union , in its role as a member of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
We must not forget this .
Through these agreements , the EU is undertaking to resolve a serious problem with important countries , which it is having to sort out because it has breached the principle of non-discrimination .
These are therefore agreements that restore our credibility and proper position as members of the WTO .
This agreement follows on therefore from disputes and tensions , amid a climate that will certainly have been damaging for other areas of our relationships .
As a definitive settlement agreement it is trying and succeeding to create a new balance , with particular attention , as we have said and have also stated in the resolution , to countries in fragile states of development .
The accompanying measures will now certainly be monitored , and to my mind this is the most important point .
It is important to have established the accompanying measures , but it will be even more important to have the evaluations of their impact and to have the commitment , which I am delighted to have heard today from the Council and the Commission , to keep constant track of the situation as it develops and above all the willingness to assist with further measures if they should prove to be necessary .
POSEI ( Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ) itself has been incorporated into the resolution as a sensitive point that must be monitored due to the delicate balance between the financial contributions made under POSEI and the new situation regarding the outermost regions .
Therefore the impact of the agreements on the outermost EU regions where bananas are produced will also be monitored and watched carefully .
The Council also mentioned the need to work on transparency in the agri-food chain , which I am happy about , as it is an important point .
We have been talking about producers the whole time , but there is also the major issue of banana distribution within the EU .
There are many things that must be done going forward , therefore .
We need to monitor the effects of the agreements , the implementation of the accompanying measures and the suitability of POSEI to protect Europe 's producers .
We also need to use other instruments such as transparency in the agri-food chain and hence widen the scope of examination to take in the distribution chain as well , which has a major impact on the final cost of the fruit .
We need to look at consumer protection , which is something that deserves our attention as much as all the other interests involved in this business .
However , all these things , not least consumer protection , must start with the current situation and establishing the outcome of these disputes in which the EU has had to make concessions to the United States and the Latin American countries .
I hope therefore that these agreements will be adopted , because I believe they form an essential basis for making the instruments linked to the delicate balance of the banana market work and can guarantee clear practices that will benefit other interests also , such as consumer protection , which is linked to transparency in the agri-food chain .
These will in turn bring improvements to the banana market and to our European producers , which are impossible without a sound basis such as that provided by finalising these disputes within the WTO , to which the European Union belongs .
To wind up the debate , a motion for a resolution has been tabled under Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 : 30 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
The conclusion of these agreements has made it possible to bring an end to one of the most complex and longest = running disputes against the EU in the World Trade Organisation .
It should be mentioned that , throughout the negotiation process , we warned the Commission of the need to take care of : - the interests and specificities of banana producers in the outermost regions , notably by increasing funding under the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) , as producers ' incomes and the marketing of their produce could be compromised by the pressures created by strengthening the increasing liberalisation of the global banana trade ; - the interests and specificities of banana producers in the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries .
I therefore consider the conclusions of the rapporteur 's recommendation - according to which the outermost regions ' interests should also be considered - to be a contribution of great relevance , in that Parliament should consent to the agreements if the Commission and Council : present to Parliament , as soon as possible , an impact assessment on the consequences of the agreements for banana-producing developing countries and for the outermost regions ; implement specific measures aimed at strengthening banana producers ' commercial position , and adopt measures to finance a programme in favour of banana-producing ACP countries .
in writing . - ( RO ) On 15 December 2009 , the European Union , the United States and a group of Latin American countries signed the agreement on the EU 's tariffs for the banana trade .
This agreement brought to a close a complicated dispute , lasting almost two decades .
It shows the EU 's commitment in this area and will be included in the final results of the Doha Round negotiations .
Unfortunately , we are unable to savour fully this success .
The approved reduction in tariffs for Latin American banana exports is likely to have an adverse economic and social impact on the group of African , Caribbean and Pacific countries whose producers do not have the same technical facilities as their competitors .
This is why I welcome the financial aid programme included in the agreement , whereby ACP countries will receive EUR 190 million up until 2013 as support aimed at encouraging competitiveness and the diversification of their production .
However , the European Commission must present an impact assessment of the agreement by 2020 , as well as of the aid programme , along with any recommendations for extending it and providing additional financial aid .
in writing . - ( FI ) It is excellent that the EU has reached an agreement with the countries of Latin America and the United States over the banana dispute , which has been an emotional issue for a long time .
It is better to come to an agreement than to continue rowing within the context of the World Trade Organisation .
It has been claimed that the agreement and tariff reductions would favour large banana producing countries and multinational companies .
It is nevertheless important to realise that in the future the interests of poor ACP countries will continue to be better compared to the countries of Latin America .
Furthermore , the EU is also utilising a huge aid package to help the ACP countries diversify their economies to make them less dependent on the export of bananas .
It remains to be seen whether the agreement reached now will have an effect on consumer prices in Europe .
Whatever the case , the agreement is a historic one , because it shows that the EU is capable of demonstrating internal consistency and taking decisions even in awkward situations and amid tough negotiations .
I will be voting in favour of the agreement .
The Geneva Agreement on trade in bananas represents an opportunity for the emerging economies of Latin America , but it also gives rise to new competition between banana producers in the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) Group of States , the economic development of which essentially relies on the exploitation of their natural resources .
We must therefore take care that this new competition is fair .
I am also concerned about the bilateral agreements with the EU negotiated by Peru and Colombia so that they may enjoy a preferential rate of customs duty that is lower than that provided in the Geneva Agreement .
In these circumstances , I consider that it is now a matter of urgency to implement the Banana Accompanying Measures contained in that agreement , which will enable the ACP countries to modernise this sector and to cope with global competition .
I therefore call upon the Council to declare without delay its position on Parliament 's new proposal , so that the ACP countries may benefit from the measures announced for 2010 , and I ask the Commission to ensure that the social and environmental requirements are reciprocally respected by producers and exporters outside the ACP .
In my opinion , this is essential if all producers are to be put on an equal footing , which is far from the case today .
The banana agreement concluded by the EU at the WTO in December 2009 , which we are ratifying today , must be accompanied by support mechanisms for our producers .
The reduction by the EU of tariffs on bananas imported from Latin America will put several European regions , such as the French overseas departments of Guadeloupe and Martinique , Greece , Portugal and the Spanish Canary Islands in difficulty , as they will have to cope with the opening-up of the market .
That is why we will have to monitor the real impact of the financial aid , which is intended to support investment and economic diversification policies , and to strengthen the social and environmental impact .
This impact assessment must tell us whether this aid is sufficient to counterbalance the new international situation in the banana market .
Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question by Louis Michel , Charles Goerens , Antonyia Parvanova , Frédérique Ries , Olle Schmidt , Maria Da Graça Carvalho , Nessa Childers , Marc Tarabella , Bart Staes and Marina Yannakoudakis on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , to the Commission on the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative -B7-0006 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , I am happy to be able to lend my support to a pan-European project that is very ambitious both for the European Union and for developing countries , and which is aimed at eliminating tuberculosis by means of a vaccination programme .
Let us remember that more than 1.7 million people died from tuberculosis in 2009 .
The cost in terms of human life is some 4 700 people per day .
Add to this the annual economic losses , which are estimated at more than USD 50 billion for Africa alone .
If , based on this , we were to reduce tuberculosis to a problem typical of developing countries , we should be greatly deceiving ourselves .
In fact , the cases reported in the United Kingdom and Ireland during the summer of 2010 remind us that the disease is here in our countries , not to mention the ravages caused by the same disease in the east of our continent , particularly in Russia and Moldova .
The Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative ( TBVI ) is an initiative that aims to create effective vaccines with a view to protect developing countries at an affordable price .
With this in mind , I should like , if I may , to make the following comments .
First , health does not have a price but it has a cost .
While access to healthcare must be universal , the ability to pay remains in itself limited to the industrialised nations .
That being the case , it is important to spread the costs broadly .
Clearly , patients in the North , that is to say in the industrialised countries , must pay a high price , otherwise the sources of funding for research will dry up quickly enough .
However , given that the financial contribution of the countries of the South is , if not non-existent , then no more than purely symbolic , our solidarity becomes indispensable to overcome this shortfall .
Second , the TBVI initiative also has a place in the EU 's 2020 strategy .
It is a perfect illustration of what we can achieve if we can establish our health priorities in good time .
My third , and concluding , comment is this : that this in no way excludes additional or complementary funding from the large institutional lenders , including the World Bank in particular .
Other countries , such as the United States , Canada or a number of emerging countries that are affected by the problem of tuberculosis , whether directly , as it impacts on their populations , or indirectly in the context of international solidarity , should quite logically make their own contribution to this initiative too .
To be specific , I am talking here about the public-private partnership model .
This new approach can be beneficial provided that solidarity is limited to those who have both medical and financial requirements .
The alternative would be to protect only well-off populations .
In 2008 , the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative ( TBVI ) was established in the form of a public-private partnership with the support of the Health Cooperation Programme within the Seventh Framework Programme for research in order to mobilise additional resources for this important area .
At the present time , the majority of recently developed new vaccine candidates are still in the preclinical development phase or beginning clinical development .
A crucial point to emphasise is the fact that we do not have available clinical data to support the idea that one of the vaccine candidates under development could prove to be more effective than the vaccine currently in use , which is the Bacillus Calmette-Guérin ( BCG ) vaccine .
In order to come onto the market , new vaccine candidates must be capable of being more effective than BCG or of replacing it as a better vaccine .
The fact is that we still do not have these important data available .
The TBVI should not be considered in isolation from other initiatives for supporting clinical trials .
In order to deal with bottlenecks in the clinical development field , the European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership , or EDCTP , has been established as the first initiative taken under Article 185 , in which 14 Member States , 2 Associated States and the Commission have collectively committed EUR 400 million , with EUR 200 million coming from the European Union , with the aim of promoting research in phase 2 or 3 clinical trials for AIDS , for example , malaria and tuberculosis in sub-Saharan Africa .
The programme is predicted to complete all the trials currently under way , including eight trials of the anti-tuberculosis vaccine , by 2015 .
This alternative is therefore already in place , and it works .
The Commission is also very interested in what is called ' the business model ' , which has been developed by the public-private partnerships , including the one presented by the TBVI .
The TBVI has , moreover , proposed a model that can potentially become a useful tool in the future .
However , this requires an in-depth analysis of the commercial project as well as a risk assessment .
Consequently , even if the TBVI enjoys significant financial support , its success is not guaranteed , precisely because of the fact that there is not enough information to indicate whether what is currently being trialled can yield results subsequently .
However , the Commission will continue these internal discussions and will also analyse the model with the financial institutions , thus contributing to the development of a concept so that it can form part of the practical implementation of EU 2020 .
From this point of view , then , this possibility could be examined .
Madam President , Commissioner , the incidence of tuberculosis worldwide remains a cause of great concern , despite the progress made .
The increasing resistance of this disease and insufficient scientific research mean that today almost 2 million people die of it every year .
We welcome EU initiatives to combat tuberculosis through this resolution , but we call for more scientific research to be undertaken to develop new forms of vaccine against this disease .
Vaccines are the public-health measure that is most effective at protecting Europeans from infectious diseases , but it is also important for healthcare to reach developing countries , so as to contribute to increasing life expectancy and combating poverty .
As I said , there has been some progress and we are on the right track , but the EU must redouble its efforts , and call for more coordinated action and integration of European research into combating poverty-related diseases .
That is the only way that we will manage to alleviate the tragic situation being experienced in several developing countries .
I should like to ask the Commission how it intends to follow up on scientific research efforts in this area , to intensify these efforts , and to translate the results of this research into benefits for people in the light of the Europe 2020 strategy .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , it is always good to see you in the chair when we are discussing issues about the plights of others .
I know you share our concerns .
I want to associate myself with the words of Mr Goerens and , indeed , take the Commission a little further .
It is quite right that TB is a significant global health concern and , as we know , is the second leading cause of death from infectious diseases worldwide .
As we heard , 1.6 million to 2 million people die annually from the disease .
EU funding has been instrumental in generating a robust pipeline of innovative TB vaccine candidates , as the Commission said enabling their early stage development by phase 1 and phase 2A clinical trials .
Unfortunately - and this is the problem - currently funding mechanisms , including the European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership , allocate very limited funding to the very costly late-stage clinical trials - phase 2B and phase 3 - which are vital to demonstrate vaccine safety .
We have vaccines , but it is vital to demonstrate the safety and the efficacy necessary for licensure .
I now welcome the fact that the Commission has said that it is bringing in additional funding , but will the rules for any new EDCTP budget provisions permit funding to be directed to the development and building of clinical trial sites , including epidemiology studies ?
Is the Commission considering the introduction of competitive funding mechanisms for the late-stage clinical development of innovative new vaccines that address the neglected diseases , such as TB ?
( DE ) Madam President , tuberculosis is still very widespread today , particularly in poorer countries .
A third of the world 's population is infected and 2.5 million people die from TB each year .
According to estimates by the World Health Organisation , there are 49 new cases and seven deaths per hour in Europe alone .
In the industrialised nations , tuberculosis has experienced a resurgence , particularly as a secondary disease in patients with HIV and AIDS , but also as a result of migration and tourism .
Prevention , diagnosis and treatment can indeed bring the spread of this disease under control .
Humans are the only host of the tuberculosis microbacterium and its eradication would be perfectly possible .
However , there are concerns about the increasing number of resistant bacteria .
There are new vaccinations and , according to one study , administration of vitamin D reduces the treatment time for tuberculosis .
To what extent has the Commission already stepped up its activity in this area ?
( PL ) Madam President , four years before the deadline for achieving the Millennium Development Goals , the number of new cases of tuberculosis being diagnosed throughout the world is still alarming .
Tuberculosis is a treatable disease .
In developing countries , unfortunately , and in particular in Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa , it remains a very serious problem .
According to recent estimates , around two billion people are infected with the tubercle bacillus , or in other words one third of the world 's population .
Statistically speaking , one in ten of these individuals will go on to develop tuberculosis .
The poorest regions of the world are at particular risk of an increase in new cases of tuberculosis , since poor nutrition and living conditions , as well as stress , create a favourable environment for development of the disease .
Access to effective treatment for the disease is limited in many countries , and there is no coordination of treatment for AIDS and that for tuberculosis .
This is a result of the fact that the governments of developing countries do not spend enough on health .
In addition , healthcare systems in rural areas suffer from staffing shortages , and lack the means to treat such diseases .
In countries with limited financial possibilities , the effects are therefore felt most severely in rural areas .
Developed countries spend around 5 % of GDP on public healthcare , whereas developing countries spend one half of this figure .
It is therefore impossible for poorer countries to increase spending on health without external assistance , as was also noted by Mr Goerens .
On top of this , tuberculosis is not only a medical problem , but also a social and economic problem , since it causes productivity to drop and has economic ramifications .
All this means that we should be decisive in our response , and we really should make every effort to ensure that vaccines become more widely available .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , health is one of the issues that we have yet to resolve in the struggle against poverty .
In the Millennium Declaration we committed , first of all , to reducing child mortality ; secondly , to improving maternal health ; and thirdly to combating AIDS , malaria and many other diseases , including tuberculosis .
Nonetheless , all of us here today know that it is those goals that are currently the furthest behind schedule .
We must take measures : we must increase funding for health programmes in developing countries .
Access to free healthcare systems should be the European Union 's ultimate goal in this area .
I believe that support should be given to global initiatives such as vertical funds to aid in the struggle against AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis .
However , Commissioner , it is also necessary to support countries politically and economically , so that they can develop effective healthcare systems .
I am convinced that this would be the best way of ensuring the principle of appropriation and allowing the most vulnerable parts of the population access to healthcare .
- ( SK ) Madam President , tuberculosis , like malaria and AIDS , is one of the great pandemics which are decimating the populations of developing countries , particularly in Africa and Asia .
This directly results in a deteriorating economic and social situation in these countries .
However , European countries have also failed to cope with the high incidence of tuberculosis .
This disease cannot be considered simply as a medical-pharmaceutical problem , or just as a problem of human behaviour .
It also involves issues of human development and integrity , and also justice , which require a global approach .
People who are ill with tuberculosis in developing countries are also victims of injustice , for the treatment they receive is insufficient and not of the same quality as in the developed world .
We need further research , and a continuous flow of new medicines and vaccines capable of responding to new complications and resistant strains of various pathogens .
I would like to draw your attention , however , to those simple heroes who are fighting tuberculosis , enabling us to continue treating the sick , to resist the hardships created by combined infections of tuberculosis and AIDS , and to help all countries meet the millennium challenges .
We must support health workers in developing countries .
Health workers are leaving for more affluent countries because health budgets are being slashed in their own countries .
I support the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative , but we must take a global approach to overcoming this disease .
It is not enough just to support research and the pharmaceutical industry , because , apart from anything else , it will be a long time before this research bears fruit .
- ( SK ) Madam President , I would like to stress that tuberculosis is far from being eradicated , and we see here that nearly two million people a year are succumbing to this serious disease .
I would like to say that it is a good thing we are aware of this , and I welcome the Commission initiative for the fact that we are not talking just about the AIDS pandemic , we are also talking about tuberculosis , which takes the lives of millions of people .
I agree that there is a need to devote more resources to the development of new vaccines .
As the Commission has just stated , however , we do not yet have these new vaccines , of course , as we are still in the pre-clinical stages , and we are still just testing their effectiveness when given to humans .
I would like to make a call - I am about to finish , Madam President - for new funding and new resources .
( RO ) Madam President , an annual mortality rate of between 1.6 and 2 million people makes tuberculosis one of the two major causes of death worldwide from infectious diseases .
This justifies the growing concern globally of public health organisations .
In an age when medicine is making spectacular advances , we must acknowledge that the time has come for the traditional tuberculosis BCG vaccine to be replaced with a new , more modern and much more effective one .
However , this cannot be achieved without , on the one hand , granting more generous EU funds for completing the research in this area and , on the other hand , finding other sources of funding by reviewing the model proposed by the TBVI for alternative , innovative funding methods .
Providing financial guarantees may make this model more attractive to the European business community , thereby ensuring its involvement and the necessary financial support .
Madam President , tuberculosis , or TB as it was known in my country , was rampant in Ireland a little over half a century ago , killing many people , young and old .
As the country grew affluent it died out , and vaccination stopped for 36 years .
However , as the author has pointed out , TB has returned in recent years .
Only last year in my own constituency a child in a school and a baby in a crèche contracted the disease .
Worldwide , it is a bigger problem with 2 billion affected by the bacteria and one person dying every 20 seconds .
We therefore have a big task if we are to reach the target of eliminating the disease by 2050 .
Research is the key , and in this area the European Union deserves great credit because , while we are behind the US and Japan in terms of research in general , we are the leaders in this field , with 60 % of research taking place in the EU , and with Danish authorities and scientists in particular having developed the vaccine .
( PT ) Madam President , four years before the deadline for achieving the Millennium Development Goals , tuberculosis ends 2 million lives every year .
Tuberculosis constitutes a flagrant example of the inequalities that riddle our world .
Let us not forget that this is a disease that is not at all widespread in industrialised countries .
The problem of tuberculosis and of other diseases will not be solved without high-quality public health services accessible to the entire population , including primary healthcare .
Development cooperation and aid policy plays a crucial role here , which , naturally , must involve aid to vaccination programmes ; however , more is needed .
We must break once and for all with mechanisms , such as those of debt and debt servicing , that drain the resources of the developing world and make it possible to keep its countries backward , dependent , subjugated and destitute .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the number of tuberculosis cases and resultant deaths in Hungary has increased at a frightening rate over the past years .
This is the result of nation-destroying liberal thinking , among other things . Here I am referring to the shameful Hungarian Healthcare Act of 2006 , which was based on hospital closures and profit-oriented healthcare services .
A significant factor in the development of the disease is poverty , including the increased number of homeless people and a healthcare system that is increasingly difficult to access .
I believe that it is important to reinforce the healing and preventive role of healthcare , extend screenings , and not only extend improved vaccination but also make it available to everyone .
These steps could result in a healthier nation , and a healthier Europe and society in the long term .
Madam President , I shall try to provide some answers to the points raised .
First of all , we must intensify research , as I already said in my introduction .
The Commission is looking at ways in which to increase the funding for its tuberculosis programmes , and one solution could be to top up the EDCTP programme , which I spoke to you about .
The programme currently operates with EUR 400 million , of which the Commission provides EUR 200 million .
The Commission is also considering the possibility of creating an EDCTP 2 programme , for example .
I must also stress , as I have already said to Mr Tănăsescu , that the Commission already dedicates a substantial amount of resources to the tuberculosis research programme .
I can even cite you a figure : EUR 65 million have already been allocated to this programme .
However , it is clear that this is not enough , and the public-private partnership must also be examined .
Having said that , if it comes down to a question of funding vaccine candidates in a clinical phase , the issue of effectiveness will have to be considered .
As I told you , the information that we currently have gives us no assurance that significant funding could lead to a positive result .
Vitamins are another approach currently being studied , but what we must avoid is the development of resistance .
That is perhaps one avenue to be explored , but we must bear in mind the existence of that risk .
Let us now speak more generally about health systems in the European Union , as well as in the developing countries .
In the European Union , health is , besides , also one of the objectives that the Commission is trying to promote in the Member States , by means of various programmes , including the Europe 2020 Agenda .
In other words , it is promoting investment in health .
Within the field of research , in one of the research and innovation initiatives , the Commission - and a group of Commissioners in particular - is working on this topic so as to ensure that innovation can be boosted in the Member States to intensify health-related research , in parallel with issues concerning the ageing of the population .
As far as developing countries are concerned , the European Union is already achieving a great deal in the area of health with the development fund , and this is a topic to which the Commission will continue to pay full attention in the future .
I hope that I have been able , on behalf of the Commission , to provide some answers to your questions .
I can only assure you that research remains one of the Commission 's main concerns .
To wind up the debate , four motions for resolutions have been tabled under Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 : 30 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
As a member of the delegation to the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , I am in favour of the results of EU research into the development of vaccines against tuberculosis being made available to developing countries , and of helping these countries to fund treatment for those suffering from the disease .
Tuberculosis is one of the three most frequently occurring infectious diseases , along with HIV and malaria .
One third of the world 's population is infected with the tubercle bacillus ; every year , eight million people are diagnosed with the disease and it kills between 2.6 and 2.9 million .
Over 95 % of cases occur in developing countries .
Every second , the tubercle bacillus claims another victim .
Around 10 % of those infected will go on to develop the disease , which can be deadly if left untreated .
Most cases are diagnosed in India , China , Indonesia , South Africa , Nigeria , Bangladesh and Ethiopia .
In Asia and Africa , incidence stands at 100-120 per 100 000 of population .
Access to effective treatment is limited in many countries .
Tuberculosis is a serious economic problem .
The global fall in workforce productivity caused by the disease amounts to USD 13 billion every year .
Eliminating tuberculosis is one of the Millennium Development Goals , which the EU wants to achieve by 2015 .
We already only have four years left . Tuberculosis is currently a fully treatable disease .
We need comprehensive programmes aimed both at preventing and treating tuberculosis .
An information campaign on tuberculosis and ways of avoiding and treating it should be launched as soon as possible , and a vaccination programme started .
in writing . - Throughout the history of mankind , tuberculosis has killed more people than any other disease .
This highly contagious , airborne bacterium can infect ten to fifteen other people before the symptoms are noticed .
Overcrowded housing , slumification and the lack of proper hygiene have always been a serious risk factor for tuberculosis , and therefore TB is the disease most strongly related to and partly caused by poverty .
Despite the efforts of the WHO and national authorities , the number of people dying of tuberculosis amounts to 1.5 million every year and the number is still increasing .
I full-heartedly support the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative and sincerely hope that it can provide more vaccines for sufferers in Europe and around the world .
But it must be emphasised that the fight against TB must walk hand in hand with the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
It is necessary to identify the vulnerable groups as well as to determine and eliminate the barriers preventing these groups from accessing the full range of TB prevention , diagnosis and treatment .
It would also be beneficial to modify the agenda of TB services in order to respond better to local needs and to address the widespread discriminatory practices in health systems .
in writing . - ( LT ) We must combat tuberculosis , because this disease kills nearly two million people worldwide each year , and almost a third of the world 's population is infected by it .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that tuberculosis is a sensitive world health issue and the second greatest cause of death among infectious diseases worldwide .
Tuberculosis is heavily linked to social and economic problems , such as poverty , unemployment , alcoholism , drug addiction and HIV / AIDS , as well as the inadequate and poor state of healthcare systems in poor countries and delays in diagnosis .
I am therefore pleased that the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative model has been drawn up , because all patients suffering from tuberculosis worldwide will be able to benefit from the results of research and work activities .
Furthermore , this project would contribute towards implementing the Europe 2020 objectives and achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 .
I would like to point out that there is insufficient funding for the fight against tuberculosis and European Union funding is very important for establishing a strong package of new potential tuberculosis vaccines .
I hope that progress will be made as soon as possible to licence current potential European tuberculosis vaccines , and that they will be available to those who most need them .
Furthermore , it is important to find opportunities to implement competitive funding mechanisms to carry out the final stages of clinical research into new vaccines against tuberculosis .
In the context of our debate , I would like to note that , at the start of the 21st century , tuberculosis kills around three million people every year around the world .
The statistics tell us that one third of the world 's population is infected with the tubercle bacillus .
This problem is a cause for concern .
We must ensure that only the best and most innovative vaccines are used as the fundamental tools in the fight against the disease .
We must try to step up international measures and consider the funding of vaccines , particularly for developing countries .
In addition , an active media campaign is needed to inform society of the problem and of the routes of infection and ways to prevent the disease , since many people believe that tuberculosis is a disease which does not affect us in the modern world .
Thank you .
I am concerned at the conclusions reached by the authors of the oral question ; five years before the deadline for achieving the Millennium Development Goals , there has been a slight decrease in the global incidence of tuberculosis .
According to the information at my disposal , over 73 % of doctors in Central and Eastern Europe admit that they do not feel adequately trained to diagnose and treat tuberculosis .
The general feeling among doctors is that the situation is significantly worse ; 75 % of doctors believe that the number of new cases of tuberculosis is growing .
What can be the reason for such a discrepancy between the official statistics and the observations of medical practitioners ?
The system for collecting data on new cases of tuberculosis is outdated , and healthcare institutions often neglect their duties in this respect .
It should be stressed that the key weapons in fighting the disease remain prevention , education and adherence to the rules of hygiene , which makes it possible to avoid infection with the tubercle bacillus .
I agree with the authors of the question that one of the solutions to this problem may be the introduction of a vaccination programme at the same time as a large-scale information campaign .
Although a certain amount of progress has been made , tuberculosis continues to be one of the main causes of mortality worldwide , especially in developing countries , accounting for nearly 2 million deaths a year .
The situation in Romania is also worth mentioning , where 110 cases per 100 000 inhabitants are recorded , against a European average of 39 cases per 100 000 .
Access to health is a universal right and it is not the financial costs of it which should concern us .
An imbalance persists between the industrialised and developing countries .
We must show solidarity and support using every method available the ' Stop Tuberculosis ' programme launched by the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) .
It is Europe 's duty to look for viable , innovative methods to guarantee the funding for research in order to combat tuberculosis and other transmissible diseases .
The Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative ( TBVI ) , an organisation supported by the European Union , offers a solution to the current situation by creating accessible vaccines at affordable prices , which can be supplied to the population through a structured vaccination programme .
The inclusion of the TBVI in the EU 2020 strategy may be the solution enabling Europe to strengthen its strategic independence in the battle against tuberculosis and its position as a leading innovator .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance in accordance with Rule 150 of the Rules of Procedure .
( EL ) Madam President , first of all a few words on Egypt .
The External Action Service will need to be activated to the maximum in the difficult times ahead , in order to protect European citizens in Egypt , the rights of minorities in Egypt and the historic institutions that represent them , such as the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate in Alexandria .
Now to come back to my basic subject of waste .
Although we have a high-level legislative framework , almost every Member State faces infringement difficulties .
Many are reporting rubbish crises and some sectors , such as cross-border transportation of waste , are in mass breach of Community law .
At the same time , for political reasons , the famous ' not in my back yard ' policy , the Member States are not participating as effectively as they should in the efforts being made .
The Commission therefore needs to propose new additional instruments , such as extending the responsibilities of the European Environmental Agency and the facility for the Union to send missions to verify information in the Member States .
The Commission needs to think about this in light of the proposals for 2012 .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to highlight the situation in Romania regarding the blatant violation of the principles of the rule of law by the current government .
The arrest of a prominent member of the opposition , Constantin Nicolescu , an arrest announced prior to the start of the judicial hearing and without any hard evidence , demonstrates the undemocratic way in which the current government is acting .
The arrest carried out by political order , along with the contempt shown to ordinary citizens through the antisocial measures adopted by the government , is bringing out onto the streets the people who have been demeaned and condemned to poverty .
With the aim of quelling the discontent against abusive , antidemocratic measures , the government has arranged the purchase of anti-riot equipment , amounting to EUR 10 million .
All this paints a clear picture of political dictatorship and of what will happen in the future if these actions which contravene European values go unpunished .
We are not protesting against justice , but against politically imposed abuses .
The European Union is demanding respect for democracy in countries such as Tunisia and Egypt , but this must be strictly observed in Member States .
( BG ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the unresolved problems for tobacco growers in Bulgaria led to an escalation of tension in certain regions of the country and to protests which saw more than 10 000 participants .
They expressed their dissent in the declaration that was adopted about the policy being pursued , which is the reason for their dire financial situation , related to stopping national top-up payments for tobacco production for the 2010 harvest .
In Europe tobacco is grown in 17 of the 27 Member States , with subsidies being provided by their governments in every case .
It turns out that Bulgaria is the only Member State delaying the sanctioned national tobacco top-up payment scheme , adopted by law and notified to the European Commission .
It provides for aid to be granted to Bulgarian tobacco growers amounting to EUR 76 million , the payment of which is currently being delayed .
The delay in granting this aid is condemning hundreds of families to hunger and emigration and is jeopardising civil peace in the country .

( EL ) Madam President , today , in a noteworthy atmosphere of unanimity , the European Parliament accepted the call by its President , Mr Buzek , for the European Union to officially recognise the genocide of the Roma , who were victims of the Nazis during the Second World War .
As he said , the Roma have been the most repressed minority for a very long time .
But who are we addressing here ?
Who will apply our jointly decided policies ?
The Commission ordered a report on European policies on the Roma in 18 countries in July 2008 and the report has been in its possession since June .
I tabled a question on this , because I consider that there is no justification for the delay in publishing such a valuable report .
In fact , there has been an international call for it to be published .
Mrs Reding replied to my question and promised to publish it by the end of December 2010 .
It is already February 2011 and the report has still not been published .
I should very much like to know why .
( PL ) Madam President , I have expressed my opinion many times during debates in the European Parliament on EU policy in the field of limiting greenhouse gas emissions , a policy which is very strongly supported by the European Parliament and the European Commission .
I have however drawn attention to the fact that this policy is also giving rise to very adverse economic changes .
In many sectors , it is resulting in the relocation of industrial plants to other countries outside the European Union .
Unfortunately , the European Commission has not taken any notice , even though numerous fellow Members have highlighted the negative aspects of radically limiting CO2 emissions .
We have thus recently learned of the latest major industrial plants planning to move production from Germany and Poland to countries of the former Soviet Union , or even to Africa or South America .
These developments require tangible action by the Commission , which continues to lack perspective and vision .
( PT ) Madam President , as promised in the Citizens ' Agora that the European Parliament organised last week , I should like to relay here the cries of indignation brought to us by the various social organisations that joined us in debates on the economic and financial crisis and its serious consequences of increased unemployment , social inequalities and poverty , despite the fact that 2010 was declared European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
It was requested there that the activities and work of the European Parliament should reflect the indignation of organisations involved in combating poverty , given the social consequences of the crisis and the severity and extent of poverty .
Of the innumerable glaring examples of exploitation , poverty , discrimination and social exclusion , and of the various proposals , demands and suggestions , I would stress those that refer to the role that the European Parliament should play in condemning the situation .
Specifically , it should create a taskforce charged with monitoring the consequences of the crisis in the social sphere , and of the measures taken by the Council and the Commission following decisions by the European Parliament , such as those related to the minimum income ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Madam President , the Schengen Evaluation Working Group has adopted all the evaluation reports for Romania .
Its conclusions indicate that Romania meets all the Schengen acquis requirements .
Unfortunately , the European Council is refusing to provide the reports to the European Parliament , thereby obstructing the operation of Parliament 's procedures .
MEPs cannot vote without being familiar with the reports ' content .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs requested the documents , while Romania proposed disclosing them .
However , the Council is delaying making a decision without good reason .
I think that , in this situation , Romania is entitled to provide Parliament with all the reports about its accession to the Schengen area .
These reports are the only criteria which can be used to base the decision on accession .
The request for other criteria to be added does not comply with the European Treaties , is not a European approach and is not based on sound arguments .
Romania has met its legal obligation to prepare to protect the Union 's external borders and must receive the appropriate response from the EU 's institutions .
Madam President , I would like to inform you that democracy in Romania has never seemed under so much pressure during the last 20 years .
We have already alerted you regarding the President of the Chamber of Deputies , who falsified the vote for the all-important pensions law .
The recent case of the social democrat , Constantin Nicolescu , the Chairman of the Argeş County Council in Romania , proves once again that the methods used by the governing party in Romania brutally threaten the fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens .
All the measures adopted by the government demonstrate that the Democratic Liberal Party in Romania is at war with the entire Romanian people .
We cannot allow a democratic member of the European Union to behave undemocratically , arresting people at will and using public institutions to carry out personal vendettas .
Together we must defend our rights , our freedoms and our democracy .
Madam President , only last week in my constituency of Northern Ireland , dissident Republican terrorists left two viable bombs in the Antrim Road area of North Belfast .
It is really only by the grace of God that today we are not talking about multiple fatalities .
Hundreds of people were removed from their homes while the security forces dealt with the danger foisted upon that community .
The target of this foiled attack was police officers in what is the latest in a series of attempts to murder serving officers of the Police Service of Northern Ireland .
These attacks do not make the news programmes in the United Kingdom , let alone across Europe , yet they act as a reminder that , while huge progress has been made in moving Northern Ireland forward , we still have those who want to take us back .
Before Christmas President Barroso met with the Northern Ireland First Minister , Peter Robinson , and reiterated his commitment to the Barroso task force .
I welcome that work and I also welcome the initial work carried out within this House in relation to peace funding .
( HU ) Madam President , we have heard many complaining and indignant voices raised in connection with the Hungarian Presidency .
It is interesting that none of these pertained to the EU programme of the Presidency-in-Office .
There were some who raised their voices in connection with the media law .
The European Commission has already formulated its objections , and the Hungarian Government has shown willingness to amend the law .
The question occurred to me why there has not been the same international interest in the state language law that is in effect in Slovakia to this day , which continues to impose fines for the use of one 's mother tongue .
Why did the voices raised in alarm over the assertion of fundamental rights in connection with the media law not show concern when one of the most natural human rights of the Hungarian minority of Slovakia was called into question ?
Others were disturbed by the giant carpet laid out in the Council building , on which a map of Hungary from 160 years ago is depicted .
This map represents that we can only build a strong Europe through knowledge of , and respect for , our common history and national values .
Madam President , 14 February , St Valentine 's Day , will mark the first ever European Epilepsy Day .
St Valentine himself is reputed to have been a sufferer from epilepsy .
Currently six million Europeans suffer from epilepsy .
In Scotland this is around 39 000 people , yet just 20 000 Scots have been diagnosed and control their condition with medication .
This means that 19 000 people live on a daily basis with the fear of a recurring seizure .
Extrapolated across the EU this means millions of people also live with this fear .
On 14 February we must raise awareness of epilepsy .
We must also try to get those who have the condition properly diagnosed and call on Member States to have more neurologists who have a specialism in epilepsy .
On 15 February there will be a number of events in Parliament and I encourage colleagues to take part .
Many of your constituents will be present .
I would also like to take the opportunity to welcome Joanne Hill , a specialist nurse in epilepsy , and Fiona Nicholson , the service manager of a Scottish epilepsy centre .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to dedicate the time allotted to me to the case of the Székely people .
In the past few days , the President of Romania has unfortunately stated once again that he does not support Székely territorial autonomy .
I would welcome it if we could once and for all make things clear here in the European Parliament , and pronounce that the Székely people are entitled to territorial autonomy .
This is not a question of the goodwill of Traian Băsescu ; the Székely people do have the right to autonomy .
I would like to remind everyone that autonomy is an internationally recognised , binding right , and the double standard applied by the European Union when it says that some ethnicities have the right to autonomy while others do not is unacceptable .
Basques and Catalans are entitled to autonomy while the Székely are not .
On account of this logic , I must say with absolute conviction that those who do not support the Székely people 's efforts for autonomy are not Europeans .
( GA ) Madam President , I wish to point out that freedom is one of the fundamental purposes of the European Community : freedom to travel , freedom to trade and freedom to work .
We do not have freedom to work because we do not have mutual recognition of qualifications .
Today I heard about a physician who worked in Italy who took nine months to get permission to work in Ireland .
There is no sense whatever in that .
We should look at the UPMC system in the United States ; it is a useful example for us .
In particular , if we aim to have medical e-services , we must establish this recognition of qualifications .
Otherwise , we can not make progress .
( RO ) Madam President , the recurring abuse of power by those governing Romania at the moment has plunged the country into the darkest period of its history since 1989 .
Although Romania has a democratic constitution , its articles are often blatantly flouted .
Although , in theory , there is a separation of powers of state , in accordance with democratic principles , in practical terms , one man , President Traian Băsescu , controls all the power in Romania , dictating his orders willy-nilly and abusing power on a daily basis , all in an attempt to destroy the political opposition and stifle any voice which speaks out to offer a viable alternative to the catastrophic Băsescu-Boc administration .
As a European Union Member State , Romania 's fate should not be treated with indifference by either the EU institutions or the representatives of the other EU Member States , who should take a stance on this issue .
Please do not let yourselves be taken in by the incoherent explanations and sometimes embarrassing excuses offered by those governing Romania or those openly supporting them , whether out of fear or looking out for their own petty interests .
Their actions suffice to show those who want to see what the sad reality is in my country .
( LV ) Mr President , why , in your opinion , does the European Parliament pass resolutions ?
Precisely so that they may be implemented .
However , it appears that the Latvian government has no intention of implementing the resolution of 11 March 2004 .
That resolution clearly states that the right to vote in local elections must be granted to people who are permanently resident on Latvian territory .
To the question of when Latvia will implement this resolution , we shall possibly receive the answer : ' Kad pūcei aste ziedēs ' ( in Latvian ) .
In Russian , one would say : ' Kogda rak na gore svistnet ' , and in English : ' When pigs fly ' .
It comes down to this - either pigs will start to fly or we must collectively put an end to discrimination against 335 000 people living in Latvia .
Thank you .
( RO ) Madam President , we are witnessing today events which will change the course of history in North Africa and elsewhere .
Dictatorial regimes cannot stand firm for long anywhere in the world .
However , I wish to draw your attention to the fact that new forms of dictatorship can appear , even in a Member State of the European Union regarded as being democratic , namely , Romania .
Under the rule of law a person must be considered innocent until convicted by judges , and must stand trial as a free citizen , unless he poses a danger to society .
These universal principles of law are no longer valid in Romania when it comes to President Băsescu and the Liberal Democratic Party in power .
Clear proof that arrests are being made in Romania by political order is provided by the statement made by President Băsescu in Strasbourg five hours prior to the arrest of Constantin Nicolescu , and I quote : ' An important member of the Opposition has been arrested ' , end of quote , even though the latter had not yet reached the court .
What clearer evidence is needed to show that President Băsescu decides who will be arrested and when ?
( RO ) Madam President , I too share the sentiments of my colleagues who have drawn attention to the persecution of the political opposition in Romania , using the legal instruments of a government showing ever-growing evidence of authoritarian abuses .
With its popularity rating in free fall and in the wake of a set of austerity measures of brutal severity , having a drastic impact on living standards , the Romanian Government is resorting to increasingly violent antidemocratic methods to hold on to power .
As my colleagues have said , the unjustified and harsh arrest of a prominent member of the opposition , elected directly by the citizens , is the most recent and worrying example in a series of threats and acts of harassment against opposition groups .
At the same time , the state budget is being plundered by the government 's political supporters whose chaotic measures are deepening the economic and social crisis and increasing social tension to an alarming extent .
This is why we are also protesting together against the attacks which are being carried out in an attempt to intimidate opposition politicians and trade unions .
I believe that EU forums must take a stance against the blatant violations of democratic rights in Romania .
( ES ) Madam President , I should like to share a cause of great satisfaction with you all .
A great social and economic pact has recently been signed between the government , union leaders and business leaders in Spain .
This agreement establishes Spain as a country capable of joining forces to overcome its difficulties , face up to its challenges and reinforce the welfare state .
Ladies and gentlemen , in this global crisis , this agreement is a unique example of how , by society as a whole taking responsibility , we are making agreements with the idea of winning the future and building a strong Spain in a Union that plays an increasingly important role .
That concludes this item .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 00 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Waste crisis in Campania ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Financing instrument for development cooperation - Financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 ) - A financing instrument for development cooperation ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 ) - Establishment of a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1934 / 2006 ) ( debate )


The next item is the joint debate on :
the recommendation for second reading by Mr Goerens , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on a financing instrument for development cooperation [ 16447 / 1 / 2010 - C7-0424 / 2010 -
the recommendation for second reading by Mrs Lochbihler and Mrs Gál , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 on establishing a financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide [ 16446 / 1 / 2010 - C7-0427 / 2010 -
the recommendation for second reading by Mr Mitchell , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on a financing instrument for development cooperation ( amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 ) [ 16442 / 1 / 2010 - C7-0426 / 2010 -
the recommendation for second reading by Mr Scholz , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on establishing a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ( amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1934 / 2006 ) .
Madam President , the proposal for a regulation establishing an ACP Banana Accompanying Measures programme is today being tabled for a second reading .
As a reminder , we appealed at first reading for as many accompanying measures as possible for ACP banana-exporting countries , whose situation is liable to be made worse by the entry into force , within the WTO , of an agreement with US and Latin American producers to end the trade dispute over customs duties on bananas .
Under the agreement , import duties on bananas will gradually be reduced from EUR 176 per tonne to EUR 114 per tonne by the year 2017 .
However , bananas from ACP countries will continue to enjoy duty-free access within the European Union .
The deterioration in these countries ' situation following the entry into force of the trade agreement has led them to negotiate Banana Accompanying Measures , or BAM for short , with the European Union .
Our Committee on Development , for which I am the rapporteur , was able to secure the adoption at first reading of the following improvements to the initial text .
Firstly , emphasis has been placed on the eradication of poverty and the improvement of living conditions as main objectives of the recommended measures .
Secondly , small farmers and small entities are regarded as the main beneficiaries of these measures .
Thirdly , the regulation pays particular attention to aspects relating to the environment , health and labour standards .
Fourthly , transparent criteria have been introduced for allocating funds .
Finally , an agreement has been reached on a provisional assessment , which must be carried out 18 months before the programme expires .
In addition , Parliament and the Council have reached an agreement on the financing of the accompanying measures for 2010 and 2011 .
All of these advances easily meet the expectations of the ACP countries .
The only sticking point concerns the horizontal issue of the application of delegated acts to the financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) .
Our interpretation of Article 290 of the Treaty of Lisbon backs up our demand .
The European Parliament wishes to have its say in the strategic decisions that the Commission takes with regard to the financing of external action .
Until now , the Council has refused to grant Parliament the role that it deserves in the functioning of the financing instruments .
Matters must be made clear , and I would insist very strongly on the following point : we refuse to be called troublemakers .
Parliament and the Committee on Development prove this every day in their work .
I therefore invite my fellow Members to maintain the position adopted at first reading and to vote overwhelmingly in favour of the text that I have just submitted for their approval .
Madam President , a guarantee of human rights , the promotion and development of democratic structures and combating corruption are the central demands of those taking to the streets in Tunisia , Egypt and Yemen - by peaceful means and in the hope of thereby achieving change , so that people in Maghreb and in the Arab world can assert their right to freedom of expression and freedom of the press , their right to free elections and their right to civil participation .
The implementation of these rights is precisely what our financing instrument for democracy and human rights wants to promote ; up until now , it has had limited opportunities to act in the countries mentioned because the circumstances there are such that in general , those who were of a different opinion could expect persecution and torture .
I very much welcome the fact that , as we heard yesterday in the working party , the Commission has already made detailed plans to use the financing instrument in such a way that there will now be short-term , medium-term and long-term projects , which can now be used to support the democratic transformation in Tunisia .
It would be good if in the future we could develop a model from this that can also be used should such a fundamental transformation come about in other states .
I very much hope that the Commission will take up the suggestions made by the parliamentary delegation to Tunisia , such as on reform of the judiciary .
The instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights is structured in such a way as to be able to support those in the different civil structures who are working for improvements in the human rights situation .
This could be governments , it could be international human rights institutions or it could be individuals who need support as defenders of human rights .
Overall , it is a good structure precisely because it makes it possible in certain situations to act without the consent of the government concerned .
I do not see this in any way as interfering in internal affairs , because it is in the nature of human rights that we need to be able to resist state compulsion and state violence against the population - against the individual citizen .
Naturally , we need to review the individual projects , as well as the priorities of the human rights and democracy instrument , and subject these to continual critical evaluation .
Until now the instrument was still relatively new , so there was no point in carrying out an evaluation that would tell us little .
It is thus all the more important that we now prepare and implement the forthcoming comprehensive evaluation .
The aim must be to clarify the effects of individual measures and to allow us to rethink priorities and working methods where relevant .
This financing instrument shares the basic principle that there should be complementarity between all financing instruments .
Yet we repeatedly find in practice that this relatively modest financial instrument is being used to fund projects that could be clearly linked to a geographical instrument .
This issue also arises in the case of human rights dialogues .
For this reason we should definitely not agree to any cuts in this modest instrument and we must also see that it is not used to fund projects for which it is not in fact appropriate .
Finally , regarding the delegated acts - a matter on which we have yet to reach agreement for any of the financing instruments .
In many policy areas , such as the environment and transport , there is no dispute as to what may be regarded as delegated acts .
In foreign policy , however , this is seen as highly contentious .
It is very important , however - particularly post the Treaty of Lisbon - that we as Parliament also have codecision rights in foreign policy , at the level of the strategic focus of financing instrument programmes .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Madam President , representatives of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , all that Mrs Lochbihler , my co-rapporteur , has said is of very great importance when we consider that the current tense international situation - I am thinking of the North African cases debated yesterday , of Tunisia and Egypt - shows that the attention we devote to , for example , this financing instrument for human rights does indeed matter , and the impact this instrument has in practice in a specific place may be important .
This is precisely the first important reason why Parliament demands the right of scrutiny with regard to the instrument .
As regards the substantive issues discussed in the debate at first reading in October last year , which aimed at promoting the operation of local non-governmental organisations of key importance , the institutions were in agreement .
Now , at second reading , the other side of the coin must be addressed , namely agreement on the inter-institutional debate on Parliament 's right to democratic scrutiny .
It is well-known that the issue of financing instruments , including the question of this instrument promoting democracy and human rights , has been part of an inter-institutional battle for a year .
The Treaty of Lisbon strengthened the European Parliament 's right to democratic scrutiny ; this in fact is the institution of delegated acts , which we believe needs to be enforced and applied in the current situation .
This specific package , the case of delegated acts , is what could be the first significant example that the role of the European Parliament has indeed grown since 1 December 2009 .
Thus at second reading , and in all probability during the subsequent agreement process , we , too , are fighting for the recognition of the European Parliament 's right to democratic scrutiny , and I believe , together with my colleague , that this is relevant precisely in the case of the financing instrument for democracy and human rights .
This is because , as we have just heard , this instrument is intended to serve human rights , the rule of law and the protection of democracy , and we are promoting specific rights such as the fight for women 's and children 's rights , and the struggles against capital punishment , torture and cruel , inhuman , humiliating treatment .
We aim to help defenders of human rights in their work , even under the most impossible conditions .
This is another reason why this instrument is especially important .
Its beneficiaries are non-governmental organisations , which are subject to serious disadvantages in some countries .
All this justifies that we , Parliament , should have a say in shaping the strategy and the framework programmes and in devising future plans , as we can take more serious steps through annual monitoring than simply by having our opinions asked at the biennial financial cycles .
This is what we are asking your support for , so that now in the period following the Treaty of Lisbon we may truly act in the spirit of the Treaty as well , and I trust that both the Commission and the Council will understand the necessity of this during the forthcoming agreement process .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ( ICI ) is being fundamentally amended in this parliamentary term .
We plan to jointly allocate up to EUR 348 million to cooperation in areas such as science , academic exchanges - including Erasmus Mundus - , culture , environmental protection and renewable energy , as well as the stimulation of bilateral trade relations .
Particular consideration should be given here to small and medium-sized enterprises .
The new aspect is that with what is known as ICI Plus , projects in developing countries can now also be financed - and specifically projects that do not fall under the general definition of development aid measures .
These include projects and measures such as sending European students to universities in Africa , Asia or Latin America - a completely new element .
In the current times , when the EU has a greater responsibility to realign its cooperation in partnership with a growing number of states , allowing self-determined development has a particular part to play in this .
The recast of the regulation needs to clearly mark the opportunities and challenges arising from the expansion of its geographical scope .
It clearly states who can obtain financial assistance , for what purposes and on what terms .
Another new element of this instrument is that the regulation specifies that the allocation of funding must ensure that the partner countries comply with the core working standards of the International Labour Organisation and that they work to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as an important contribution to the international fight against climate change .
Equally important , the rule of law and human dignity in work are elevated to cooperation objectives .
As we are going into the second reading , allow me to restate that I consider it essential to ensure that when granting financial assistance no concessions are made as regards the basic principles of the European Union .
When promoting projects in developing countries attention needs to be paid in future to policy coherence , and particularly to harmonisation with measures to combat the food crisis .
In the plenary vote at first reading it was decided - albeit by a narrow majority - that none of the funds allocated to development aid thus far should be devoted to ICI Plus .
We are going into the second reading with an accelerated rapprochement on this , as on all the financing instruments .
Following successful compromise negotiations between Council and the European Parliament we have adapted ICI Plus to the challenges of the future .
All the matters of substance have been approved by a majority in plenary .
So far , so good - or so it would seem .
However , it remains undecided how we will deal in future with the division of powers between the two legislative bodies of the EU resulting from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , particularly in the area of communitarised international trade policy .
The issue at stake here is democracy , and specifically what are known as delegated acts - which is something on which the European Parliament and the Commission and Council continue to have differing views .
What is this all about ?
We want to do what we see as our duty to our electorate .
We want to check whether the multiannual strategic planning by the European External Action Service and the Commission for implementing our regulations is in accordance with the spirit of the legislator .
In the past the Commission has unfortunately too often taken the attitude that you can write anything you like on paper .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives us a new role and duty as a legislator , and we demand a right of veto .
The rapporteurs for the various foreign policy financing instruments , the chairs of the committees and the leaders of the groups are all agreed that we must fight for this democratic right .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the conduct we have seen so far shows that not all three bodies of the European Union have yet recognised this principle .
We are therefore vigorously defending our right of control today because in future the Commission must base its planning on what the legislator has laid down , not on its own communications .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am here to replace Andris Piebalgs , who is abroad due to a long foreseen engagement , on the second debate on these external relations financial instruments .
My first words are those of thanks to the rapporteurs , Ms Gál , Ms Lochbihler , Mr Mitchell , Mr Scholz and Mr Goerens .

We have cooperated very well on these files and , apart from delegated acts , there is a lot of convergence in substance among the three institutions concerned .
The remaining outstanding issues are due to the wider interinstitutional relationship in a new Treaty environment .
We now find ourselves at a difficult political and operational juncture that partners abroad do not understand , because implementation of basic acts is an internal EU affair .
Though as Trade Commissioner I am not responsible for any of these instruments , they do support a whole range of EU policy objectives , including trade , and allow us to remain relevant as foreign policy actors .
Since your last debate in October , the year ended without a first-reading agreement .
You know the situation .
Parliament expects Article 290 of the Treaty , outlining the procedure known as delegated acts , to be applied to the adoption of strategy papers and multiannual action programmes .
But in its first-reading position the Council rejected those of your amendments relating to delegated acts .
It is very important that we come to an agreement soon , in particular for ICI Plus and the proposal for banana accompanying measures .
Otherwise the Commission is unable to implement the relevant budget .
More specifically for ICI Plus , I think that everyone agrees that this instrument is designed to promote EU interests in industrialised countries , some of them key strategic partners who will not wait for us to be administratively ready .
Others are competing to fill in gaps we create , whether it be energy cooperation , business support , digital agenda objectives , etc .
As for the banana accompanying measures , I can only stress , with some resonance I hope as Trade Commissioner , that they are integrally linked with the Geneva Agreement which brought an end to our longest trade dispute in WTO and GATT , which lasted almost 20 years .
The accompanying measures are intended to support 10 banana-exporting ACP countries in their adaptation to a reduction in their preferential margin as a result of the Geneva Agreement .
It is of the utmost importance , therefore , that we preserve the EU 's credibility as an international trade negotiator by honouring our commitments and , in this case , we owe it especially to ACP banana-producing countries .
Look at the broader picture of world food trade at the moment and the hardship faced in some countries that are heavily dependent on export revenues from one or few commodities .
I really feel a sense of urgency here .
I understand Parliament 's concern to be involved in the strategy papers and multiannual programming .
The Commission has come forward with proposals to enhance parliamentary scrutiny and offers other compromise solutions , but these have failed to gain traction both in Parliament and in the Council .
I am here today to reiterate the commitment Catherine Ashton and Andris Piebalgs made to you last October to seek practical political solutions .
Let us , Council , Commission , Parliament , work towards agreed outcomes now during the second reading and all engage purposefully to achieve this objective .
Further delays carry with them budgetary , political , legal and even socio-economic consequences .
At the same time as the Lisbon Treaty changed the comitology system and assigned new powers to the European Parliament , it endowed the EU with a stronger role and new structures to pursue foreign policy more coherently , more comprehensively and with greater commonality .
Thank you for your attention and I am looking forward to the debate .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament will today give its verdict for a second time on the amendment to the financing instrument for development cooperation providing for the establishment of Banana Accompanying Measures for the main ACP banana-producing countries .
These accompanying measures are justified by the reduction in tariff preferences granted to the ACP countries following the conclusion , in December 2009 , of the Geneva Agreement with the United States and the countries of Latin America .
The European Union made a commitment at that time to provide EUR 190 million in support to the ACP countries to help them cope with this new competition .
We amended both the form and the content of the Commission proposal at first reading .
The Council disagreed with us on the form , which is why the regulation has been submitted for a second reading today .
Indeed , the Council refused to allow the delegated acts procedure to be applied to strategy papers and multiannual indicative programmes , and hence refused to implement the advances of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament decided to react quickly , and that is crucial .
We are therefore sending a strong political message to the ACP countries .
The European Parliament is behind them and is doing everything in its power to ensure that the EUR 190 million are released as quickly as possible .
Yet we are also sending a message to the Council .
The European Parliament is defending its prerogatives as laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
The ball is now in the Council 's court .
The European Union made a commitment to the ACP countries .
The Council should therefore shoulder its responsibilities , as Parliament has done .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question ( Rule 149 ( 8 ) )


Madam President , has it ever occurred to Mr Ponga that the EU taxpayer , and particularly the British taxpayer , might prefer the EUR 190 million to be frozen indefinitely ?
( FR ) Thank you for your question , Lord Dartmouth .
All I would say is that there are international agreements in place that require the European Union to invest in its relations with the ACP countries , and this is one of the agreements that the European Union must prioritise .
As far as I am concerned , I have never felt that this 190 million should be frozen .
Madam President , the position unanimously adopted today by our Parliament shows just how vitally important the issue of implementing powers is to this House .
Nevertheless , to turn to the subject of the Banana Accompanying Measures , this agreement is embarrassing with regard to our ACP banana-producing partners .
Indeed , one year after these countries legitimately obtained compensation from the Commission , they have still not received the funds , even though the Geneva Agreement is hitting them hard .
Therefore , they are the ones I am addressing again today when I say that it is precisely because we want to relay our demands even further that this House must have its say in the EU 's strategy and general guidelines for external aid .
We are determined not to fall into the trap set by the Commission and the Council .
Transparency of European decisions must be at the heart of our work .
This is the very spirit of the Treaty and the essence of history .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , this issue has technical considerations and it also has human , poverty considerations .
In this joint debate I would first like to tell the Council that Parliament is here to monitor and check , and look with openness and transparency and accountability at the way we spend our taxpayers ' money in terms of international development .
If the Council cannot recognise that , and cannot recognise that delegated acts should go through Parliament 's internal procedures so that it can avail itself of the right of scrutiny , then what the heck are we doing here ?
Why are we here if we are not allowed to be accountable to our voters , constituents and taxpayers over the money that they give us in good faith to spend , through the Commission , on international development ?
Secondly , on the issue of bananas , in which Parliament 's considerations should also be taken into account , the European taxpayer has lost on both counts .
We had a freer trade agreement which has now gone ' phut ' , and what we now have to do is to indemnify and compensate those banana-producing countries again .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , there is a credible sounding justification for each one of the four financing instruments being presented to Parliament today .
However , taken together , their collective aim is to advance and promote the political and foreign policy agenda of the European Commission .
The Commissioner made that very clear earlier , with his customary precision and clarity , for which I must thank him .
We all know by now who is going to be paying for this : the hard-pressed taxpayer and obviously - and as usual disproportionately - the British taxpayer .
The exact cost of these financing instruments is still unknown , despite the best efforts of my colleagues yesterday and first thing this morning .
The Commission is , once again , being profligate and irresponsible with other people 's money and this is why we will not be supporting either proposal .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Dartmouth , it has struck me that you are always trying to bring the British taxpayer into your speeches .
I would be interested to know whether you actually see yourself as representing a small group of people in the United Kingdom or whether you feel at all that you are a representative of the European Union ?
Madam President , I mentioned both the EU taxpayer and the British taxpayer in my speech .
I was , however , elected by people in Britain , not by people anywhere else , so I regard my prime responsibility as being to represent the British taxpayer .
My heart also goes out to hard-pressed EU taxpayers in other countries - not least in your own country , Austria , a contributing nation - whose money is also being wasted in the construction of these vain and fragile empires .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would like to address a few points .
First of all I want to raise the issue of flexibility of financing instruments in the external area .
Over the last few weeks and months we have all seen a lot of unforeseen catastrophes and events unfolding , and under the external heading we have almost no more margins left , while there are still a few years to go .
At the same time there is one instrument which is flexible , namely the Stability Instrument , which is then often used for other purposes than it was actually created for .
So I think we can agree that we need more flexibility in the foreign policy instruments , but we must underline that this can only go with enhanced democratic scrutiny at the same time .
We are currently fighting on this issue , and we also need to signal that , while for the future of the financial instruments there needs to be more flexibility , we cannot go ahead with that without the enhanced democratic scrutiny that we ask for .
Second point : we have to rethink how we do our work and provide our aid in fragile states .
Just yesterday the UN made once again the link between development and conflict , and pointed out that those countries that are in conflict are , of course , those that have the hardest time getting out of poverty .
So far the EU instruments have not really been adapted .
We have EU missions in some of these fragile states working alongside , but not always together with , our financial instruments .
So we have to reflect on what would be a good way of combining these two .
Last point , quickly , the events in North Africa have shown us the importance of human rights and democracy promotion , and for me also gender equality , and we need to be more daring in this regard in the future when revising the structures .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we should make it clear that in the case of these financing instruments we attach importance to making a distinction between legislative and executive tasks .
It is not the job of a parliament to carry out detailed management or to actually implement projects .
On the other hand , legislation must not result in a carte blanche being given for years on end with no ability to intervene if the action taken is not in accordance with the legislator 's will .
Consequently , whether or not this is a delegated act in legal terms , we must have the possibility of revoking decisions if , in the legislator 's opinion , they are not being executed in accordance with the spirit intended by the legislator .
For this reason - regardless of the legal ruling under which it was carried out , or whether or not it was carried out within the framework of delegated acts - the Commission and the Council must act in this matter in order to find a reasonable , objective solution ; this will also lead to us interfering less in executive matters and therefore , where everything runs properly , will give the executive body greater freedom .
I should like to endorse what Mrs Brandtner said .
Parliament implemented the instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights years ago , providing the possibility of bypassing governments and dictators in order to support civil society and democratic forces .
We are only now establishing that contrary to the will of the legislator , the Commission or now the External Action Service has never used this instrument in this way , which is a decisive element of the fact that we find ourselves in this situation in North Africa today .
Since this is a political failure - a failure to execute the will of the legislator - the regulation must be amended , and we intend to fight for this .
( PT ) Madam President , out with Mubarak , now !
The resistance forces are still shouting on Tahrir Square and I am shouting with them .
The demonstrations in Egypt , Tunisia and other Arab countries , with millions of citizens braving the streets to bring to an end to decades of oppression and corruption , show that human rights and democracy are universal aspirations and also how all those calling for stability to sustain dictatorships are flying in the face of history .
The democracy and human rights instrument is a tool of the European Union that can and must be used , without the consent of governments , in support of the defenders of human rights and those who promote gender equality , the rule of law , free elections and democracy .
Therefore , it must be strengthened financially , made flexible to deal with emergencies and be better coordinated with geographically focused instruments in the promotion of the same objectives .
It must be under adequate parliamentary scrutiny .
Hence the insistence of this Parliament on the delegated acts procedure .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , both Mrs Gomes and Mrs Lochbihler are right when they say that the events in Egypt and Tunisia should be receiving our support and should be attracting our attention , and indeed the instruments which we are debating , today , do create this possibility , particularly the financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide .
It is my conviction that this should be very strongly supported , because , indeed - as Mrs Gomes said - these rights are universal , and , this being so , the right to live in a democracy and the right to live in a country which accepts human rights are something which is quite obvious .
It is important that the second instrument allows for this assistance to be given irrespective of the consent of the governments of third countries and other public authorities .
This is something very important .
Our assistance is needed by Belarus and Ukraine , it is also needed by other countries of the Eastern Partnership , and I think these instruments should be used , too , for these very countries .

( PT ) Madam President , we are discussing here a series of packages concerning financial instruments , such as the Goerens report on a financial instrument for development cooperation , the report by my colleague , Mr Scholz , and others .
The majority of the reports aim for specific measures that could improve the lives of millions of people : in other words , legislative practice at its best .
However , the Council insists on not completing the codecision that these instruments require .
It is here that the process of codecision becomes a process of co-indecision by virtue of a tacit veto by the Council , which nothing in the reading of the Treaty justifies , and which is founded solely on capricious displeasure and an esoteric reading of Article 290 of the Treaty of Lisbon , which describes delegated acts .
This is putting people 's lives at risk .
With regard to the refugee resettlement policy , for example , we have been prevented from giving extra money to resettlement countries and closing refugee camps , which means that if the Council persists in continuing with this whim , people 's lives will be detrimentally affected .
It is time for this to stop and for delegated acts to develop normally in the codecision process .
( BG ) Madam President , I will , of course , support the proposal being made because Parliament must defend its rights when it concerns powers granted by the Treaties .
I wish to say that we need to extend our control , and not only to preliminary control of the delegated acts which we are discussing at the moment .
We must also have subsequent control because billions and billions of euros are being poured into some programmes , which usually end up in the pockets of various dictators , financing their fine lifestyle , while , at the same time , millions and millions of people are living in our own countries , who are also leading very miserable lives .
This also means that we are using European taxpayers ' money to finance the luxury lifestyle of dictators who are oppressing their own peoples , while our own citizens are badly off .
This is why we must remove the beam from our own eye and then see the speck in our brother 's eye , which will finally give us real , tight control over these resources .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are once again required to assert our role both inside and outside the European Union .
The promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms , which is enshrined in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights , our own Charter of Fundamental Rights and regional instruments , forms part of our foreign policy and of our social policy .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 on establishing a financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide needs to be an effective , practical instrument that has the flexibility to cope with exceptional operational situations .
The European Union 's contribution to these battles of civilisations through its external cooperation strategies and the proper use of the associated financial instruments , that is to say the greater effectiveness and visibility of the Union 's external action in the world , cannot disregard the responsibility and hence the control of its most representative body , which is the European Parliament .
In view of this fact , therefore , I endorse the proposed amendments , which are clearly in alignment with the changes in our constantly growing Europe .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) ) .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to ask if Mrs Matera is able to tell us whether the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) would be willing to lend its support specifically to the giving of assistance , on questions of democracy and human rights in particular , to countries in the east , by which I mean Ukraine , Belarus and other countries included in the Eastern Partnership .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , yes absolutely , my political group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , works hard every day , striving to ensure that fundamental human rights are respected throughout the world .
I believe the speeches by my distinguished colleagues who have been working here for much longer than I have confirmed and supported this House 's policy .
I stress the fact again that I belong to the political Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
We are staunchly pro-European and convinced of the role that this House can play around the world .
Madam President , I want to place on record my support for what other colleagues have said on the issue of parliamentary scrutiny of the instruments , and of the instrument for democracy and human rights in particular .
I want to thank the Commission for the structured cooperation we have .
By nature , human rights defenders are at risk and there needs to be a degree of privacy .
Let us make sure that this cooperation continues in the future .
One criticism of the projects would be that we run very high quality projects , but they are pepper-potted around the world and have not been sufficiently integrated into the other programmes .
The setting up of the External Action Service gives us a chance to remedy this .
We should make sure that we do so .
The concern that some of the programmes that are currently prepared by legally-qualified people may not be in the future is something that we need to deal with in order to maintain that quality in the future as well .
Finally , with what is happening in Egypt and elsewhere in the Arab world at the moment , we know there will be an increasing call for finance for democracy-building and election monitoring in the future .
We have insisted on the fixed percentage within the regulation , otherwise it would crowd out other human rights projects .
However , we may need more money , and when it comes to the new financial perspective we must not go back to the old argument that we should get rid of this regulation .
It is needed today more than ever .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , I wish to thank the previous speaker for permitting me to ask him a question .
I have great respect for Mr Howitt 's knowledge on human rights and the work he has done in the past .
My question is this . How can we take our presumptions about equality and fairness and justice , born of a deep Christian or humanist tradition , in Europe , and expect other cultures with other religions or beliefs , or with a lack of beliefs , to understand exactly what we are saying , without appearing to be ramming neo-colonial ideas down their throats ?
How can we do that ?
Madam President , answering that question in 30 seconds is a big challenge .
The answer - as he and this whole Chamber should know - is that freedom of thought and religion is a fundamental human right for all nations , for all religions , for all countries and for all people .
( DE ) Madam President , development aid is always costly , often unfortunately ineffective and sometimes even harmful , because it all too frequently does not deal with the specific problems of the country in question .
There is rarely any attempt to take a long-term approach and the activities are poorly coordinated .
In my opinion , it is doubtful whether an EU-wide financing instrument for development and human rights can improve the situation , particularly as there is no consistent coordination within the EU .
Giving aid to small African farmers , while at the same time bringing them to the brink of ruin with our subsidised agricultural products , ultimately means that we are throwing billions of euros down the drain .
This will not change to any significant extent as long as we continue supporting large companies in the EU and indirectly in the developing countries .
China 's development aid , which the government in Beijing is using to secure raw materials and new markets , is in competition with our traditional development cooperation methods .
In this area too , we will have to come up with some new ideas .
In addition , it is equally important to make development aid dependent on cooperation with regard to the refugee problem , perhaps by introducing readmission agreements .
( NL ) Madam President , this Parliament is asking for what every parliament in the world is asking : democratic scrutiny of the development and implementation of policy .
The European Union should serve as a model , as an example , in that respect .
The Treaty of Lisbon has been a major step forward in developing the European Parliament 's influence .
There is in this House a large majority which has not given into Council and Commission efforts to curtail parliamentary scrutiny , which is contrary to the spirit of the Treaty .
This House does not want to be a micromanager , it simply wants an influence on policy , on how it is developed and implemented .
This is therefore about strategic choices , about the content of policy .
In other countries , people take to the streets to demand that influence and we should support them in every way we can .
However , the struggle for democracy also sometimes takes the form of difficult negotiations and dry statements .
This in no way affects the underlying conviction , as any power requires maximum democratic scrutiny .
That is the right of all citizens , whether in Cairo , in Tunis or in Brussels .
Madam President , a young woman in my constituency has this morning , as every weekday morning at this time , just returned home from walking her two young children to school .
Jenny used to drive them there but she can no longer afford to put petrol in the car for anything other than her twice-weekly trip to the cheapest supermarket in her part of Manchester .
This morning , as every morning , Jenny is hungry because she has a choice for breakfast : either she eats or her two little girls eat .
There is not enough bread and jam for all of them .
Meanwhile , here on planet EU , MEPs discuss tweaks to a financial instrument that involves the spending of EUR 1.1 billion of taxpayers ' money on promoting democracy and human rights , mainly in the third world .
Most of those tweaks further reduce the oversight the nation states have , as the Commission burns its way through vast amounts of British taxpayers ' money .
What a waste and what hypocrisy to bang on about women 's rights in Africa when thousands of Jennies cannot even feed their kids properly .
( RO ) Madam President , we would probably not have discussed cooperation with the developing countries if the European Union 's founding states had not requested a special mention in the Treaty of Rome for the colonies that they possessed , which casts a shadow over the concept of democracy to start with .
The European Union 's very foundation has gradually transformed into a policy whose key concepts have become eradication of poverty and the promotion of human rights , basic freedoms , decent work and good governance .
Nowadays , developing countries are strategic partners for the European Union .
This is why I believe that a financial instrument for developing countries which do not meet the ODA criteria facilitates economic , financial , technical , cultural and academic cooperation .
In addition , they can boost bilateral trade , investments , economic partnerships and the promotion of dialogue between public sector players and non-governmental organisations both in the European Union and partner countries .
( DE ) Madam President , the dictators in our neighbouring countries are being toppled and it is a good thing that they are going .
Although our High Representatives in the European Union are not in a position or are not prepared to support and encourage those people who are fighting for democracy , it is good at least to be able to take action and provide help , even if we are not talking .
However , it is very important for us to combine the aid we provide with a requirement to comply with our values , including democracy , the rule of law and core labour standards .
It is essential for the European Union to provide help .
In addition , we must not only help these people , but also ensure that they understand the values which have made us strong .
Given that this is the case , it is clear to me that this aid must ultimately be controlled and managed by a democratic Parliament .
In future , we must not allow the European Union 's actions to be controlled by a bureaucratic organisation .
Parliament must be put in a position to fulfil its role as a parliamentary body , which means being able to take decisions .
( RO ) Madam President , Parliament must be able to control on an equal footing with the Council the adoption of strategic decisions relating to how the resources allocated by the financing instruments for cooperation are spent .
However , at the same time , the EU must become more flexible and speed up the mechanisms for developing trade relations with partner countries .
I support the idea of the Union adopting a pragmatic approach in its economic relations with partner countries .
I think that it is particularly important to implement financing instruments in countries like Turkmenistan and Iraq , which can provide energy resources through projects such as Nabucco .
I would also like to mention here that the joint declaration from the presidents of Romania and Turkmenistan has marked the establishment of an energy partnership for exploiting and transporting natural gas and crude oil , including through the transfer of experience and equipment .
Romania has also been involved in carrying out stabilisation and reconstruction missions in Iraq .
( SL ) Madam President , a significant part of the resources which are available to us through financing instruments and which are intended for the development of developing countries ends up via certain channels back in the hands of our companies or monopolies at home .
I think that an essential purpose of these financial and policy instruments should be to ensure that the resources are used in accordance with the development plans of those whom we want to support .
Several speakers have already pointed out that we often finance regimes which are anything but democratic .
When it comes to financing the development of the poorest countries , I think that we should be careful not to perpetuate the single-crop farming trend , but to open up opportunities for the modern development of these countries .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I have listened carefully to the numerous contributions .
The Commission hopes that we will find a solution for these important financing instruments .
However , we need to be able to fully implement external relations financial instruments .
Proper implementation of our external actions should not be taken hostage by a dispute between the institutions .
It is difficult to retain credibility vis-à-vis the outside world on such a basis , and this exposes us to loss of relevance as a global player and trade negotiator .
The Commission stands ready to work towards a rapid solution that is agreed by all the institutions concerned .
In the current instruments , which are in force until 2013 , which means another two years , multiannual strategy papers are considered to be implementing measures necessary for the implementation of the budget .
Such measures are subject to the comitology system .
Strategy papers are technical documents , and so by their nature are not suited to take the form of binding legal acts .
The current instruments have only two more years to run and there remain only a few strategy papers to be put in place .
The Commission considers that to change this system now would require significant changes to instruments , which would take too long to put in place and which would cause major disruption to EU external cooperation .
The Commission already involves Parliament in the process of democratic scrutiny of strategy papers .
The Commission is willing to reinforce this process with substantive scrutiny rights for Parliament .
It is too soon to say what the new instruments will look like because they are subject to extensive consultation with stakeholders and to Commission proposals .
Provided that the criteria established in Article 290 of the Lisbon Treaty are fully respected , the option is open to consider recourse to delegated acts in the new instruments , but the Commission does not yet have a set view on this question .
Madam President , I too would like to thank all the speakers who talked about financing instruments in general and about those relating to the report that I have submitted to you this morning in particular .
I think that Mr Brok found the right words to express what we want .
We do not want to be troublemakers , but neither do we want to give the Commission carte blanche to implement fundamental agreements adopted by the European Parliament without there being any parliamentary oversight .
Between having everything or nothing , Parliament insisted on a sensible solution that consists in closely monitoring strategic acts .
We are demanding nothing more and nothing less than that .
I would also like to say a word about those who were more critical in their remarks , specifically those who spoke rather sceptically about development cooperation policy , and those who always refer to the taxpayer in order to reject any support for development cooperation policy .
From my point of view , the taxpayer finances a budget .
A budget is an instrument for showing solidarity with the least well off .
Hence , thanks to taxpayers ' contributions , the budget generally provides an opportunity for our countries to help the weakest in society .
The alternative would to be to ignore the basic , fundamental rights of people thus deprived of resources .
I would , however , recommend that those Members consult the reports of the United Nations Development Programme , to see that those who contribute the most in terms of cooperation and external solidarity are the ones who also spend the most on internal solidarity within their country .
In other words , there is no inherent contradiction between internal solidarity and external solidarity .
Those who would like the rest of the world to believe that any money of ours that is spent on external solidarity is money wasted in the four corners of the world would therefore be well advised to reread the statistics in the United Nations Human Development Report .
Madam President , I believe that it has become very clear during the debate why we in Parliament want these delegated acts .
We do not want micro-management , but we do need to be able to use this instrument in a responsible and well-informed way , so that we can , if necessary , correct what has gone wrong .
If we talk about Parliament 's position with external bodies , for example , with human rights organisations which could be affected by this and if we fail to come to an agreement , although I hope that this is not the case , and if individual projects cannot then take place , I believe that there is support and understanding for Parliament 's position .
It is not true that Parliament and the concept are not understood .
I would like to say something briefly about the criticism that too much money is being spent by Parliament on human rights and the development of democracy .
I think that the opposite is the case .
If we consider this instrument for human rights and the promotion of democracy , which has only been in existence since 2004 , we can see even now that a great deal can be achieved with relatively little money .
We cannot simply look at this as a whole .
Instead we need to focus in detail on what these projects have achieved .
Projects have only had to be discontinued in a few individual cases .
If we really want to see the fundamental values of the EU being put into effect , if we really want people to live in freedom , free from poverty and free from fear , we must promote human rights .
This instrument makes a very good complement to our policy for requiring other states to support human rights .
We are not spending too much money .
On the contrary , we need much clearer financial support .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Madam President , I thank my fellow Members and the Commissioner for their opinions expressed in the debate , and naturally my fellow Members for their words supporting our decision .
Mr Brok made it quite clear that we really want to make a distinction between executive and legislative duties .
Our aim is not to mix these but , as it has been stated here by both the rapporteurs and my fellow Members , Parliament must have the opportunity to have a say in planning and in strategy to make execution really function effectively and to direct the funds to where they are most needed .
I would like to remark with regard to the opinions about the use of the funds in particular that I do not believe that any taxpayer would question the importance of us being able to help or save human lives , the lives of human rights activists , through this financing instrument for defending democratic and human rights , so I believe that this is exactly the instrument which would be accepted by any taxpayer .
I take extremely seriously what the Commissioner , too , has said , that Parliament has been assigned new powers and stronger rights after Lisbon .
For this reason we would really like the Council and the Commission to show openness so that a good compromise may finally be reached , since we all have an interest in making these instruments work really efficiently , and for this all three institutions are needed .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I understand I have some injury time for not being able to get in at the beginning of the debate .
My apologies - I got held up in traffic .
First of all , a British colleague has criticised the situation with regard to the importance of democracy and human rights .
If democracy and human rights were functioning in our Member States , then we would not have children going to school on bread and jam , and that is the reality of it .
Whether in Britain or in any other Member State , I think it is clearly a matter for those Member States to ensure that does not happen .
Let us be very clear about what this is all about : not just democracy and human rights .
Twenty-two thousand children die each day , every day , a short plane journey from this building .
Twenty-two thousand .
The good news is that it used to be 34 000 .
We and others have brought it down to 22 000 because of democracy and human rights and the sort of financial instruments which the Union has approved .
Let us not pit those people against children in our own Member States going to school on bread and jam , which I deplore also .
Let our Member State governments get their act together in dealing with those children .
This issue is about implementation or delegated acts .
Is it implementation , or is it a delegated act - in which case it is legislation ?
I propose to stick completely to Parliament 's first reading and thus to say that we will reinstate - have reinstated - all amendments .
These have not been accepted by the Council .
The issue at stake is one of principle and is crucial to the future nature of interinstitutional relations in the area of external action .
The amendments proposed by Parliament do not concern the substance of the DCI or the other instruments , but the role of Parliament in the practical implementation of the law .
The objective is to protect the democratic prerogatives of the European Parliament , as provided for in the Lisbon Treaty .
As co-legislator , we must be able to control , on an equal footing with the Council , the adoption and the execution of strategic decisions on the spending of development aid : how much , where and how .
In technical terms , the amendments ensure that certain draft decisions taken by the Commission are recognised as delegated acts as defined in Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
This would give the two branches of the legislative authority the possibility to object to draft decisions which are not in conformity with the requirements of the law .
This veto would ensure that Parliament 's suggestions are taken into account when the Commission programmes EU aid .
Let me be clear that we are not talking about micro-management , as a colleague has already said , or individual programmes and projects .
The amendments will ensure that legislators keep control over strategic decisions concerning funding allocations and sectoral priorities .
All proposed amendments were already included in Parliament 's first reading position , which was adopted by plenary with a large majority on 21 October 2010 .
However , the Council has flatly rejected all amendments on democratic scrutiny and delegated acts , without proposing any alternative solution which would satisfy Parliament 's demands .
It is unfortunate that during the many months - almost one year - that have passed since the first discussion of the dossier in committee , interinstitutional negotiations have not made any progress .
I can assure this House that we have really tried very hard .
Negotiations with the Council and the Commission - which should incidentally facilitate these negotiations - started in February 2010 .
We held three dialogues and several meetings at technical level , both on the contentious issues of delegated acts .
On these issues , there has been no rapprochement .
Only towards the end of last year did the Commission negotiators come up with a compromise proposal .
Parliament immediately reacted with a counterproposal , but this was not reflected in the Council 's position .
We understand that it was not formally transmitted to the Member States in the Council .
Despite the hard line of the Council , which is shared by the Commission - something I regret because it is not its constitutional position to do so - Parliament insists on its position .
Legally , our arguments are sound .
The strategy papers are multiannual programmes , decided under the DCI for example , which fulfil the criteria for the application of the delegated act procedure .
They supplement the basic regulation and are of general application .
The criteria mentioned in Article 290 are compulsory if they are fulfilled .
The Council and Parliament must have a veto right .
This is not a matter of political bargaining or any special arrangements , as that would be contrary to the Treaty .
It is a legal obligation .
Politically , we have the full support of our Conference of Presidents , which decided on two different occasions - most recently earlier this month - that in all dossiers negotiators should insist on the application of the delegated acts procedure for decisions concerning objectives , the choice of priorities , expected results and financial allocations in broad terms .
We also have a common line among the committees : the rapporteurs in the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Foreign Affairs - respectively responsible for instruments for cooperation with industrialised countries and instruments for human rights and democracy - have adopted the very same approach as I have .
All amendments concerning delegated acts from first reading should be reinstated .
Our position is plain and simple and fully in line with the mandate of the Conference of Presidents .
We will not be divided or have our role as a legislature ignored .
I am convinced that the introduction of the new procedure would also be in the interests of the intended beneficiaries of our financial instruments .
Parliament could play its role as watchdog much more effectively and ensure that the money is spent on the core objectives of the Union 's development cooperation defined in the Treaty : the reduction - and ultimately the eradication - of poverty .
Twenty-two thousand children do not need to die each day , every day .
We demand to have our say on how this issue is addressed .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Madam President , I just wanted to ask my honourable colleague and friend , Mr Mitchell , whether he agrees with me that in 2005 Parliament gave up 14 areas of codecision on these financing instruments .
What we are actually trying to do now is to get some restitution , because we not only lost our ability to look at what is going on with the Commission , but we also lost the accountability process and the transparency process , so I want to ask Mr Mitchell ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

rapporteur . - Madam President , I agree with Mr Deva that we gave up certain of our rights .
I was the rapporteur on the Development and Cooperation Instrument .
It took us two and a half years to agree that instrument because we simply would not give up on certain core rights of Parliament , but we did have to compromise towards the end .
In the end , there was an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council which said that we , through our Committee on Development for example , would have scrutiny rights over the DCI , and we set up groups to carry out that agreement .
These instruments are in the spirit of that agreement , which should be continued .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr De Gucht , you are absolutely right that the outside world does not understand why we cannot come to an agreement with the Council .
The Council is not even present for this debate , which I very much regret , because that is not a good omen for the completion of the second reading .
However , we must ask why a normal principle and a normal right , which are enshrined in the treaty , are not being recognised .
I believe , and Mr Brok has discussed this in detail , that this is only about giving us the opportunity to intervene .
Perhaps I can give one more example with regard to the content .
In the Commission 's multiannual plan for my industrialised countries instrument ( ICI ) , the reference document was not the amended regulation , but instead the Global Europe strategy .
This uses language which has become obsolete since the advent of the economic crisis and the resulting trade problems when it says that the objective of the multiannual plan is to promote European business and profit interests .
According to the text , the instrument is intended to resolve the problems which EU companies have in penetrating certain markets .
I can only repeat that this is not what the legislators intended the instrument to achieve and they have not put aside any taxpayers ' money for this purpose .
In our view , the ICI should be a modern cooperation programme and not a weapon of conquest .
To give another example , this time in more blunt terms : For us , the countries of south-east Asia are not just junior partners , as the Commission has stated .
As part of the cooperation with central Asia , the instrument must not focus solely on EU access to the gas reserves there .
When we look at the Maghreb region and the developments in the Middle East , it is clear that we need to take a long-term , large-scale approach to cooperation .
I hope that the new regulation will be future-proof .
I also hope that this financing instrument will encourage exchanges on an equal footing between the EU and third countries and will help to create openness throughout the world and promote responsible support for sustainable development processes which are in the interests of citizens .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 .
The European financing instrument for promoting democracy and human rights is one of the EU 's only foreign policy instruments which still maintains a rigid system for allocating funds , due to the fact that it does not offer the opportunity for an exemption from the principle of ineligibility of costs relating to taxes , duties and other charges financed by the EU .
In a situation where we are faced with deteriorating protection for human rights worldwide , I believe that it is an absolute necessity for the European Union to reassert its role as a global leader for democracy and fundamental rights .
In this respect , it is especially necessary to make the European financing instrument more adaptable to enable the Union and beneficiaries of European financial assistance to enjoy a certain degree of flexibility in managing the projects they undertake .
On the other hand , this flexible approach to granting EU funds will be monitored closely to prevent the occurrence of abuses .
Apart from the exemption which should remain regarding the approval of the financing of costs relating to duties , taxes and other charges and carried out on a case-by-case basis , the European Parliament must have the right to monitor the activities carried out by the Commission and the strategic documents adopted by it .
The recommendation for a second reading on the establishment of a financing instrument for development cooperation , mentions the high level of agreement over the measures , and in principle adopts all of the amendments from the first reading .
I personally consider it a priority to resolve the systemic issues relating to the multiannual funding of development assistance , and I agree with the rapporteur that we must sort out the funding method for 2012 and 2013 .
The recommendation states that the regulation radically reduces spare capacity within the framework of the ceiling for Heading 4 of the multiannual financial framework for the period 2007-2013 , and does not leave sufficient room for manoeuvre in respect of addressing and responding to any future crises .
The recommendation also addresses legislative issues in the procedural approach of the Council , which Parliament criticises , since Parliament should have the same monitoring powers as the Council when it comes to adopting strategic decisions over the issue of where and how development aid will be spent .
In accordance with both the letter and the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon , I therefore support the urgent incorporation into the regulation on the instrument for development cooperation of a properly integrated procedure for delegated acts relating to the planning of other external action financing instruments which are currently under review , that is , the stability instrument , the instrument for human rights and democracy and the instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries .
in writing . - ( CS ) One of the main aims of EU development policy is the reduction and definitive eradication of poverty , to which the proposed EUR 190 million Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) for 2010-2013 , approved by the Commission on 17 March 2010 , should make a clear contribution .
It is also true that in the past , plans in this area were drawn up more from a commercial perspective than from a development perspective , and it is precisely the development perspective that should be reflected in the new proposal .
It also seems right to support the BAMs with the aim of improving living standards for people in the ACP countries which supply bananas , and which are affected by the duties levied on bananas imported into the EU .
Nevertheless , the Commission 's proposal has certain shortcomings , such as the absence of an impact assessment in respect of the proposed measures , the timing of drawdowns , the questionable large-scale use of EU reserves or the continuing problem of insufficient funding for Heading 4 , which the Commission correctly pointed out in its assessment report on the functioning of the interinstitutional agreement .
On the whole , I think that the report submitted by Charles Goerens presents an accurate analysis of the issue both from a commercial and a development perspective , reflecting the comments approved by the Committee on Budgets on 13 April 2010 , and that it also contains relevant recommendations in the BAM area , and I therefore recommend approving the proposed version .
I understand the Commission 's demand for greater flexibility in the funding of politically sensitive projects aimed at supporting democracy and human rights .
However , at the same time , I firmly believe that if this Parliament has to give the Commission a freer hand in financing such projects , it must retain its monitoring role .
In the final analysis , it is we who are responsible to the people for the EU budget .
If we are talking about financial instruments for supporting the spread of democracy , legal certainty and respect for human beings , we should also be talking about the effectiveness of these instruments , and about whether we might promote democracy and human rights in even more effective ways .
In the debate on the persecution of Christians worldwide , the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs assured us that every bilateral agreement on cooperation now includes a clause on democracy and human rights .
To make any financial assistance or commercial agreement conditional on the fulfilment of these obligations might help to spread democracy and respect for fundamental human rights more than supporting various more and less sensible projects .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment ( debate )
( The next item is the report by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) ( recast ) - C6-0472 / 2008 - .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Potočnik , firstly I would like to thank all the kind people in this House and in the Commission who have helped me during this phase .
The process has not been exactly straightforward .
The cooperation with the Commission was excellent and I would like once again to give my sincere thanks to the team in my office who worked around the clock on this report .
The issue of electronic waste is not about implementing exaggerated environmental standards .
On the one hand , it is true that these are environmental standards , but on the other hand , this also concerns the question of safeguarding our supplies of raw materials in Europe .
We all know that in the foreseeable future raw materials will be in short supply .
What use are advanced technologies if we no longer have any raw materials ?
Therefore , we also need to look at this report from an economic perspective and then it unfortunately becomes clear that we are weak in a number of areas .
The European countries have varying collection rates .
The countries in the north are the best , with a rate of 16 kg per head of population .
The worst performer is the country where my name comes from , where only 1 kg per year is collected .
With rates of 16 kg and 1 kg , it is important not to keep quiet about those countries with a good record , but we also need to name and shame the poor performers and I intend to do that .
We must finally introduce uniform criteria in this directive , because these have been lacking until now .
Every country is doing what it wants and using its own definitions .
This is why it is not really possible to bring the countries with such poor collection rates before a court , because they are acting correctly according to their own standards .
The situation in the European Union must change , because we are living in an internal market .
Sometimes we seem to have forgotten that .
We must not give up the huge benefits that the European Union can bring .
This is why it is right that this piece of Swiss cheese which is full of holes is finally being transformed into something consisting of more cheese and fewer holes .
The Commission is now on the right track , but unfortunately it has neglected to carry out checks in recent years .
I would have liked to have seen greater commitment from the Commission in this respect .
However , that is in the past and we hope that the future will be better .
It really is not easy when the Member States go their own way and even my own country is not exactly biddable .
We are right to define the collection targets more clearly .
We are right to put a stop to illegal exports .
The examples I can give would make your hair stand on end .
In a large port in one country , 420 containers containing high-quality electronic waste were checked and 360 of them were illegal .
Our children will be asking us very uncomfortable questions , if we cannot finally bring this situation under control .
One tonne of circuit boards contains 200 grams of gold , while one tonne of ore contains only 2 grams of gold .
We cannot afford to go on in this way in future and I hope that the citizens of Europe will become more aware of these economic issues .
This is why we want a more dedicated collection system .
Specifically , we want it to be possible for small appliances , which can easily be thrown into the dustbin , to be handed in free of charge .
We can put in place exceptions for very small businesses , but as a general rule we must make it easier to hand in electronic devices , rather than putting them in the dustbin , because we need the valuable raw materials .
That is our main goal .
We must also stop illegal shipments and change the scope of the directive .
Today , if you manufacture a lamp , you have to register it in all 27 Member States in order to be able to sell it , simply because of the waste directive .
The system must be brought up-to-date and made more attractive .
We are on the way to achieving this .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would also like first to thank Parliament , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , and his team , the shadows and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , for their hard work .
Their commitment and interest in this matter is reflected in the amendments that were adopted in committee and tabled in recent weeks .
I am pleased to see that many amendments fully support the objectives of the Commission 's proposals on the directive on waste electronic and electrical equipment , namely : to fully reap the environmental benefits of the WEEE Directive by setting ambitious collection and recovery targets that are realistic for all the Member States ; to strengthen implementation and enforcement by establishing detailed rules to fight illegal exports of EU waste ; and to reduce unnecessary administrative burdens significantly for European producers through reinforced cooperation among national authorities .
By strengthening the WEEE Directive we can make an important contribution towards becoming a resource-efficient recycling society .
We are talking about the fastest growing waste stream in Europe , and one with huge potential for reducing our dependence on imported or virgin raw materials .
Based on this very positive background of broad agreement between Parliament and the Commission , let me make some introductory comments on the three specific issues .
The Commission is pleased that Parliament fully accepts the ambition level and starting date for the new collection target .
It is ambitious in order to benefit our environment and increase the resource efficiency of our economy , and it is achievable for each Member State , which is also important .
The committee proposes to define the target in a new way by mentioning the ultimate goal - collecting a proportion of the WEEE generated - explicitly in the wording .
The Commission can agree to this approach if an appropriate methodology to calculate the WEEE generated is established .
The Commission is willing to contribute to coming up with this methodology , as proposed by the committee .
Concerning the scope of the directive , it is proposed that the link between derogations to the WEEE Directive be abolished .
This is acceptable to the Commission , because the principle objective of the Commission proposal in this area was to clarify , but not to change , the scope of the WEEE Directive .
Finally , concerning photovoltaic models , which are one specific issue within the matter of the scope of the directive , the Commission proposes to exclude them specifically from the scope of the directive which , as you know , is in line with the committee 's proposal and the current directive .
However , we are aware of the increasing number of concerns relating to the potential environmental impact of solar panels , particularly in their waste phase .
A voluntary agreement recently submitted by the solar panel industry clearly fails to meet the criteria for such agreements .
An evaluation of the agreement by the Commission 's services will be published very soon .
We clearly need to assess properly the environmental risks and opportunities of the disposal of solar panels before considering their inclusion in the scope of the WEEE directive .
To conclude , as you know , the new WEEE Directive was proposed under the recast procedure , which combines the requalification of existing texts with designated new or amended elements .
We still believe that , when the recast procedure is used , we should in principle respect the agreed rules of the procedure .
Only those elements have been truly impact-assessed .
However , we sympathise with the intentions , and agree with the direction , of certain amendments which were tabled by the committee .
I am now curious to listen to your debate on the proposal and the proposed amendments , and will make further comments , on behalf of the Commission , in my closing remarks .

Madam President , firstly I would like to thank Mr Florenz for his highly pragmatic approach to this subject and for his stamina .
I would like to start with a question for Mr Potočnik .
You say that we must deal with the Member States in accordance with their ability to collect waste .
It is true that the motto of the European Union is ' United in diversity ' but can it really be right that one Member State collects 16 kg of waste per head and another only 1 kg ?
Is this not a misinterpretation of diversity ?
I am calling on you openly to take a stricter approach on waste with the Member States .
We are busy adopting regulations here in Parliament while the Member States are doing what they want .
This must not happen in future .
I would like to remind you about the interview you gave during the waste crisis in Naples .
Italy was condemned at the time and there is still no proper plan on the table .
You need to be stricter .
It is the function of the Commission , in its capacity as the custodian of the treaties , to remind those Member States which are lagging behind about their obligations .
In this area , we have a rapidly growing market and the future of Europe will depend on how we manage this waste problem .
We need the Member States to implement the regulations properly .
If they are too lax in this respect , then we will not be able to make progress .
I would have liked to have asked you to set realistic targets , in particular with regard to the smallest companies , and to include consumers .
It is clear that everyone must take on their share of the responsibility .
However , we need to remind those responsible , and when it comes to the implementation this is the Member States , what their responsibilities are .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , on the eve of the energy summit and at a time when the Commission and Parliament are placing a great deal of emphasis on energy efficiency and good management of our raw materials , this is the kind of directive which should effectively translate those fine ideas into practice .
That is Parliament 's ambition and with that in mind we have worked on our amendments .
This is about an ever-growing mountain of waste , but not just about waste .
Each of these electronic products contains several materials which we urgently need to recycle and reuse .
It is very clear that the first directive has failed to meet that objective .
If we consider the fact that only one in three products is recycled or reused and that we do not even know where one in two of such products are to be found , then we have to set higher collection and better recycling targets .
Above all , we should ensure that we curb exports of such products to the rest of the world .
What we want , in fact , is for such products to remain here and for us to keep the raw materials .
In addition , we have major ethical and ecological concerns about the way in which these products are being dealt with in developing countries , in particular .
In other words , Parliament wants clear and very specific targets .
I would very explicitly like to thank my fellow members , the shadow rapporteurs and , of course , Mr Florenz , the rapporteur , for their excellent cooperation , thanks to which we have been able to table a coherent text .
We are a Parliament that will stand firm in the negotiations with the Council .
Council , be warned , because we really want to translate these ideas into practice .
For the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , it is extremely important that we put extra emphasis on illegal export and that we also enter the fray on small WEEE .
This is extremely important .
We have no one dumping large refrigerators by the roadside any more , but our small appliances are not being properly disposed of yet .
Commissioner , I have listened very carefully to what you said about photovoltaic panels .
You know that my group has fought long and hard against these being granted a special exemption .
We have not discussed photovoltaic panels here , but I will keep you to your word .
You have said that you will carry out an evaluation and that that evaluation will form part of the debate with the Council on whether or not photovoltaic panels will be included .
In any case , I ask my fellow members to wholeheartedly support the ambitious text before us today .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( BG ) Madam President , Europe pays more than EUR 130 billion every year to import strategic metals to support its industry .
This expense can be significantly reduced with the improved text of the European directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment , which we adopted by a large majority in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in the summer .
This is why I must congratulate the rapporteur Karl-Heinz Florenz and the other rapporteurs for the exceptionally skilful and responsible job they have done .
The compromise text , which will be presented to you today to vote on , marks an important step forward in the management of waste electrical and electronic equipment in Europe .
Furthermore , thanks to the new , more ambitious specific target and the improved waste collection scheme with clearly highlighted responsibility , Europe can also resolve its important and , I would say , strategic problem .
This is because a great deal of the waste electronic and electrical equipment in Europe contains precious metals such as gold , platinum , palladium , copper , nickel and others , which can be extracted and reused many times over .
Just to give an example , in 2006 , according to Eurostat data , European Union countries dumped almost 307 million tonnes of recyclable waste and equipment .
The report marks a significant advance not only in terms of the increased waste collection target , but also in terms of better environmental protection .
This is why I call on all fellow Members to support the report in its entirety .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are trying in this endeavour to address the problem of the spiralling increase in waste electrical and electronic equipment , which is forecast to reach 12.3 million tonnes by 2020 .
The review of the directive is an excellent opportunity to put a stop to leaks of hazardous substances due to the lack of official collection points , irrational management and illegal shipments .
The basic problems we have to address are : firstly , the fact that , although 65 % of waste electrical and electronic equipment on the market is collected separately , less than half is treated and declared and the rest ends up in the environment or is exported to third countries .
Secondly , the current collection quota of four kilos per person per annum for waste generated by households does not reflect consumption in certain Member States and thus results in very low targets in some countries and excessively ambitious targets in others .
Thirdly , there are different procedures for registering and recording output in various countries and , finally , commitments are not applied .
What we have done is this : firstly , we have broadened the scope to all waste , with just a few exceptions .
Secondly , we have increased collection targets for this waste to 85 % by 2016 .
Thirdly , we have set a separate target of 5 % for re-use of complete electronic and electrical devices .
Fourthly , the Member States must provide adequate resources for collecting waste from households .
Fifthly , retailers should not only take this waste back when a new item is purchased ; they should also collect very small volume waste .
The producer does not have to come from the country in which he wishes to register and , finally , we want close monitoring of shipments .
Above all , however , what we need is to encourage the production of long-lasting appliances .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I would also like to express my thanks to all the shadow rapporteurs and the rapporteur for the work that has been done on this .
The aims of the directive are clear , and my group is happy to support them in principle .
WEEE is the fastest growing waste stream in Europe and we simply have to have an adequate directive to deal with it .
There are of course many details that still need to be dealt with here .
Firstly , I want to mention the costs .
Recycling , re-use and ultimate disposal are not cheap and not free .
The ' producer-pays ' principle is paramount .
We must not impose a system that increases the costs for the general taxpayer , particularly in this era of fiscal consolidation .
Secondly , I want to emphasise the need to maintain flexibility for Member States .
Yes , I totally agree : let us set challenging targets , but let us not confuse targets with compliance .
Let us not be over-prescriptive in directing how Member States get there .
Echoing Ms Van Brempt , I also want to mention needs in relation to small WEEE .
This is an area that has been sadly neglected .
I think that the proposed ambitious targets will ensure that a larger percentage of smaller WEEE will be collected in the future .
I look forward to that .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the amount of waste equipment is increasing dramatically .
Millions of tonnes of electric and electronic waste are produced in the EU every year and this represents a genuine hazard for people and the environment .
I am pleased that the report by Mr Florenz recognises this problem and that we were able to introduce some pleasing improvements in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety which had the support of all the groups .
The stricter export regulations for electric and electronic waste are important .
I hope that you , ladies and gentlemen , will support this regulation which , above all , will help to protect the people in those countries which are affected .
However , I still do not agree with the exclusion of solar modules from the directive .
I take a very critical view of the voluntary collection of items by producers .
A few manufacturers use cadmium , which is a toxic substance , in their solar modules .
The fact that modules are frequently removed by do-it-yourself enthusiasts presents an additional risk .
Nanomaterials can also be hazardous for people and the environment during the recycling process .
Some nanomaterials come with clear instructions stating that they are damaging to health .
Therefore , I am calling on the Commission to subject nanomaterials to a detailed investigation .
If it is not possible to prove conclusively that these products are not hazardous , then they should not be allowed onto the market .
This is why we have tabled two amendments together with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and I would like to ask you to support them .
These are Amendments 101 and 102 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the measure under examination contains some critical issues that can only be resolved if they are discussed again at second reading .
In addition to unacceptable rules to the detriment of distributors and , down the supply chain , consumers , who will be obliged to recover old equipment and assess whether it can be reused , the collection rate is being raised from an already unrealistic 65 % right up to 85 % .
Since waste management is a responsibility of the Member States , how can we force producers and distributors to recover 85 % ?
If consumers dispose of equipment themselves by giving it away or reselling it , how can other people be held responsible for recovering it ?
The text also lays down the obligation of recovering 5 % of waste for reuse .
That means going against the environment and consumer safety , because old , high-energy consumption and potentially dangerous equipment would be put back on the market .
If the text remains the one adopted in committee and not the one with the amendments included , we will vote against it .
( PL ) Madam President , waste electrical and electronic equipment represents the fastest-growing waste stream in the European Union .
It is a problem which exists at many levels , because on the one hand it concerns protecting the environment and human health , and on the other it is about the effective management of resources and natural materials .
Revision of the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment should give consideration to goals which are not only ambitious , but which are also more realistic from the point of view of the new Member States .
In the new Member States , electronic equipment such as computers , televisions and refrigerators is changed much less frequently , and these appliances are used for much longer than in other countries .
The amendments tabled by the rapporteur represent a move towards solving the problem of disproportionate methodology and the unfavourable treatment of the European Union 's new Member States .
Such a system takes much greater account of market variances and differences in thinking between individual Member States .
I do think , however , that new regulations in this area should place greater emphasis on effective inspection of collections and the enforcement of legislation .
Numerous irregularities occur in many countries , such as the creation of fictitious documentation of waste collections , for example , in a practice known as invoice trading .
This is a common situation , in which false documentation is generated to certify the collection and processing of equipment , to overstate the weight of equipment processed , or to issue certification that different equipment was collected than was really the case .
In addition , inadequate monitoring and inspection mean that in many countries a grey market is in operation , in which equipment collected is dismantled at sites other than treatment facilities .
It is necessary to show determination in the prevention of such situations and not to allow similar practices to develop .
Madam President , I should like to point out to the Commissioner that , where I live , if I want to recycle any of my electrical goods , I have got to take them to a local council site myself .
There are about four or five in my city and they are only open at certain times .
If I want to recycle cardboard , paper , plastics or glass , these are collected at the kerbside , from my home .
If I want to recycle batteries , I can take my old batteries to any retailer .
If we want to see the targets increased for waste electrical goods , we have to have more of that kind of collection .
We have got to make it easier for the public to dispose of their electrical goods , and particularly small electrical goods .
When the target of four tonnes per person was set , it was totally inadequate .
It was met too easily just by people recycling their fridges or their big electrical goods .
We need a much more ambitious target in order to drive the market and to make sure that companies are set up which can strip the useful elements out of these goods .
Last week , Commissioner , you launched your resource efficiency strategy .
This directive is part and parcel of that .
It should be the norm that every item of electrical waste is collected and most of it recycled , not the exception .
Unfortunately , in Europe , today it is the exception .
Tomorrow it has got to be the rule .
I am afraid we will never succeed in your long-term strategy of resource efficiency - tackling the problems Karl-Heinz has raised about the lack of raw materials - unless this directive works .
Madam President , [ opening words lost as microphone switched off ] ... a recast directive but quite a few of us here worked on the original cast , and it is a good opportunity to close some of the loopholes and put in place the directive we always thought merited our attention .
But because we want to ensure that we are properly recycling electrical goods , we want to close the loophole which is leading to so many electrical goods ending up in developing nations , being taken apart by children on bonfires and dumps .
To those manufacturers and producers who are writing to us now asking us not to support one or other amendment that aims to close these loopholes , I would say : let them come up with their suggestions .
It is their products which are ending up in these dumps and they have to come forward with proposals to make sure it does not happen .
This also gives us a chance to finish some uncompleted business .
Printer companies have a business model based on selling their printers relatively cheaply and getting their customers locked into a contract to keep buying expensive printer cartridges .
They have a constant war with the remanufacturers , who take these printer cartridges and refill them with ink and sell them back to you for a fraction of the price .
Nearly 10 years ago we discovered that the printer manufacturers had hit upon a new means of advancing that war by using electronics to stop the printer cartridges being recycled : you fill them with ink and they stop working .
So we inserted into the legislation Article 4 designed to ensure that you cannot place on the market products which cannot be recycled .
But the printer companies found a way around that .
They lobbied one government after another and they said that printer cartridges can be regarded as consumables , not as waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) .
So we are left now with a position where printer cartridges in some Member States are regarded as WEEE , in some others not .
This is the chance to close that loophole to make sure that we have more competition on the market and to encourage proper recycling .
I look for the support of colleagues for those amendments .
- ( CS ) Madam President , it is beyond doubt that this directive marks a step in the right direction , as it tries to change the quantitative collection targets , to establish rules for the cross-border transportation of electrical and electronic equipment , and to harmonise the administrative steps applying to mandatory subjects in order to reduce bureaucracy .
It is because of the excessive bureaucracy that I reject product definition at the EU level , even with regard to the possible enforcement of stipulated obligations by Member States .
In this case , we should be guided by the principle of ' if it ain 't broke , don 't fix it ' .
As far as the scope of the directive is concerned , I personally prefer a limited scope , because I am concerned that an open scope would include equipment that cannot feasibly be recycled or equipment with a long working life , thereby putting at risk the fulfilment of the agreed collection targets .
In this case , I take the view that we should not only be ambitious in setting targets , but above all realistic , and we should not place a greater burden on local authorities .
Madam President , mobile phones , phone chargers , play stations , cameras , saunas , thermometers , refrigerators , freezers , toasters , kettles , microwaves , irons , air fresheners , clocks , watches , electric toothbrushes , DVD players , vacuum cleaners , children 's toys , video games , medical devices , televisions , remote controls , calculators , heaters , tumble dryers and washing machines .
Well , that is just to name a few , because all of these appliances and many more will undoubtedly rise in price as a result of this waste directive .
And to think that the European Union is prepared to pile this legislation on just at a time when we are in the depths of a recession and when people are struggling to make ends meet !
I therefore encourage everyone in this Chamber to show sympathy with the hardworking taxpayers and with small-to-medium-sized businesses and put this prospective law in the waste bin .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , Mr Nuttall tells us that the requirement to recycle electrical waste puts up the price of products .
Can he then also tell us who - if not the producer - should pay for the disposal of those products ?
Why is he so against council taxpayers , ratepayers and local governments across Europe , in his own country and elsewhere , who have to bear the burden of dealing with such waste , which he says the producer should not have to pay for ?
Madam President , I too enjoy my jousts with Mr Davies .
It seems that we have these little jousts on every speech that I give .
He knows as well as I do where the cost will lie - it will end up with the taxpayer having to fund this .
At the moment , we are in the depths of a recession the like of which we have not seen since the 1930s .
I am standing up for hardworking taxpayers .
Secondly , the real point here is that this should be done at national level by people - by politicians - who are accountable to the electorate , not by a Commission that meets in secret and is accountable to nobody .
That is the key .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to address my fellow Member by name , but unfortunately I do not know who he is , because I have never come across him before in the debate on electronic waste .
Perhaps I do not recognise you because you have a new haircut .
However , what answer do you plan to give the citizens when it emerges in five or six years time that our raw materials have run out and have been discarded or are polluting our waters ?
You need to explain this .
My second point is as follows .
Please read the directive .
It says nothing at all about taxpayers having to fund the system .
In fact , this is the responsibility of the producers .
This system is now being tightened up and extended , which is the right thing to do .
I would like to hear your response to these two points .
Madam President , first of all I will repeat what I just said .
We all know where the cost ends up - where it always does .
It does not necessarily have to say it in the directive , because it never does .
You never tell people that you are going to put up tax .
You never tell people that you are going to hit them in the pocket .

In my country , for example , it costs us GBP 50 million a day to be members of this club .
The key to all of this is - and I go back to exactly what I said to Mr Davies - decisions should be made at nation-state level by politicians who are accountable to the electorate .
The electorate of my country , Great Britain , cannot remove Commissioners .
That is fundamentally undemocratic and wrong .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , what I have to say has been said many times over by my fellow Members .
At a time when Europe is considering a common strategy for its supply of raw materials and especially rare earths , we cannot overlook the huge potential that the intelligent recovery of our waste offers .
Strengthening European standards so as to improve the functioning of the collection chain , solving problems relating to the leakage and illegal export of WEEE , and setting more ambitious collection targets : that is what should be at the heart of this legislation .
Let us not forget who is chiefly responsible for the success or failure of this legislation : the consumer .
Empowering the public is crucial if we want to implement effective legislation .
To this end , Mr Florenz , the eco-contribution , among other systems , has proved to be a very important tool .
Of course , electrical and electronic equipment producers must become more involved in the collection and recycling system , but we cannot absolve the citizens of all responsibility for the waste they produce .
Our citizens must become actors and not spectators in European environmental policy .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with much of what I have heard .
I think this is an important , fundamental directive , and so we will of course vote for it .
I am also convinced , however , that we need more detail on certain aspects and I hope that will be possible at second reading .
For example , I expect the Commission to carry out an impact assessment concerning the open scope of the directive because , although in theory it might appear to respect the environment more , I think it could give rise to problems at a practical level .
Based on experience with the current directive , a closed scope gives greater certainty and makes the legislation easier to implement .
There are other aspects as well , in addition to this impact assessment .
I think we have to be careful to ease the burden for producers , distributors and retailers .
It is right that they should be involved and made to accept responsibility , but we must be careful not to overburden them , not least in terms of administrative requirements .
I think the instruments and criteria need to be adjusted to take the various national systems into account .
Member States are not just good or bad .
As we have heard and as we have already appraised - although I think we need to go into this area as well in greater depth - there are different systems and different circumstances in the Member States , which need to be carefully assessed so that no countries automatically benefit while others automatically lose out .
We are therefore in favour of this directive , but we need more time and greater detail .
( FI ) Madam President , the Commission has quite rightly produced both a resource efficiency agenda and a raw materials strategy , because raw materials and their use are becoming ever more limited , and at the same time their prices are rising .
We know that a regrettably large proportion of electronic waste , and , in particular , small waste items , such as mobile phones , have ended up in landfill , not just in the EU but also in third countries , and is ultimately incinerated .
That is why this important tool is a good step in the right direction in the recycling of electronic waste , allowing us to guarantee better resource efficiency and the return of raw materials to producers .
Hopefully , in future we could progress towards a better system of reporting , with reference to this directive , so that we might actually know how well the different Member States and actors are implementing its aims .
We need to give a guarantee of separate collection which is even better than the one proposed and set better and more ambitious targets for it .
The directive is a good start , but I hope that in future we can transfer more responsibility from distributors to producers .
( ES ) Madam President , our goals must be ambitious , but it must also be acknowledged that the rapporteur 's proposal is not easy to apply with the situation that exists in each Member State .
However , we in the Spanish delegation will support his proposal at first reading .
Nevertheless , we are in favour the cost of recycling and treatment being invoiced separately .
We are going to vote against Amendment 52 , which aims to delete Article 14 ( 1 ) , and in favour of Amendments 91 and 103 .
We believe that consumers have a right to know what this treatment costs and , moreover , that they should know : that motivates them to collaborate with the legislation itself and it is also positive in order for there to be a suitable amount of transparency in the commercial chain .
( HU ) Madam President , my apologies for hesitating .
I would like to thank Mr Florenz for his excellent professional work .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) belongs to the fastest growing waste stream in the EU .
We must do all we can to ensure its proper recycling not only to be able to prevent damage to the environment and health , but also to reduce the loss of raw materials .
Based on the results of current impact assessments , 85 % of WEEE is now collected but only 33 % of this is treated properly in accordance with the requirements of the directive .
Unfortunately , the outbound illegal shipment of waste from the European Union is large-scale , and for this reason it is important that the new directive be able to prevent this .
Waste must be collected separately because this is how we can ensure that it is retained and sent for recycling within the Member State .
Regrettably , experience to date has shown that Member States have not interpreted the current directive uniformly , and so I would like to suggest that in the future the guiding principle should not be classification into different categories but the directive should cover basically all electrical and electronic waste .
I believe that the legislation is particularly important for the countries which acceded most recently as they still lag behind in the area of separate waste collection .
( SV ) Madam President , we really do live in a wasteful society if we regard this as waste .
Much of this scrap contains higher levels of gold and silver than is contained in the ore in a gold or silver mine .
It is not a question of the cost of dealing with this .
It is a question of pure profit .
It will reduce our dependence on imports of important commodities and we will not be releasing heavy metals and other toxic substances into the environment .
We will do nothing but gain if we process this waste ; it should not even be referred to as a cost .
However , it is unfortunate that solar cells are exempt , for if we do not include them it will create an advantage for those solar cells containing cadmium and will distort competition within the industry .
It would be better for solar cells to be included so that they are subject to fair competition , and alternatives to those containing cadmium will come onto the market sooner .
We also need to vote in favour of the amendments that contain requirements for better checks on nanowaste .
Finally , it is important that the Member States and the Commission now ensure that the export rules are tightened up and that they are complied with .
We must put a stop to the export of waste to poor countries .
( LV ) Madam President , I am one of those people who largely support the adoption of this document .
I also support the approach that seeks to define a target for separate collection that varies according to the period concerned .
In Latvia , we currently collect only 25 % of the electrical and electronic equipment available on the market .
That is too little .
I also support the ambitious targets set in the Regulation , but at the same time , it makes me anxious that there may be great differences between Member States , and I therefore call upon the Commission and everyone concerned , including the Member States , to pay the utmost attention to monitoring the implementation of these documents .
Of course , in Latvia we should like a somewhat smaller chance to make the targets : 45 % by 2016 and 65 % by 2020 .
- ( SK ) Madam President , the amendment of the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment has gone through an extensive consultation process in the relevant European Parliament committees .
The text drawn up by the Commission has gradually been modified through the amendment proposals of the MEPs , and the current compromise version again places the problem of electronic waste collection further to the fore .
The version of Article 47 proposed by the Committee on the Environment is , in my opinion , a particularly beneficial amendment , because it enables the financial obligations of industry to be directed towards developing an electrical waste collection system , rather than implementing penalties for failing to achieve set objectives for collection .
This may be particularly beneficial and useful in countries that have yet to create a sufficient infrastructure for collecting electrical waste .
I would also like to support the new Article 93 , which responds to the fact that many liable persons , particularly internet retailers , are avoiding fulfilling their obligations .
The new regulation attempts to deal with this problem in a sensitive and proper manner .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , many honourable Members of this Parliament mentioned implementation , which is truly a problem .
Unfortunately , it is not a problem in this area only , but a problem across the whole environmental spectrum .
To be precise , I know my Treaty duty , and I intend to do it to the full .
We are also preparing a communication on implementation later this year , which would deal with the question of implementation in a more holistic way .
We are already discussing it thoroughly together with the directorate , because I believe that this is one of the questions on which we should focus in the future , including , of course , in the proposals which we are discussing today .
By the way , the recast proposal certainly facilitates implementation .
Secondly , the targets .
It is of fundamental importance that we have ambitious targets .
Many of you mentioned that this is the fastest-growing waste stream .
Many of you mentioned that we are living in a world of electric and electronic devices , and this is something we certainly have to take into account when deciding on targets .
Thirdly , costs .
Whenever we propose any proposal , we also have to take into account the burden of the costs and make things as simple as possible .
However , I want to be clear that the real cost to our society and our economy would come if we were not to deal with these questions .
That would be the real cost , to which in the longer term we would not be able to respond .
We published 14 days ago the so-called waste report .
That very day I also visited Unicor , which is one of the hi-tech companies that recycle electrical and electronic waste .
I was struck by what I learned and saw there .
It is extremely important that we understand that , for example , the mobile phones we hold in our hands in our daily lives , actually contain precious materials , from gold to platinum to rhodium , which are extremely important for the future .
If we continue now and always to extract raw materials , we will never see the end of things .
I held in my hands 20 kilos of gold produced from mobile phones .
It was very difficult to lift , but to be honest it was even more difficult to leave it !
Many of you mentioned the most important term to be addressed in this context , and that is resource efficiency .
I have already mentioned this fact many times , but it is extremely important that we never forget it .
According to UN data , in the 20th century the growth of our human population was four times , our output growth was 40 times , CO2 emissions 17 times , energy consumption 16 times , fish catches 35 times and water consumption 9 times .
If anybody thinks it can continue like that in the 21st century then they are simply terribly mistaken .
We have to do things differently .
That is why , as I mentioned , now that we are living in an ever more electric and electronic world , the proposal which is on the table today and which you will debate later , is extremely important for dealing with these questions .
Many of you also mentioned better reporting and better sorting .
All of this should be given our attention .
In conclusion I would just like to say that , after the first reading , I believe we have a good product , worthy to be worked on at second reading and finalised into something that I am sure will be even better .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Potočnik , I support the final remarks that you made , in particular with regard to resource efficiency .
However , over the next few months the focus of the entire decision-making process will be on you , because a common position will now have to be agreed on .
You will have to negotiate with the Council and come to a decision and I must say to you that the Council has not moved one millimetre over the last seven months , and that was not the fault of the Belgian Presidency .
Some countries are very obstinate and , against the background of the unanimity in this House , I would like to ask the Members who have spoken so passionately today in favour of this report to go home and exert some influence on their governments and to explain that things will not be the same as they have been in the past .
I could mention the names of a few old friends who would really come to grips with this issue .
Therefore , Mr Potočnik , I believe that we will need to have an intense debate over the next few months .
You must continue to be tough with the Council .
It is also important to point out that there is a clear desire for national regulations when it comes to waste policy .
However , that is counterproductive , because the internal market was born a long time ago and we now need to bring it up properly .
It is not the entire internal market , but half of the internal market which is the problem .
I would like to highlight once again that the ratio of 16 kg to 1 kg , as Mr Seeber has clearly stated , shows that we still have a great deal to do .
However , if we can agree on this , then we will be on the right track .
Mr Potočnik , I have no doubt that you know what you have to do .
I would like to emphasise the fact that you are doing an excellent job and we will continue to give you an occasional nudge , perhaps a little roughly , in the right direction .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11 : 30 .
in writing . - CS ) The collection of electrical and electronic waste is a very topical issue at present .
It is therefore highly necessary to update the directive covering this area .
In my opinion , some of the amendments that will be voted on in the introductory block represent a very poor way of combining Commission proposals with the other proposals for facilitating the collection , sorting and recycling of the waste .
On the contrary , even if they do not bring chaos to this issue , they do bring less light .
Unfortunately , there is not much we can do at this stage of the issue in the final vote .
It is interesting that the representatives of most political groups agree on many of the relatively decent amendments .
If this agreement translates into support in the final vote , the resulting directive may support a dramatic increase in the collection of electrical and electronic equipment , as well as equipment that is easier to process .
One of the key points is Article 14 , paragraph 1 , which - as long as Amendment 91 or the rather less clear formulation of Amendment 103 is adopted - could support the recycling and collection of electrical and electronic equipment .
It is important for the overall effort to result in a directive that will clearly set out the obligations of the various bodies , while at the same time enabling the recycling process to be as effective as possible .
From this perspective , the bizarre idea of sorting lighting equipment into several categories is not desirable , nor is the excessive number of exemptions for the entire category of large equipment .
in writing . - ( CS ) Waste electrical and electronic equipment is the fastest growing source of waste .
It currently represents a significantly higher risk to the environment and public health than spent nuclear fuel .
It was essential to revise the directive .
A large amount of electronic waste is either not being processed in accordance with the current version , and ends up in dumps , or is illegally exported out of the EU .
It is worrying that we have no idea what is happening to more than half of European electrical and electronic waste .
This situation is unsustainable , since annual per capita waste output may rise from 4 kg today to 24 kg by 2020 , unless collection and recycling targets are stipulated and complied with .
The recycling of electronic waste can return more gold to the manufacturing process than is mined in the EU , and the same applies for other precious raw materials .
I therefore unequivocally welcome the creation of new permanent jobs and particularly the reduction in the EU 's dependence on imported precious raw materials .
Nevertheless , I take a very dim view of the exemption for solar panels .
In connection with the exemption for cadmium-telluride panels from the Restrictions on Hazardous Substances ( RoHS ) directive , it represents a further increase in the risk of environmental pollution by highly toxic cadmium , which the EU is combating in other legislative measures .
There are lobbying interests behind this inconsistency , which does not reflect well either on the EU or on the European Parliament , and will consequently be of no benefit to European industry .
in writing . - I support today 's WEEE report , but we must ensure that we do not place overly-burdensome regulations on already struggling SMEs and retailers .
We must ensure that the burden to take back WEEE rests with the manufactures , not the retailers .
I welcome the proposal of stronger provisions which seek to prevent illegal shipments of this waste and to close loopholes in the law .
Currently , by declaring such equipment as ' used but functional EEE ' and not WEEE , it can be illegally shipped to , and dumped in , third world countries .
Of course , greater enforcement on behalf of authorities is also crucial , while electrical items should be recycled in accordance with the law in order to prevent the uncontrolled release of CFCs .
Criminals often profit from illegal shipments , as traffickers involved in the scam often trick authorities by not labelling goods as electronics , by pretending they are for re-use , or by hiding them in the middle of a container for shipment .
Unchecked shipments usually end up in Ghana , Nigeria , India or Pakistan .
We need to work together on the second reading to ensure that this dangerous practice is stopped , and also to ensure that valuable European metals remain in Europe .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) represents the fastest-growing waste stream in the EU .
The proper management of WEEE contributes to the re-use of some valuable resources , which has a particular impact on the environment , citizens ' health and the creation of green jobs .
According to the Commission 's impact assessment , approximately 24 kg of WEEE / inhabitant / year are generated at the moment at EU level , only 65 % of which is collected .
Recycling WEEE will help create 5-7 times more jobs than in the incineration sector and 10 times more than in the storage sector .
The revision of the directive has helped set new targets for collecting , recycling and re-using WEEE ( recycling target of 50-75 % - depending on the categories , which now number six instead of the initial 10 - and a new re-use target of 5 % ) .
It has also helped devise tougher measures for preventing the export of electronic waste to developing countries .
The responsibilities of manufacturers , consumers and local authorities are defined more clearly to ensure environmentally friendly treatment .
Electronic goods manufacturers will have to provide the funding for waste treatment , with a positive upshot in the form of compliance with ecodesign rules , thereby creating products which are easy to repair and recycle .
I believe that the proper disposal of waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) is exceptionally important .
Increasing the rate of separately collected waste is indispensable but it is important that the entire recycling process be monitored through appropriate documentation .
Industry 's responsible attitude is also required for this ; the conduct of large manufacturing and processing companies must be controlled more efficiently .
At the same time , it must be understood that Member States , mainly the newly acceded Member States , do not yet have an appropriate number of recycling facilities , and thus emphasis must be laid on developing these to guarantee that the WEEE collected is indeed treated properly .
in writing . - ( HU ) The current recast of the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment is not only immensely important from the aspect of environmental protection and public health , but also from the point of view of resource efficiency , so frequently mentioned nowadays .
It is common knowledge that numerous illegal WEEE shipments leave the European Union year after year , and so it is in the fundamental interest of our industry to ensure that Member States retain valuable raw materials within the borders of the European Union through the proper collection of WEEE , which is generated in increasing quantities , and , if possible , its recycling .
Naturally , consumer habits vary from one country to another , and thus in the interest of successful collection this should not be overlooked when setting targets .
In Hungary , for instance , the average consumer will not change his television within two or three years , and even if he did , he would be most likely to take it to his weekend house and not to the collection points .
In view of all this , the rapporteur , having recognised this problem , managed to secure the acceptance of a broadly supported compromise which determined the basis of the collection targets not by the quantity of products placed on the market but by the quantity of electronic waste generated .
Although numerous professional details still need to be worked out in this area , I believe this may be a good direction .
This is especially so because in a contradictory manner even the Commission 's impact assessment itself considers the original collection target realistic for the old Member States and not for the new ones .
The proposal for a directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment , in the form submitted by the Commission to the European Parliament , is unclear .
This is why Member States can apply different interpretations to the types of equipment covered by this directive .
Furthermore , the Commission will have to establish a common methodology for determining the amount of waste generated in each Member State .
However , the amount of waste generated depends on the specific features of the consumption market , products ' different life cycles and the habits of the population in each state .
A reporting interval has not been stipulated either for calculating the amount of waste generated as a percentage .
The added value offered by this directive lies in the potential health and environmental benefit .
Proper management of electronic waste could help achieve a recycling rate of up to 50-75 % and a re-use rate of 5 % .
Both electronic goods manufacturers and consumers need to assume their responsibilities in order to meet this target .
Manufacturers will have to provide the funding for waste treatment , while consumers will have to dispose of electronic waste legally at treatment centres .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 : 10 and resumed at 11 : 30 )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Announcement : see Minutes
1 .
Request for waiver of the immunity of Mr Tamás Deutsch (
2 .
Financing instrument for development cooperation (
3 .
Financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 ) (
4 .
A financing instrument for development cooperation ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 ) (
5 .
Establishment of a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1934 / 2006 ) (
6 .
Agreements on trade in bananas
7 .
Agreements on trade in bananas (
8 .
Repeal of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 on the tariff rates for bananas (
9 .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment (
10 .
Situation in Tunisia (
11 .
Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative
12 .
Closure of the accounts of the European Police College for the financial year 2008
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 7 October 2010 Parliament adopted by 618 votes to 0 , with 7 abstentions , a decision to refuse to grant discharge to the European Police College for the financial year 2008 .
In accordance with Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , if discharge is not granted , a formal proposal to close the accounts shall be submitted at a subsequent part-session .
The decision put to the vote today is therefore a technical measure designed to close the accounts for the financial year in question , not the granting of discharge .
I wanted to make that clear .
13 .
Appointment of the Chairperson of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Banking Authority )
Mr President , we are now supposed to appoint the three chairpersons for the new Financial Supervisory Authorities .
I would bring to the attention of this House that none of those three is a woman .
I think it is very strange that the Commission cannot come up with one single woman who is competent for one of these authorities .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would very much like to propose Mrs Andreasen for one of these roles .
( Applause and cries of ' Hear , hear ' from the EFD Group )
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , last evening we had an extremely fruitful discussion in this House on the appointment process for the chairs and executive directors of the new supervisory agencies .
I am sincerely grateful to this House and the Members who participated in the debate .
Members pointed out some issues that needed to be clarified and will have to be monitored in order to reach our common aim : having a well-functioning supervisory system that is capable of doing its job properly .
We share your view that it is of utmost importance to ensure that the agencies can function independently , that they have capable leaders with proper authority and that the appropriate financing of the institutions is guaranteed .
Parliament 's message has reached the Presidency and found open doors .
I am convinced that we managed to reach a fine agreement on the issue .
I kindly invite you all to vote in support of the candidates .
Perhaps you are available for the job ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the vote that you are going to cast with the utmost responsibility is a very important one .
It is a case of choosing the chairpersons of the three supervisory authorities - for banking , insurance and markets - and hence of getting these three new authorities up and running .
Together with the System Risk Board , they will at last constitute the first real European financial markets supervisory architecture , and they owe you a great deal , since it was thanks to a vote by this House that the authorities were created and their powers strengthened .
You are going to cast this vote with the utmost responsibility , and we shall respect your decision .
As it was my responsibility within the Commission , I undertook the job of selecting the candidates from the 275 people who applied , whom I did not choose .
They were people from the Member States and the regulatory authorities who freely submitted applications .
It was an open and transparent process in which anyone could participate if they so wished .
At the end of this process , I personally met the people pre-selected .
I have to say , Mr Schmidt , that I myself regretted the fact that , for one of the three posts - the European Banking Authority post - one of the two people pre-selected , a high-calibre female applicant , withdrew at the last minute , just before Christmas .
The first commitment that I wish to make is to ensure that the ongoing process of appointing the executive directors - just this morning , I met the candidates pre-selected for one of the authorities - is more balanced and that there is greater diversity of representation , especially from the point of view of gender equality , which is a legitimate demand of the European Parliament .
We selected these candidates on the basis of their skills , expertise , commitment to Europe and independence .
I shall do the same thing when it comes to the executive directors , so that these three authorities have the credibility and the authority required .
Ladies and gentlemen , this vote is important .
In a letter sent to Mrs Bowles and Mr Lehne yesterday , I pledged - and I confirmed that pledge to you this morning with Vice-President Šefčovič - that we would give these three authorities the practical , financial and human resources necessary to ensure that they have the credibility and independence they require , and I understand that the Presidency has pledged the same things .
These three authorities have a heavy workload ahead of them , with regard to the stress tests , credit rating agencies and the texts that you are discussing at the moment concerning the regulation of derivatives and short selling .
There is no shortage of work .
We know that the markets move at a much faster pace than democracy .
I have confidence in Parliament as it prepares to vote , and I confirm the commitments made by the Commission to ensure the independence , practical resources and credibility of these three new authorities .
author . - Mr President , I am sorry to take up Members ' time .
Resolutions were tabled because the committee was not satisfied with the institutional procedures and wished to obtain assurances from the Commission and the Presidency .
In debate yesterday , and in written statements and letters to me , suitable assurances have been given and these will all be published .
The majority recommendation of the committee now is to approve all the candidates , with which I personally agree .
That means voting against all the resolutions .
There were four areas in which we sought assurances .
Concerning the independence of the authorities , both the Commission and the Presidency have reaffirmed respect for the provisions of independence of the authorities , their chairs , executives and board members .
Concerning board representation , the Commission is being vigilant concerning the designations by the heads of the supervisory authority to the boards of supervisors , as required by the regulation , and the Presidency supported the Commission statement .
Concerning adequate budgetary resources , the Commission has recognised the need to provide adequate budgetary and human resources to the authorities , with which the Presidency has agreed and , further , stated the importance of fulfilment by Member States of their obligations .
Concerning the appointment procedure , we have all discovered we are bound by regulations in ways that all sides realise is inappropriate , such as the retirement age criteria projected to the end of the term of office and also on the gender issue .
These will be addressed in the review , with which the Commission and the Presidency also both agree .
The committee continues to insist on a role in the ongoing and future shortlisting procedures for all positions , such as that of executive director .
For democratic purposes , Members wish to be able to express a preference on individual candidates , and so the resolutions have been kept on the agenda for voting .
However , as I say , if you want to approve the appointments , with which I concur , then you should vote against the resolutions .
We now come to a rather perverse procedure , as Mrs Bowles has indicated .
We are going to vote now , but you vote in favour to oppose the candidate and you vote against to confirm the candidate .
I do not understand it , but there it is .
14 .
Appointment of the Chairperson of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority )
15 .
Appointment of the Chairperson of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Securities and Markets Authority )
( PL ) Mr President , could you please give us the names of the people about whom we have been voting ?
I know it was a secret ballot , but we do not know for whom we have voted .
Can I just agree with you that , as I said , this is a rather perverse procedure .
Mrs Bowles , can you help the House ?
Mr Sonik has quite reasonably asked for the names of the successful candidates for these positions .
Are you able to give the House the names of these people who have been appointed , either now or in a few minutes ' time ?
author . - Mr President , I think it would be better if we circulated them later .
( Objections )

I think it is a fairly legitimate request .
I can tell you that the chairpersons that you have confirmed - and I am grateful to you - and who will assume their duties , are : Mr Maijoor , from the Netherlands , who becomes Chairperson of the Markets Authority ; Mr Bernardino , from Portugal , for the Insurance Supervisory Authority ; and Mr Enria , from Italy , for the Banking Authority .

16 .
Waste crisis in Campania
author . - Mr President , I know this is the last vote .
I am not going to take up much of your time .
I am the rapporteur for the Committee on Petitions for the subject we are about to vote on : finding a breakthrough in the ongoing waste crisis in Campania , which is the region surrounding Naples in Italy .
After having received numerous requests from petitioners , the Committee on Petitions sent a mission to Campania and adopted by consensus a report pointing towards a solution .
It is self-evident that Italy must comply with EU law , just as any other Member State .
We are about to send a strong message , yet the amendments tabled politicise the issue unnecessarily and , if supported , will water down the strong signal to a weak whisper .
If this House does not want to walk on the leash of one Member State , I suggest voting against the amendments and supporting the original text .
( IT ) Mr President , I would just like to make a correction because there is a misprint in the amendment .
A longer sentence was suppressed and all that remains is ' proposes that the Commission should check if existing sites in protected areas have been extended and if some of them are in Natura 2000 protected sites ' .
Mr President , would it be possible to have a block vote on all the amendments ?
I have read the names of the signatories of the amendments .
It would be very unfair to some Italian colleagues if we were to do that .
( IT ) Mr President , that demonstrates that this resolution is political .
Nobody is looking at the substance or practicalities and nobody wants to help the community , but everyone is talking nonsense .
This is a political motion .
It is even shown in the way people have addressed Mrs Mazzoni .
I call on the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to vote for the amendments and against this motion from the left , which is responsible for what has happened in Campania and is now tabling a motion in Parliament .
They are responsible for this situation .
They were in government when it all happened .
I know the motion for a resolution is on a sensitive subject but it has been duly tabled .
Amendments have also been tabled and we will continue voting on the amendments one by one .
There are very few to come .
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
We now come to the explanations of vote .
Oral explanations of vote
( ES ) Mr President , I abstained because , on 14 January , the European Council renewed the measures against Côte d 'Ivoire , in view of the seriousness of the situation following the holding of the presidential elections late last year .
I must say that these measures were adopted for people and entities that opposed the democratically elected president or did not submit to his authority ; these entities included the autonomous ports ofAbidjan and San Pedro , as well as a number of banks .
The initiative 's goal is development and the promotion of international trade in order to foster development .
The programme is aimed at natural and legal persons .
Annex I of this initiative includes Côte d 'Ivoire , but includes no mention of the decision that I mentioned , which is why I abstained .
Mr President , I would also ask you who are chairing this sitting for us to improve Parliament 's image , because I believe that situations such as that which we are experiencing today , and in all plenary sittings , contribute absolutely nothing from the point of view of the image and prestige that we are attempting to convey .
I believe that it is unacceptable that , while any Member is speaking , there should be groups laughing and paying no attention : they could perfectly well do so outside .
As I have the opportunity today , I would ask all those who chair these sittings to improve Parliament 's image , which is damaging European politics .
As you know , Mr Swoboda has a working group examining our proceedings in plenary and I will bring your point to his attention .
I would also point out that you can always put an explanation of vote in writing if you wish .
( HU ) Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order .
I have been asking to speak for about ten minutes .
I would like it to be noted in the Minutes that during the last votes the Romanian politician behind me , Mr Becali , was not present for the voting , but this will be shown on the video recordings .
Despite this his assistant , or secretary , voted here with Mr Becali 's MEP card .
I would like to ask you , Mr President , whether this is in accordance with the rules and , if it is not , what punishment the extreme Romanian politician may expect for his assistant voting in his stead .
That is a very serious point that you are making and the Bureau will look into it .
( IT ) Mr President , in order to go further along the road on which we set out in 2006 , to make the European Union 's external assistance more effective and transparent , we could not fail to eliminate the inconsistencies that have emerged regarding exceptions to the principle of non-eligibility for Union financing of costs related to taxes , duties and other charges .
The amendment to the regulation is , in that sense , necessary and timely .
The Commission should be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union in respect of strategy papers , as those strategy papers supplement Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 and are of general application .
I hope not only that appropriate consultations will be held during the preparatory work , but above all that the amendments adopted succeed in equipping Parliament with suitable instruments so that it can monitor and influence the measures adopted by the Commission .
Only in that way can we ensure that the EU 's external assistance policy operates legitimately and democratically .
( ES ) Mr President , I should like to say that I think it is in the European Union 's interests to establish agreements of this sort using financing instruments for cooperation with industrialised countries .
I also think that it needs to be pointed out how many countries are included in the Annex .
I should therefore like it put on record how important this initiative is .
- ( SK ) Mr President , I welcome the agreement reached in the lengthy and bitter legal dispute over the trade in bananas , which brings to an end the long-term state of uncertainty and instability in countries producing and trading in bananas .
The agreement on trade in bananas will also have a significant impact on other developing countries aiming to export bananas , and we will have to help these countries adapt to the considerable changes in the competitive environment on the world market .
The programme of accompanying measures must therefore also address urgent issues relating to the social consequences of adaptation .
I therefore agree with the proposal to examine the impact of this agreement on the regions affected , in order to establish appropriate measures for mitigating the undesirable effects .
( FI ) ( Beginning of speech missing ) the banana war that almost become larger than life , that it is excellent that it has come to an end .
It is quite true that we cannot allow universal rules on trade to be broken .
It is absolutely right that the WTO has intervened and that we too in the European Parliament and the European Union acted correctly .
As a consequence , the system of special treatment received by some ACP countries will be abandoned .
Of course it is quite true that it is important to ensure that the rules of fair play are preserved in the markets , but we must adhere to our principle whereby we treat all producers in the same way .
On the other hand , since 1993 the countries in the import regime have enjoyed an immense advantage and in that time have had the chance to sort themselves out and develop their own banana production .
This means that they are also better able to cope in the midst of genuine competition and are not merely reliant on special aid .
I therefore voted in favour of this change , and I congratulate the Commission and the European Union for having now brought the banana war to an end .
Mr President , the trade dispute involving bananas has been one of the longest-running and perhaps the most difficult in the history of the WTO and it is a dispute where the European Union has been squarely and unequivocally in the wrong .
Its policy has been to favour producers in some former colonies at the expense of the principles of free trade which are , of course , enshrined notionally in the Treaty of Rome .
This policy has been bad for everyone .
It has been bad for consumers in Europe , who have had to pay much higher prices , it has been bad for exporters , it has been bad for international harmony and the community of nations , and it has been bad for the people it was notionally designed to protect .
The former British and French dependencies have now become dependencies in the fullest sense , tied to an artificial and unproductive export when they might have diversified their economies and integrated more widely into the world economy .
I want to say one more thing about this which has not come up in any of the debates .
The EU has disgracefully been applying pressure on banana producers to form political and economic unions around themselves , in mimicry of the EU model , which is truly none of our business .
The whole point of free trade is to swap on the basis of differences , not to sell each other bananas and indeed , for that matter , not to have an artificial customs union among the industrialised economies of Europe .
( SK ) Mr President , when negotiating the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment in the European Parliament , a number changes were introduced which improve the directive .
I voted in favour of the amended version of this important directive .
The directive allows producers of electrical equipment to provide buyers who are purchasing equipment with information on the costs for collecting , processing and disposing of the waste in an environmentally-friendly way .
It increases market transparency by providing information to the relevant bodies , distributors , exporters or customers .
It will boost levels of awareness and acceptance of recycling and the refunding of costs .
It is important for the financial obligations of industry to be concentrated on developing an effective electrical waste collection system , and not on the payment of penalties for failing to achieve set objectives for collection , where there is insufficiently developed infrastructure for waste collection in a given region .
( PL ) Mr President , the dynamic development and technological progress of the countries of Europe is also , unfortunately , accompanied by less desirable consequences .
The huge growth in electronic waste is the most visible example of this .
We make systematic use of every possible kind of electronic appliance , and we replace them ever more quickly with new ones , but we do not worry about the need to make the old ones safe .
This cannot but have an effect on the natural environment .
I hope that the revision of legislation on the collection and processing of e-waste will make it possible to achieve an increase in the amounts of valuable materials recovered , because as well as environmental benefits this will also bring economic ones .
The high separate collection rate recommended by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety should result in the retention of these materials and their preparation for re-use .
I agree that it is imperative to curb the illegal export of e-waste outside the European Union .
I also expect a reduction in the practice of storing waste from one Member State in the territory of another , something which is not always in accordance with regulations .
I think you have broken new ground .
That is the first time I have seen someone reading a speech from an iPad .
( DE ) Mr President , waste does not respect borders and that applies in particular to electronic and electrical waste .
Therefore , it is essential that the provisions for waste disposal and recycling are harmonised across and within the Member States of the European Union and , most importantly , that the export of waste without provision being made for certified and environmentally sound disposal is stopped .
My final request is for us to investigate the effectiveness of our decisions to ensure that our intentions really do become reality .
- ( SK ) Mr President , waste electrical and electronic equipment is rapidly increasing in the European Union and the inefficient disposal and unprofessional collection of the waste represent a serious problem for the environment and human health , as well as a loss of raw materials and resources which are not in unlimited supply .
In light of the new information acquired in the application of the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment , it appears necessary to make suitable amendments to some parts of this legal measure that have so far caused considerable problems with application in practice .
I therefore agree with the provisions leading producers and consumers to take more responsibility for the proper disposal of such equipment .
However , as far as the current objective is concerned , I would like to say that this objective fails to take account of the very different economic conditions in the various Member States .
In my opinion , a percentage share based on market volumes over a certain period of time would be a better way of taking into account the particular circumstances of the Member States and their specific situation on the electrical goods market .
( ES ) Mr President , we have voted and I have voted in favour of this initiative on electronic waste .
We have talked here about collection , treatment , prohibition and illegality , but I should like it put on record in Parliament that what we should perhaps be reflecting on is something that has been the subject of studies for some time : why do materials that could remain useful and effective for longer break in a way that is anticipated and planned after a certain amount of time ?
This very week I have prepared several questions , to both the Council and the Commission , so that they will investigate whether some companies really make a considered decision about this and whether , therefore , the volume of electronic waste produced at European and at global level could be prevented by combating this type of practice .
( GA ) Mr President , firstly may I congratulate my friend and colleague Karl-Heinz on this report .
Everything he does is accurate and practical , and such is the case with this report .
As has been said , we are living in an electronic age with newer and newer gadgets coming onto the market almost daily , and the shelf life of many such items of electrical equipment and gadgets is very short , necessitating an upgrading or disposal .
The proposals here are certainly timely in that regard .
Also , the point made about the internal market is very important .
We like speaking about it , but it is far from complete .
( GA ) Therefore , I think that this report represents considerable progress towards solving those problems and I welcome it and was glad to vote in favour of it .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we have adopted the resolution on waste in Campania , which should be a lesson to us all to prevent environmental disasters like this from happening .
We can feel pleased with ourselves today , because in this plenary we have adopted a measure like this , which makes a culture of recycling and reuse at a time of globalisation a measure to be promoted and encouraged in every possible way to ensure that European citizens , who are now free from the effort of producing the goods that are now within everyone 's reach , are aware of their real value .
Mr Florenz 's report on the reuse of electrical and electronic equipment , on which we are voting today , is important not only for the future of environmental sustainability in Europe , but also for another aspect : the loss of raw materials .
In fact , the efficient and innovative use of materials and resources is a key issue in the globalised economy .
I therefore consider it positive that we have set ourselves ambitious targets and also that the actual cost of a product should be indicated in such a way that consumers become aware of it .
Mr President , I am happy to support the ambitious report from Parliament , which sends a strong message to governments all over the EU .
The report upholds the ' polluter pays ' principle and it does so in a proportionate way .
I am pleased with the ALDE amendment which exempts micro-enterprises - that is businesses employing less than 10 people and with a turnover of less than two million - from the requirement to take back all small volume waste .
This ensures that small shops that have difficulty with space are not burdened with unreasonable requirements .
Finally , to those who complain about the cost of this proposal - and there were some - I would say that we do not have the right to continue to use the dwindling resources of this planet .
We have the obligation to actively promote re-use and recycling and make every possible effort to mitigate the loss of our ever scarcer raw materials .
Mr President , driving around the beautiful downlands and copses of my South East constituency , I have noticed little roadside cairns made up of white goods and other eliminated electrical items .
Those little cairns are a visible monument to the law of unintended consequences .
A directive intended to encourage recycling has ended up encouraging fly-tipping .
As a consequence it has vitiated the traditional notion of property rights .
Our normal understanding of ownership is that if you sell me something and I buy it from you , it is then my responsibility .
There is no residual obligation on you to recycle .
In fact , the free market will generally recycle these things and there are these wonderful people who will do it for nothing , called scrap dealers .
Sometimes they will even pay you a fee for doing it .
None of this , however , is of any consolation to those of my constituents who are wondering how to get rid of their white goods .
A constituent of mine contacted me last week and asked how to get rid of their fridge .
I was reduced to suggesting that she give it to her mother-in-law .
( SV ) Mr President , I am extremely disappointed in the way that the hands of the main representative of the common foreign policy , Baroness Ashton , have been tied in the negotiations with regard to the crisis in the Middle East .
Standing side by side with those who are fighting for democracy and freedom should be a foregone conclusion for us in Europe .
Our common Parliament and our common Union are the result of our endeavours never again to have to experience the horrors that totalitarian systems bring .
With this motion for a resolution , we want to accept our share of the responsibility for this and show that we are willing to support the fight for democracy and freedom in the Middle East .
It is therefore even more regrettable to see that the Commission and the Council have not been able to accept their share of the responsibility .
We are seeing the winds of change sweeping through the Middle East .
People there are calling for help and it is our duty to provide that help .
Specific measures are needed on our part in the form of the provision of food , medicine and aid workers .
This is needed now .
At the same time , of course , we must help to build democratic societies that have legal certainty in Tunisia and Europe .
Half of the Member States in our Union have gone from dictatorships to democracy and freedom .
What is so difficult about saying that the same should be the case for people in the Middle East ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there can be no doubt that the uprising by the younger generations that is shaking Tunisia may have significant repercussions on the European Union itself .
There are many good reasons for that , including the formulation of the new European Union-Tunisia Action Plan for the period 2011-2016 and , most of all , the regulation of migrant flows .
Just a month ago , this very House adopted an important measure - the first legislative dossier under the Treaty of Lisbon - on trafficking in human beings .
Any upsurge in the flow of illegal migrants must be decisively countered .
To that end we need a European agreement covering the southern shores of the Mediterranean , including Tunisia and also Egypt .
To achieve that , the delegation has to go and monitor this process of full democratisation , as indeed it has gone to Tunisia today , but at the same time we need to give Tunisia a real chance through constant , ongoing support for full democracy .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to take the floor again as part of the explanations of vote , because yesterday I unfortunately did not have the opportunity to speak .
I want to express my admiration for the people of Tunisia , who have swept away a dictatorship using peaceful means , and I hope that the transitional government in Tunisia will see our resolution as a chance to move towards democracy .
At the same time , I would like to apologise once again to the citizens of Tunisia , because the European Union and its politicians were obviously not prepared for this sudden change of direction .
We have underestimated the power of the people , if I can express it like that , and we should take this opportunity to ensure that we analyse situations better in future and , if necessary , react appropriately to events of this kind .
( PL ) Mr President , the recent events both in Tunisia and now in Egypt have caught the attention of the whole world .
The demonstrations by the citizens of these countries against the ossified regimes which hold power have , however , brought hope for permanent political change .
For the transformation which has begun in Tunisia to continue peacefully , the full support of a democratic Europe is imperative .
In adding my voice to the appeal of the President of the European Parliament , Mr Buzek , I too call for all steps to be taken to ensure the conduct of fully democratic elections in Tunisia and to bring about the formation of a government of national unity .
I also support the call of the parliamentary delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries for an independent investigation to be carried out to determine how far those who govern Tunisia are responsible for the use of violence and for the bloodshed .
Cooperation and the development of mutual and equal relations with Tunisia lie in the interests both of the citizens of Europe and of Tunisians .
Today , therefore , I voted in favour of the resolution - a document which gives details of the prospects for this cooperation .
( FR ) Mr President , I myself was not a friend of either Mr Ben Ali or Mr Mubarak .

I did not welcome them with a hug and an affectionate pat on the shoulder as President Sarkozy used to .
I did not welcome their parties into the political federation to which I and my political colleagues belong , unlike the socialists - since Mr Gbagbo 's party in Côte d 'Ivoire , Mr Ben Ali 's party and Mr Mubarak 's party were all part of the Socialist International .


This means , therefore , that I am more entitled to say how disgusted - for want of a better word - I am by the treatment reserved for these people today , without interfering personally in any way in the political situation in those countries .
I respect the principle of non-interference too much for that .
I was not the one who invited Mr Ben Ali to the European Parliament .
If you had criticisms to make of Mr Ben Ali , you should have made them at the time .
It is too easy to criticise these people after they have fallen .
All across the Middle East and the world , people are aware today that the West does not support its friends , and rest assured that there will be few candidates for our friendship from now on .
We do not think that Mr Ben Ali has ever been invited to the European Parliament .
But , anyway , he will not come now - mercifully .
( ES ) Mr President , I believe that the situation in Tunisia has caught the European Union on the hop .
All we have to do is look at the treatment given to Mr Ben Ali in recent months .
I believe that , once again , we have arrived too late , because the European Union did not come out strongly in favour of the people of Tunisia , who wanted to do away with a dictatorship that had been in place for so many years , and to win themselves freedoms and democracy .
I would therefore ask Baroness Ashton for greater European Union involvement , and for her to establish the taskforce mentioned in this resolution , in which the European Parliament should be involved , so that Tunisians can hold their democratic elections , can create institutions for their country and can get their freedoms back .
However , I would say that this is the future of politics : the future of politics in the 21st century must be dialogue and negotiation , in order to incorporate the aspirations of all citizens in democratic processes .
Moreover , I believe that we should make ourselves reflect on the issue of whether we in the European Union really treat all countries equally when we include clauses relating to respect for human rights .
As you know , the European Parliament is sending a delegation chaired by Mr Salafranca to Tunisia today and they will be reporting back next week .
Mr President , events in Tunisia serve as a warning to all undemocratic governments - not just in the Arab world but throughout the whole world .
If they do not provide a mechanism in their constitution for people to express their discontent , then they face revolution and the violence that this entails .
It is not for the EU to dictate the dots and commas of any nation 's constitution .
However , we should encourage transition to constitutional democracy and promote an open economy , investment and economic growth , because it is economic growth - trading with the rest of the world - that will bring jobs and relieve poverty , which is actually the root cause of much of the dissatisfaction in the Arab world .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have of course voted in favour of this resolution , because I believe all the Member States need to make a greater effort in the fight against endemic diseases .
Back in 2000 , the United Nations in New York included that objective in its Declaration on the Millennium Development Goals .
Through its Framework Programme for Research and Innovation , the European Union has already financed the development of tuberculosis vaccines with the aim of eradicating the disease completely from the population by 2050 .
To that end , moreover , it has promoted a partnership with over 40 research centres throughout Europe that specialise in developing and producing vaccines .
With the adoption of this text , the Member States must now make an effort to fulfil their own financial commitments , particularly with regard to developing countries , so that the right to health can also mean a right to preventive care .
( NL ) Mr President , last September , Parliament refused to close the accounts of the European Police College because of serious mismanagement and structural problems .
It was not expected that things would be put right until 2014 .
I do not have the impression that anything has improved at CEPOL in the meantime .
Why , then , do we now have the proposal to close the 2008 accounts anyway ?
The delegation of the Dutch Freedom Party ( PVV ) has therefore voted against this proposal and wants the costs of all undue losses to be borne by those concerned .
Moreover , we are calling the very existence of CEPOL into question .
We already have excellent police cooperation in Europe and we do not need CEPOL here .
As far as we are concerned , it might as well be entirely abolished as soon as possible .
In fact , that would represent a huge saving for the taxpayer .
Mr President , I like to think that I have always been a champion of my South East constituents .
One of the ways in which I try and champion their interests - as taxpayers - is by preventing the squandering of the money they have worked for on useless , inefficient or corrupt EU agencies .
That argument loses none of its force when the useless agency happens to be situated in my constituency , as is the case with the European Police College .
I do not think there is any doubt about the mismanagement of its accounts .
I do not think anyone in this House is arguing that , financially , it is a worthwhile or efficient organisation .
There is a wider issue of why we need a European police agency at all .
A monopoly on the right of coercive force is perhaps the definitive attribute of statehood and states around the world have reached extremely sophisticated , extremely efficient accords on police collaboration without needing these EU agencies to tell them what to do .
We have worked very well without the EU in the county of Hampshire , where the EPC is situated .
It predates most of the Member States and it will be fine with or without this EU agency sited on its territory .
Mr President , I voted against closing the accounts of the European Police College .
I did so by way of a small protest against the way the EU handles taxpayers ' money .
We waste far too much of it , and we waste too much on useless bodies like the European Police College .
We do not need it .
We should save the taxpayer some money and scrap it .
Mr President , you have heard me many times in this Chamber fighting my lonely and gruelling war of attrition against the establishment of these new EU supervisory agencies in the field of financial services .
My contention throughout has been that they were a solution to a non-existent problem .
None of the people you can blame for the financial crisis are covered by the remit of these agencies .
This is not , in my view , a proportionate , considered response to an identified problem , but an ideological move to have more European integration for its own sake .
Any doubt as to who was right was surely removed by the farce that we saw a few moments ago , when the President asked the House who the three candidates that we had just approved were , and not a single MEP was able to reply .
So why did we so overwhelmingly vote to appoint these nominees ?
I suspect it was because what Commissioner Barnier said in recommending them - they had been chosen ' because of their commitment to Europe ' .
So that is what it is about .
It has nothing to do with improving financial services and everything to do with extending Brussels control .
I will finish by echoing Lord Dartmouth 's call : if - as was suggested today - we need to have female candidates in some of these roles , I can think of no one better than the whistle-blower who brought down the previous Commission , my South-East of England colleague Ms Andreasen .
Mr President , I wish that we did not have a European Supervisory Authority , but we do .
Given that we do , we should appoint the best people to lead them .
What we saw earlier today was indeed a farce , where colleagues who had interviewed the individuals and deemed them to be competent nonetheless wanted to flex their muscles and protest that they had not been consulted enough .
That was why we had the vote today .
It was posturing at its worst and it does this Parliament no good at all .
Mr President , you very cleverly observed today that we had a Member reading a speech from an iPad for the first time .
Then we had - hopefully for the first and last time - a Member allegedly voting while absent .
Then we ourselves voted on the Supervisory Authority chairs .
By voting against , we were actually voting in favour .
Riddle me that .
We did not , of course , as has been pointed out , know the names of the candidates and we did not have a female candidate , although , in fairness to Commissioner Barnier , he explained that adequately .
It is perhaps not surprising that we were discussing bananas today because , taking all those things into account , many people consider that we have gone a bit bananas .
In that spirit I will be retiring for my lunch , of which bananas will make up a very important part of the menu . Thank you for your indulgence , Mr President .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution on the waste crisis in Campania , which was adopted by a majority today , is a very important sign .
The emergency in Campania has become a European emergency , and that is a decision in favour of the people of Campania .
We are saying ' no ' to the disbursement of funds that are used simply to strengthen corrupt politicians , unscrupulous businessmen and organised crime ; ' yes ' to European money if a credible , environmentally friendly waste plan is put forward ; ' no ' to uncontrolled landfill in national parks ; ' no ' to dioxin-producing incinerators ; and ' yes ' to recycling and environmentally friendly methods .
We are also saying ' no ' to the criminalisation of dissent in local communities , and therefore ' yes ' to legality .
It is an important turning point and a warning to the Berlusconi Government and the regional government run by Stefano Caldoro , which so far have done nothing but talk and bolster up their cliques and the Mafia establishment .
( DE ) Mr President , I hope that the citizens of Campania will see the resolution that we have adopted today as encouragement for them .
Our aim was not to discredit or run down the region .
We were also not intending to fight any domestic political battles .
The European Union 's fair offer to Campania is as follows .
If you develop a complete waste disposal concept which is logical , environmentally sound , efficient and free from corruption , the European Union will provide you with financial support .
Providing that this message has been received , I hope that we will at some point be able to discuss the fact that the crisis in Campania has been finally and permanently resolved .
Written explanations of vote
The unanimous vote on the request for waiver of the immunity of Hungarian MEP Tamás Deutsch highlights the benefit of the protection guaranteed at EU level to all members of the legislative .
The reason for this , as emerged from the in-depth examination we carried out of the request submitted by the Hungarian judicial authorities , is that we are obviously dealing with the most clear-cut case of immunity concerning political views .
Granting immunity to members of a legislative body , an instrument which has been disputed on countless occasions , is intended to give them the freedom to express their opinions .
Indeed , the case involving Tamás Deutsch demonstrates its direct benefit .
I would remind you that the European Parliament has never protected any of its members if acts of corruption or common law offences were being investigated .
The very attempt to prevent MEPs from expressing their opinions on matters of public interest and concern by instituting legal proceedings is unacceptable in a democratic society .
Not to mention that it is a breach of Article 9 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Union , which was devised to protect the freedom of expression of MEPs directly involved in carrying out their duties .
Given that what is at stake is a Member of the European Parliament 's exercising of his political activity , as is recognised in the request submitted to the competent Hungarian judicial authorities , I voted in favour of the conclusions of this report , which recommends refusal to waive Mr Deutsch 's immunity .
It is a case of ensuring compliance with European legislation and of defending a Member 's activities , as we are dealing with an alleged crime of opinion regarding facts in the public domain .
It is also acknowledged that Mr Deutsch was in no way involved in publicising these facts or in originating them , so he has no links to the process of determining whether they are true or false .
Defending the independence of the mandate of Members of this House is the responsibility of Parliament , and that independence cannot be jeopardised .
The Member is accused of defamation allegedly committed as a result of statements made about the accuser , a Hungarian citizen , in the course of a radio programme broadcast on 25 March 2010 , to which he was invited in his capacity as a politician and a Member of the European Parliament .
This demonstrates , therefore , that the opinions were expressed in the performance of Mr Deutsch 's duties as the Member of the European Parliament , so I am opposed to waiving his immunity .
in writing . - All this mess surrounding the immunity of Tamás Deutsch MEP is just a method of political struggle .
I am categorically against such methods which are used to settle accounts with political opponents .
In the given case I voted against the waiver of the immunity of Thomas Deutsch .
I think that a waiver of immunity should be applied only to an MEP who has committed a homicide .
We ( i.e. all Members of European Parliament ) should understand that when a political race goes beyond all limits of logics , we become accomplices of lawlessness .
in writing . - ( DE ) Last year Tamás Deutsch made some remarks during a radio programme which have led to him being charged under Hungarian law .
The only thing he did was to express his opinion on facts which were in the public domain and which had been published in a newspaper .
The comments were clearly made in his capacity as a Member of the European Parliament , which means that under EU rules he is covered by parliamentary immunity .
The purpose of this immunity is to protect the integrity of the European Parliament as a democratic legislative assembly and to ensure the independence of its Members in the performance of their duties .
The use of legal proceedings to attempt to prevent Members of this House from expressing their opinions on matters of legitimate public interest is not compatible with democracy .
We must safeguard the right of free expression .
For this reason , I fully support this report , which rejects the request to waive the immunity of Tamás Deutsch .
The waiver of an MEP 's immunity is always a sensitive issue to address , but in some cases requests for waivers should be analysed in the context of an MEP 's duties .
I do not believe that a simple complaint , where the person is accused of making what are seen as defamatory public statements , is reason enough to request the waiver of parliamentary immunity .
The rules on immunity also show that the accusations made against Tamás Deutsch refer to opinions expressed in the course of his duties as a Member of the European Parliament .
Therefore , Mr Deutsch was performing his duties as an MEP by expressing his opinion on a matter of public interest to his electorate .
One should not try to prevent MEPs from expressing their opinions on matters of legitimate public interest , and that is why I voted in favour of Mr Speroni 's report against the waiver of Tamás Deutsch 's immunity .
The European Parliament was asked to waive the parliamentary immunity of our fellow Member , Mr Deutsch , as a result of criminal proceedings in which he is accused of defamation under the Hungarian Criminal Code .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has issued its opinion on the matter , with a report that decided not to waive his parliamentary immunity being adopted unanimously .
It was considered that Mr Deutsch was performing his duties as a Member of the European Parliament when he made the declarations that motivated these criminal proceedings .
To seek to gag Members of the European Parliament from expressing their opinions on matters of public interest by bringing legal proceedings is unacceptable in a democratic society .
I voted in favour because I advocate freedom of expression for Members when performing their duties , and in order to defend the interests of the European Parliament as an institution .
Nonetheless , I would add that I believe those in positions of political responsibility in general - Members of this House included - must always keep their discourse truthful and respectful of other involved parties , which has not always happened .
in writing . - At the sitting of 8 July 2010 the President announced , under Rule 6 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , that he had received a letter sent by the Hungarian judicial authorities on 9 June 2010 requesting the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Tamás Deutsch .
The President referred the request to the Committee on Legal Affairs under Rule 6 ( 2 ) .
The Court of the 2nd and 3rd Districts of Budapest asked the European Parliament to waive the immunity of its Member , Tamás Deutsch , against whom criminal proceedings are being brought in that court .
Tamás Deutsch is accused in the proceedings pending in the Budapest Court of the criminal offence of defamation under Section 179 ( 2 ) ( b-c ) of the Hungarian Criminal Code .
The case against Tamás Deutsch is that during a radio programme ' Let 's discuss it ' ( Megbeszéljük ) broadcast on the ' Klubradio ' radio station on 25 March 2010 Tamás Deutsch expressed a number of allegedly untrue statements concerning the past of the accuser and considered by him to be defamatory . Accordingly , the accuser brought the criminal proceedings against Tamás Deutsch .
I agree that the position on delegated acts must be approved and reiterated at second reading .
In view of the absence of any alternative proposal from the colegislator , and in view of the need to act quickly in the interests of the beneficiaries , I think that Parliament must confirm its first-reading position with regard to the proper procedure for the purposes of democratic control and application of delegated acts without entering into a new debate on individual changes at this stage .
At the same time , I agree that the Council must respond as quickly as possible to Parliament 's second-reading position so that we can find a solution and all the funds can be released .
in writing . - The UK Independence Party feels that trade , not aid , is the best way to support developing countries ' economies .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the Regulation establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation .
The objective of European Union development policy is to reduce , and ultimately , eradicate poverty .
It supports the efforts of African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries to reduce poverty and ensure sustainable economic and social development .
The European Union is committed to supporting the smooth and gradual integration of developing countries into the world economy with a view to sustainable development .
The main ACP banana-exporting countries may face challenges in the context of changing trade arrangements , notably liberalisation of the Most Favoured Nation ( MFN ) tariff in the framework of the World Trade Organisation and the bilateral and regional agreements concluded , or in the process of being concluded , between the Union and Latin American countries .
The financial assistance measures to be adopted under the programme should aim at improving the living standards and living conditions of people in banana-growing areas and in banana value chains , specifically small farmers and small entities , as well as ensuring compliance with labour and occupational health and safety standards , and environmental standards , notably those regarding the use of and exposure to pesticides .
The measures should therefore also support the adaptation , including , when relevant , the reorganisation , of areas dependent upon banana exports through sector-specific budget support or project-specific interventions .
I welcome the EU 's commitment to supporting the efforts of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries to achieve sustainable economic and social development .
By integrating a trade dimension into development strategies and by promoting international trade , the EU has made a significant contribution to reducing and eradicating poverty in these countries .
It is important to promote the economic diversification of these regions and make them more competitive , whilst taking into account these countries ' policies and adaptation strategies , as well as their regional environment .
It is essential to support ACP countries ' adjustment to the liberalisation of the Union 's market within the framework of the World Trade Organisation .
I call for the issues central to EU aid to be improving people 's living standards and living conditions and , where relevant , those of small entities , not least by respecting labour , safety and environmental standards .
By supporting this legislative recommendation for second reading , I want to guarantee that the legislative role that the Treaty of Lisbon has given the European Parliament is not devalued through the intransigence of the Council .
The refusal of the Council to grant Parliament its proper role in implementing the financing instruments according to Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union does not appear legitimate to me .
The iron hand that the Council insists on maintaining by not applying the solution of delegated acts is blocking various important legislative processes .
Parliament must be kept informed responsibly in order to be able to decide responsibly as well .
In the case of delegated acts , it must keep intact its powers to revoke that delegation .
To give a blank cheque to the other institutions while excluding Parliament is to withdraw this institution 's supervision of the allocation of resources and sectoral priorities in connection with development cooperation .
I call for a swifter response from the Council to the draft recommendation from the European Parliament amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation .
One year on since the interinstitutional negotiations were initiated on the horizontal issue of delegated acts within the scope of external action financial instruments , the Council has officially refused to grant Parliament its proper role in the operation of the financing instruments , including for development cooperation , as stipulated in Article 290 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
After rejecting all the amendments from first reading attempting to introduce delegated acts into the instruments , without proposing any alternative procedure , the Council called for Parliament to adopt its position without leaving any scope for negotiations .
These negotiations are intended primarily to ensure respect for the Treaty of Lisbon by all institutions and not only effective parliamentary control and , therefore , democratic control over the implementation of EU legislation .
Indeed , the outcome of the negotiations will establish an important precedent for future legislative negotiations on all financing instruments .
I would like to appeal to the Council to advise us of its position as soon as possible so that we can reach an agreement to unblock the funds .
I voted in favour of the report on establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation .
I think that such a financial instrument is a necessity in the context where developing countries have become strategic partners of the EU .
This instrument will facilitate economic , technical , academic , financial and cultural cooperation , thereby yielding benefits for both the European Union and its partners .
In spite of the crisis the European Union is going through and the internal problems affecting its people , it must not neglect the support that it gives to developing countries and allow them to fall into tragic situations of extreme hunger and destitution .
Some of these countries are dependent to a great degree on the production of one or just a few products , very often agricultural products , and are therefore particularly vulnerable to market fluctuations .
That is the case with bananas , which , for many countries , constitute one of their main sources of income .
I hope that the financing instrument is able to support the necessary adjustment arising from the reduction in preferential tariffs for the producing countries .
This draft legislative resolution , which consolidates an amendment to the Financing Instrument for Development Cooperation ( DCI ) Regulation and is aimed at supporting banana-exporting countries , has led to formal problems between the co-legislators regarding the strategic programming documents to support this sector.According to the proposals tabled at first reading , procedures relating to delegated acts must be included in the DCI Regulation , as provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is essential that Parliament 's powers as regards control over the applicability of strategic decisions and development aid be preserved .
Indeed , in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon , I agree that such monitoring should be conducted on an equal footing with the Council , which would contribute to increased sharing of responsibilities between the European institutions and to mitigating any lack of democracy in the EU 's decision-making process .
The question of delegated acts has dominated the discussion around the financing instrument for development cooperation , as in fact has happened with other financing instruments .
In this case , well-founded concerns have been expressed here , which we share , about a possible delay in the transfer of the funds foreseen in the banana accompanying measures as a result of the current dispute between Parliament and the Council .
Without detracting from the importance of this discussion , nevertheless it would also be good to look at the underlying questions arising from the agreement for the liberalisation of the banana trade signed by the European Union .
We need to remember here that the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries , which will be significantly affected by this agreement and were not duly involved in its discussion , estimate the amount of aid necessary to maintain their banana sector at EUR 500 million .
Therefore , the amount proposed by the Commission , EUR 190 million , is well below the estimated impact of this agreement .
On the African continent alone , approximately 500 000 people depend on the banana sector for their living .
The sector is regarded as a focus of sustainable development that has made it possible to install health , water , energy and housing infrastructure .
Free trade , to which this agreement opens the gates , will now put all that in jeopardy .
Parliament today approved the text of the recommendation tabled by Mr Goerens because it saw fit to amend Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation .
The Union 's key objectives undoubtedly include promoting peace , the Union 's values and the constitutional traditions common to the Member States , as well as ensuring the well-being of the people .
In this respect , the effort made to support developing countries , including in particular the countries of Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific , is well known .
The objective of this assistance is to improve the living conditions of beneficiary populations by recommending and providing all those instruments that will ensure that these countries embark on a path towards growth and accountability .
Lastly , I would mention that the amendments that we have adopted follow on from a mid-term review of the programme and are aimed at more effective intervention and greater monitoring by the European Union .
The EU has always focused on helping developing countries , particularly the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries .
This draft legislative resolution is aimed at establishing a financing instrument that helps protect ACP countries affected by the reduction of tariff preferences .
By helping the banana sector in these countries we are helping them develop their economies , create jobs and fight poverty .
I voted in favour of the recommendation for second reading on the financing instrument for development cooperation .
Moreover , I should like to emphasise that the European Parliament has always been in favour of granting financing measures for the banana sector to the 10 ACP banana-producing countries .
The only stumbling block in this matter remains the horizontal issue of delegated acts .
I hope that we can quickly reach an agreement at institutional level on this last point .
Indeed , it is hard to accept that the countries being given these funds are unable to use them .
This delay undermines the credibility of our commitments and affects the conclusion of the economic partnership agreements .
As in the case of the other reports concerning the financial instruments for development cooperation , this report strengthens the rights of the European Parliament in relation to the delegated acts adopted by the Commission , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( DE ) The report grants the European Parliament more powers in the area of conferred competences .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report .
On the subject of development cooperation , I voted in favour of establishing a financing instrument to encourage that process , because the European Union 's development policy aims to reduce poverty over the long term .
It follows that the integration of development strategies and the promotion of international trade are important factors for reducing poverty .
I believe the financial assistance measures to be adopted in such a context should aim at improving the living conditions of the groups most at risk , and should therefore facilitate adaptation and inclusion through sectoral support and specific actions .
I am also of the opinion that EU policy should focus more on substantive integration with developing countries through the establishment of a specific , appropriate financing instrument .
Development and economic growth currently underpin the proper functioning of a country .
It is therefore necessary to promote targeted actions in that direction in order to achieve a stable level of cooperation with regard to countries at risk .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the amendments to Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation at second reading .
These amendments are aimed at supporting the main banana-exporting countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific using Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAMs ) , which are intended to last four years ( 2010-2013 ) .
According to the report by the Committee on Development , Parliament raised a series of questions regarding the Commission proposal at an early stage , which meant that their concerns , in particular the need for ensuring that the BAMs are geared towards development and the eradication of poverty , were taken into account .
These and other concerns , which have been well highlighted in the final text , such as environmental , health and labour standards associated with the fulfilment of specific criteria for allocating funds , were the reason why I voted in favour .
The main African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) banana-supplying countries may face difficulties following the liberalisation of customs duties implemented under the Most Favoured Nation tariff within the framework of the World Trade Organisation and the bilateral and regional agreements concluded , or which are in the process of being concluded , between the EU and certain Latin American countries .
Under the terms of this proposal for a regulation , which amends Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council , the main ACP banana-supplying countries will benefit from Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAMs ) , aimed at assisting their process of adjustment to this new import regime .
With specific regard to this recommendation for a second reading , what it at stake is the issue of implementing the financing instrument for development cooperation on the procedure relating to delegated acts , as outlined in Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , which would concern both strategic planning documents and the BAMs .
I voted in favour because I agree that in its capacity as a co-legislator , Parliament should be able to monitor the adoption of strategic decisions about where and how development aid is spent , on an equal footing with the Council .
in writing . - Under the influence of the European Parliament 's Legal Service , the DEVE , AFET ( DROI ) and INTA Committees have started a fight to gain co-decision rights on the strategic programming level of the financial instruments in external relations .
Parliament has decided to raise the bargaining level by treating all instruments in a package approach .
Apart from this basic conflict , the other mid-term adaptations are consensus between the three institutions ( with the exception of the ICI + ) .
As it turned out after the first reading in October 2010 , negotiations on the ' delegated acts ' are completely blocked .
Therefore Parliament has decided : ( 1 ) to maintain a common line , i.e. to keep the package of external financial assistance instruments together ( including also - so far informally - the IfS ) ; ( 2 ) to restore with the EP 's second reading amendments the positions adopted by the EP at first reading , i.e. to adopt regarding all external financial assistance instruments the same amendments that were rejected by the Council ; and ( 3 ) to go for a quick second reading .
The proposal for a regulation amending the financing instrument for development cooperation aims to support the main banana-exporting countries of Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific ( ACP ) through measures known as Banana Accompanying Measures .
The initiative comes in the wake of the reduction in preferential tariffs for banana exports from the ACP countries granted by the European Union .
The need to reduce the tariffs applicable to products imported by the European Union results from the World Trade Organisation classification .
This is a four-year plan , running from 2010 to 2013 and , according to the document , the measures must be geared to the objectives of development and the eradication of poverty , taking into account environmental , health and labour standards , and the specific criteria applicable to the allocation of funds must be formulated .
I support the initiative , which is based on a concern to contribute to and cooperate with the development of the ACP countries , since it adds a programme of banana accompanying measures .
I am looking forward to finding out how the situation in the outermost regions that produce in the same sector will be affected and subsequently taken into account following the changes to the terms of trade between the two parties .
in writing . - ( PT ) Bearing in mind that the new framework for governing the planning and performance of aid activities , established in 2006 in order to make Community aid more effective and transparent , has revealed some inconsistencies in its implementation , namely with regard to the exceptions to the principle of non-eligibility for EU financing of costs related to tariffs , taxes and other charges , I approve the adoption of a second reading of Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 , which grants greater legitimacy to the other institutions ( Parliament and the Council ) in the adoption of strategic documents by the Commission within the scope of delegated acts .
in writing . - The UK Independence Party fully supports the cause of genuine human rights .
However , we note that the EU 's interpretation of human rights is a flawed one .
From votes for prisoners to refusing to deport terrorist hate preachers , all in the name of ' human rights ' , the EU has damaged Britain , and now wishes to spread this throughout the world , using our taxpayers ' money .
This is why we cannot support this measure .
Democracy and human rights are fundamental values for the European Union , which should be strongly promoted worldwide as an integral part of the ongoing actions aimed at reducing poverty and settling conflicts , while providing , at the same time , a valuable starting point in the fight against terrorism .
I therefore welcome the European Union 's specific intention to incorporate the promotion of democracy and human rights in its external policies .
The financing instrument for the promotion of human rights worldwide increases the effectiveness and transparency of EU external assistance and enhances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the countries and regions where they are most at risk .
I am in favour of action to increase civil society 's role in promoting human rights and democratic reform , in supporting the peaceful conciliation of group interests and in boosting political participation and representation .
Furthermore , I support the actions carried out in the areas which come under the European Union 's guidelines , relating specifically to the promotion of democracy , human rights , the death penalty , torture , children 's rights , violence against women and armed conflict .
I voted for this report which supports and strengthens the international and regional framework for protecting human rights , justice , the rule of law and promotion of democracy .
The EU finances many projects in developing countries with the aim of promoting development cooperation , democracy and human rights .
It is essential that Parliament be given the right to scrutinise EU funding for these projects .
In its capacity as a co-legislator , Parliament should be able to monitor the adoption of strategic decisions about where and how the aid is spent , to ensure that development and human rights are taken into account .
I fully endorse the decision to resubmit the same amendments as were adopted at first reading but rejected by the Council .
The aim of the proposal , which fits into the broader context of interinstitutional negotiations on the use of delegated acts for the financing of the Union 's external action , is in fact to protect Parliament 's prerogatives as laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon , while also ensuring effective control over the implementation of EU legislation .
The Council has shown its reluctance to accept that the procedure under Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union applies to the instruments in question .
That not only demonstrates the Council 's unjustifiable refusal to grant Parliament its due role as colegislator in making strategic decisions on the management of financing instruments , but also ends up legitimising an unacceptable democratic deficit in the implementation of EU legislation .
This refusal by the Council goes against the letter and the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I therefore believe that it is crucial to insist that the proposed amendments are accepted , for reasons of legal as well as political expediency , in order to strengthen Parliament 's role and ensure that it is placed on an equal footing with the Council in terms of respecting each other 's powers and the legislative changes introduced by the Treaty .
I voted for this report because I think that it is a necessity for the European Union to reassert its role as a global leader for democracy and fundamental rights .
In this respect , it is especially necessary to make the European financing instrument more adaptable to enable the Union and beneficiaries of European financial assistance to enjoy a certain degree of flexibility in managing the projects they undertake .
On the other hand , I believe that suitable control is required over the use of these funds .
Apart from the exemption which should remain regarding the approval of the financing of costs relating to duties , taxes and other charges and carried out on a case-by-case basis , the European Parliament must have the right to monitor the activities carried out by the Commission and the strategic documents adopted by it .
The Commission and the Council are opposing each other on the application to the financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide of Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , and also to all the strategy papers and the multiannual indicative programmes .
Like the resolution resulting from the Mitchell report voted on today , the present resolution also accepts the need to perform a mainly technical clarification in the same vein in an attempt to guarantee the position of the European Parliament in the legislative process and in the control and monitoring of the acts of the Commission .
As I advocate compliance with and respect for the Treaty of Lisbon , I am voting in favour of Parliament having a clear position on the assertion of its powers and responsibilities , and taking an active role in promoting EU policies which are capable of ensuring effective support for democracy , freedom and respect for human rights worldwide .
In view of this , it is crucial that Parliament have an effective opportunity to evaluate this instrument and ensure that it is being used correctly in supporting people and institutions working in their respective countries , under very adverse conditions , to counter oppressive regimes or trends .
These people are promoters of the development of democratic structures , of freedom of the press and speech , and of the fight against corruption and other problems that undermine full respect for human rights , and which are at the root of crises such as those currently occurring in the countries of North Africa .
We have reached the second reading with changes which are no more than a tug of war between Parliament , the Commission and the Council , a power struggle resulting from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The objective is control of an instrument which , they say , is aimed at the ' promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide ' , but which , in practice , has in itself been an attack on democracy .
Look at the example of Honduras , where the EU has used this instrument to legitimise the power resulting from the coup that deposed the legitimately elected president , and the violations of that country 's constitution .
It legitimises a power associated with the brutal increase in murders , particularly of members of the resistance front against the coup , journalists and their families , and with the occupation and expulsion of farmers from their land .
Let us also look at the contradiction that exists in the signing , by the authorities that are , de facto , the result of the coup in Honduras , of a so-called ' EU-Central America Association Agreement ' , which includes a clause demanding respect for human rights and democracy .
What is becoming increasingly evident is the hypocritical way in which the EU uses its supposed preoccupation with human rights : by interfering to promote the agents who are willing to defend the interests of big capital in the EU .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because there are still too many human rights violations in the world .
The financial and economic crisis , climate change , the introduction of new information technologies and the war on terror further exacerbate human rights issues and new forms of human rights violations emerge .
The global economic and financial crisis is above all having an adverse impact on the rights of the poorest .
The most vulnerable groups in developing countries are particularly likely to suffer the negative consequences of climate change .
Development cooperation represents a very important part of EU external relations .
It is the most important instrument reducing poverty in developing countries , and developing the economies of the poorest nations , as well as social policies , democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
The promotion of democracy and human rights should be the most important priority of a coherent EU foreign policy .
In December 2006 , the European Parliament and the Council enacted Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 on establishing a financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide .
Four years later , the two institutions have seen fit to amend certain articles of the regulation , in order to improve the assistance it provides from the point of view of both clarity and efficiency .
My vote in favour of the recommendation can be easily explained : the experience of the recent past has taught us that we can never be too cautious when granting humanitarian aid , if we are to ensure that it ends up in the right hands .
It is for this reason in particular that I believe that , thanks to its vote , Parliament has today provided that extra something to ensure that its financial assistance has the effect of safeguarding democracy and fundamental human rights , because achieving those things is what it was designed for .
I voted for this report on the European instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide .
This instrument can be used in ways that will benefit populations .
My vote certainly does not mean that I accept the disgraceful double standards demonstrated by the European Union in the areas of democracy and human rights .
The failure to award the Sakharov Prize to the North African opponents during the years of the regimes that are today in trouble attests to the blind ideological nature of the anti-communist Eurocrats .
The problems which have emerged due to the implementation of these regulations lead to inconsistencies regarding exceptions to the principle of non-eligibility for EU financing of costs related to taxes , duties and other charges .
An amendment is therefore proposed to the relevant provisions of Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 in order to align them with other instruments , and so that they can play their part in the fight for human rights worldwide .
I am voting against .
These days project funding in the human rights area is turning into the personal business of some senior European Union officials .
The Saharov prize , for example , is evidence of this .
To my mind , in the last two years this prize has been awarded to candidates who were not the best .
Clear signs of political parti pris have appeared in the European Parliament 's work in defending human rights .
People who have no right to be called human rights defenders are often being nominated for cash prizes .
Clear and strict rules are needed , otherwise European Union funds will be laid open to inappropriate use .
This motion is primarily about empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts .
The amendments tabled by Parliament impose extensive obligations on the Commission to provide Parliament with information .
This and the possibility of raising objections to the delegated acts or even of revoking them completely , together with the proposed measures for increasing efficiency , have prompted me to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) The report grants the European Parliament more powers within the framework of the competences conferred upon it .
For this reason , I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) The European Union is the world 's biggest donor of development aid .
We provide more than 50 % of total global aid , thus providing an example for other regions and countries to emulate .
Development cooperation represents a very important part of EU external relations .
It is the most important instrument reducing poverty in developing countries , and developing the economies of the poorest nations , as well as social policies , democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
If it is implemented even more effectively , development aid offers hope that we may overcome the division of the world into ' rich ' and ' poor ' countries .
I voted in favour of this recommendation , because I am in favour of the call for the European Commission to prepare a compromise proposal , on how to include the European Parliament in the control of the Instrument for Development Cooperation following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
The European Parliament should acquire the same powers as the European Council in deciding when , where and how much of the instrument should be used .
In line with the European Union 's policy on human rights and the promotion of democracy , I voted in favour of the regulation since I believe that the values and principles on which our Union is based must be promoted and passed on around the world .
There are still countries , however , where human rights are not respected and democracy does not play a significant role , and where the people live in a state of slavery and submission with no freedom of expression .
In that respect , I believe the Union 's external assistance needs to be made more effective and transparent so as to ensure that democracy and human rights are granted the importance they deserve throughout the world .
It would therefore be appropriate to establish a financing instrument in order to facilitate and support the promotion of human rights and democracy .
A regulatory framework for planning and delivering assistance was established in 2006 in order to make the Community 's external assistance more effective and transparent .
According to the reports submitted to Parliament , the implementation of this framework has revealed profound inconsistencies regarding exceptions to the principle of non-eligibility for Union financing of costs related to taxes , duties and other charges .
In view of this , it is important to amend certain provisions of Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 in order to align them with the provisions of other instruments pertaining to the aforementioned regulatory framework .
These amendments do not go beyond the objectives set out in the Treaty on European Union and contribute to the need for this regulation to be clarified ; owing to these factors , I voted in favour .
With specific regard to this recommendation for a second reading , what is at stake is the issue of applying the procedure relating to delegated acts , as outlined in Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , to the financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights .
I voted in favour because I agree that Parliament , in its capacity as a co-legislator , should be able to monitor the adoption of strategic decisions on the implementation of this instrument on an equal footing with the Council .
in writing . - Under the influence of the European Parliament 's Legal Service , the DEVE , AFET ( DROI ) and INTA Committees have started a fight to gain co-decision rights on the strategic programming level of the financial instruments in external relations .
Parliament has decided to raise the bargaining level by treating all instruments in a package approach .
Apart from this basic conflict , the other mid-term adaptations are consensus between the three institutions ( with the exception of the ICI + ) .
As it turned out after the first reading in October 2010 , negotiations on the ' delegated acts ' are completely blocked .
Therefore Parliament has decided : ( 1 ) to maintain a common line , i.e. to keep the package of external financial assistance instruments together ( including also - so far informally - the IfS ) ; ( 2 ) to restore with the EP 's second reading amendments the positions adopted by the EP at first reading , i.e. to adopt regarding all external financial assistance instruments the same amendments that were rejected by the Council ; and ( 3 ) to go for a quick second reading .
I supported this text because I think it can help to make the European Union 's external assistance procedures more effective and transparent .
In implementing certain regulations , inconsistencies have emerged over time regarding exceptions to the principle of non-eligibility for Union financing of costs related to taxes , duties and other charges Now that this point has been cleared up , we need to carry on resolutely along this path .
in writing . - ( LT ) Democracy is not just free and fair elections .
In order for there to be a democratic society , it is necessary to support and defend human rights .
The EU has often rushed to be the first to condemn human rights violations outside the EU , such as when it approved the application of sanctions against President Lukashenko 's regime on Monday , or when it criticised human rights violations in Egypt and Tunisia .
However , when attention turns to human rights violations within the EU , we are slow to react .
This only weakens the EU 's position .
The EU 's external financial instruments , such as the Instrument for Development Cooperation , the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument and the Instrument for Stability have great potential .
However , the EU should focus attention on strengthening the rule of law within its borders , as well as increasing transparency and accountability in public services .
I believe that democratisation and the election process are also important for poverty reduction , sustainable development , peace and stability .
If we fail to ensure human rights and democracy , then we risk losing far more .
It is important for the EU to have a good reputation in the field of human rights if it wants to take full advantage of its financial instruments for external action .
Parliament must reconfirm its position at first reading without entering into individual amendments at this stage .
Bearing in mind that no alternative procedure was proposed and that only a few technical amendments of the EP were accepted , and since the Council is asking the EP to adopt the Council 's common position before the end of 2010 without any negotiation to determine jointly the most suitable time to transmit its position , as is required by Article 20 of the agreement on good interinstitutional cooperation in the area of codecision , I approve the present report so that Parliament 's position may be adopted and reiterated as quickly as possible with regard to delegated acts at second reading .


in writing . - ( LT ) A new framework for planning and delivering assistance was established in 2006 in order to make the Community 's external assistance more effective and transparent .
It contains Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1085 / 2006 of 17 July 2006 establishing an Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( IPA ) , Regulation ( EC ) No 1638 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 2006 laying down general provisions establishing a European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument , Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1934 / 2006 of 21 December 2006 establishing a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories , Regulation ( EC ) No 1717 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 November 2006 establishing an Instrument for Stability , Council Regulation ( Euratom ) No 300 / 2007 of 19 February 2007 establishing an Instrument for Nuclear Safety Cooperation , Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 , and Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation .
In implementing those Regulations inconsistencies have emerged regarding exceptions to the principle of non-eligibility for Union financing of costs related to taxes , duties and other charges .
It is therefore necessary to amend the relevant provisions of Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 in order to align it with the other instruments .


By supporting this legislative recommendation for second reading , I want to guarantee that the legislative role that the Treaty of Lisbon has given the European Parliament is not devalued through the intransigence of the Council .
The refusal of the Council to grant Parliament its proper role in implementing the financing instruments according to Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union does not appear legitimate to me .
The iron hand that the Council insists on maintaining by not applying the solution of the delegated acts is blocking various important legislative processes .
Parliament must be kept informed responsibly in order to be able to decide responsibly as well .
In the case of delegated acts , it must keep intact its powers to revoke that delegation .
To give a blank cheque to the other institutions while excluding Parliament is to withdraw this institution 's supervision of the allocation of resources and sectoral priorities in connection with development cooperation .
I fully endorse the decision to resubmit the same amendments as were adopted at first reading but rejected by the Council .
The aim of the proposal , which fits into the broader context of interinstitutional negotiations on the use of delegated acts for the financing of the Union 's external action , is in fact to protect Parliament 's prerogatives as laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon , while also ensuring effective control over the implementation of EU legislation .
The Council has shown its reluctance to accept that the procedure under Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union applies to the instruments in question .
That not only demonstrates the Council 's unjustifiable refusal to grant Parliament its due role as co-legislator in making strategic decisions on the management of financing instruments , but also ends up legitimising an unacceptable democratic deficit in the implementation of EU legislation .
This refusal by the Council goes against the letter and the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I therefore believe that it is crucial to insist that the proposed amendments are accepted , for reasons of legal as well as political expediency , in order to strengthen Parliament 's role and ensure that it is placed on an equal footing with the Council in terms of respecting each other 's powers and the legislative changes introduced by the Treaty .
in writing . - ( RO ) I regard as beneficial the measures envisaged by the European Union using the financing instrument for development cooperation , especially those for supporting small farmers and small agricultural entities .
These are measures aimed not only at producing social resilience policies , but also at economic diversification in the targeted areas or investment to improve competitiveness .
I voted in favour of this resolution since I believe that the European Parliament , in its capacity as colegislator , must be able to control the adoption of strategic decisions on where and how development aid is dispensed on an equal footing with the Council , as provided in the Treaty of Lisbon .
The amendment concerned is apparently technical and arises from the difference in interpretation of the Council and of the Commission on the one hand and Parliament on the other with regard to the applicability of Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to multiannual indicative programmes .
Delegated acts ( Article 290 TFEU ) give both arms of the legislative authority the power to block proposals by the Commission or revoke the delegation .
Notwithstanding its apparent technical nature , it is rooted in the different interpretations of the scope of Parliament 's power of control over the Commission 's actions under the terms of the new Treaty .
The unanimous vote in committee confirms that this is the interpretation most in agreement with the need to protect Parliament 's democratic prerogatives with regard to control of the strategic decisions on how to allocate development aid .
Given the acceptance of Parliament 's recommendation for a second reading on the financing instrument for development cooperation , I agree with the need to proceed to the amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 as a matter of urgency , so as to avoid interinstitutional conflicts which do nothing to improve the image of the European institutions and only delay the allocation of funds in the respective processes of development cooperation .
At this second reading , the discussion has been dominated by the possibility of delegating to the Commission the adoption of non-legislative acts that supplement or amend certain non-essential elements of the legislative act , in other words , what are known as ' delegated acts ' .
The speeding up of a certain type of procedures that guarantee that indispensable aid to developing countries reaches its destination in good time is certainly a concern that needs to be taken into account .
Another concern is the guarantee that the Commission acts within the strict limits of the delegation attributed to it ( which , according to the terms provided , can be revoked ) , without exceeding its competences , and the guarantee that the competences of Parliament and of the Council are therefore duly safeguarded .
More is at stake in the discussion on the financing instrument for development cooperation , however , than just the matter of delegated acts .
To be more specific , this subject requires us to reflect on a fundamental question : the direction impressed on the EU 's cooperation policy .
Therefore , we have to condemn the way in which the Commission has sought to impose free trade agreements on developing countries , in spite of their considerable resistance , since it is explicitly or implicitly making part of the aid conditional on these agreements in an act of unacceptable blackmail .
The interinstitutional negotiations on the external financing instruments are about the need to ensure democratic control by Parliament over the implementation of EU legislation .
Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union grants Parliament the power to object to or revoke certain decisions proposed by the Commission on where and how money is spent ..
The funds in question will serve purposes such as organising civil society in Belarus or supporting human rights in Tunisia .
In my view the Council must act quickly to ensure that a solution can be found and the funds can be released as soon as possible .
The different ways in which Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is interpreted by Parliament and the Council has led me to support this legislative recommendation .
We cannot forget the legislative role of Parliament , as enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon , but it seems to have been overlooked by the Council .
This intransigence is blocking a series of legislative processes , and this is doing nothing to benefit the EU .
Development cooperation with countries that have so-called ' emerging economies ' is very important for the EU .
That is why I voted as I did .
I am voting in favour , because I am convinced that additional bonuses and additional incentives must be provided in order to encourage the development of industry , science , transport and energy .
Based on the most striking examples in history ( the Marshall plan ) , we must try to step up the rate of demand from industry and consumers , by encouraging innovation in new technologies and science and funding technology ' pioneers ' .
As in the case of the Gál / Lochbihler report , this proposed amendment to the regulation on establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation concerns improvements to efficiency by means of the delegated acts adopted by the Commission .
I have voted in favour of this report , because the amendments would increase the European Parliament 's powers of control .
I voted in favour of amending the regulation establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation because I believe that cooperation is an important aspect of EU external action and relations policy .
I am of the opinion that EU policy should focus more on substantive integration with developing countries through the establishment of a specific andappropriate financing instrument .
Development and economic growth currently underpin the proper functioning of a country .
It is therefore necessary to promote targeted actions in that direction in order to achieve a stable level of cooperation with regard to countries at risk .
The financial aid to be allocated and devoted to those countries should be intended for serious and practical support so as to make them financially independent from international assistance .
I voted in favour of this report , , for similar reasons as I did for the preceding report , .
Both cases concern a dispute over the full implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Indeed , at this time of legal transition Parliament cannot and must not miss out on the powers vested in it by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Indeed , the central aspect of the legislative recommendation proposed by the rapporteur in this process does not concern the substance of the Financing Instrument for Development Cooperation Regulation .
Its main objective is to protect Parliament 's democratic prerogatives , as provided for in the Treaty .
In its capacity as a co-legislator , Parliament should be able to monitor the adoption of strategic decisions about where and how development aid is spent , on an equal footing with the Council .
To this end , the rapporteur believes that in technical terms a number of decisions , which are normally taken by the Commission for the execution of the basic act , fulfil the criteria for being considered ' delegated acts ' , pursuant to Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
This would provide the two legislative bodies with a real opportunity to object to certain draft decisions proposed by the Commission , or even to revoke the delegation .
The Union 's development policy aims to reduce and ultimately eradicate poverty .
I feel I must emphasise here that the financial assistance measures to be adopted under the programme should aim at improving the living standards and living conditions of people in banana-growing areas and in banana value chains , specifically small farmers and small entities , as well as ensuring compliance with labour and occupational health and safety standards , and environmental standards , notably those regarding the use of and exposure to pesticides .
The measures should therefore support the adaptation and include , when relevant , the reorganisation of areas dependent upon banana exports through sector-specific budget support or project-specific interventions .
With specific regard to this recommendation for a second reading , what it at stake is the issue of implementing the financing instrument for development cooperation through the procedure relating to delegated acts , as outlined in Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
I voted in favour because I agree that , in its capacity as co-legislator , Parliament should be able to monitor the adoption of strategic decisions about where and how development aid is spent on an equal footing with the Council .
in writing . - ( IT ) Improving democratic control over the funds intended for supporting human rights is a concrete objective that we have to achieve .
It can only be done , however , with our direct involvement : as co-legislator , Parliament must be able to directly control decisions on external development spending .
Granting this House power over what are known as ' delegated acts ' would help to shrink the democratic deficit in the decision-making process of the European Union .
In October last year a large majority in this House upheld the principle of applying delegated acts to external funding decisions as well , so as to have power of veto over them .
The outcome of the negotiations on the use of these instruments will establish a strong precedent .
If we lose this battle , we may have to wait for a new Treaty in order to obtain the powers that the Lisbon Treaty is giving us now .
The European Commission has proposed a technical review of the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights ( EIDHR ) with the aim of increasing flexibility , efficiency of implementation and coordination with other financial mechanisms .
The turbulence affecting many Arab countries , in particular Tunisia and Egypt , demonstrates the need to support projects that have an impact on the pursuit of democratic values and human rights .
Therefore , I consider it to be extremely important that this financing instrument supports civil organisations , states and private individuals without the prior approval of the national governments being necessary .
In view of the limitation of the budget destined for the EIDHR , it must only be applied to initiatives that promote human rights and democracy .
However , I regret having to point out the Council 's refusal to apply Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , which delegates to the Commission ' the power to adopt non-legislative acts of general application to supplement or amend certain non-essential elements of the legislative act ' .
The introduction of the regulatory procedure with control over strategy documents and multiannual cooperation programmes within the framework of the EIDHR would give the European Parliament greater power in this respect , as enshrined in the TFEU .
in writing . - The Commission proposal includes no less than four separate financing instruments .
They are aimed at different market sectors .
For each one of them there are justifications that sound credible .
However , taken together they are all aimed at the same thing .
The intention is to advance and promote the political and foreign policy agenda of the European Commission .
Even Trade Commissioner Mr De Gucht in the debate admits ' ... they do support a whole range of EU policy objectives including trade , and allow us to remain relevant as foreign policy actors ' .
And we know by now who is paying for all of this .
The hard-pressed taxpayer and obviously and as usual the British taxpayer - disproportionately .
The cost of all this , despite our best efforts , is unknown .
Once again the Commission are being profligate and irresponsible with other people 's money .
That is why we did not support either proposal and abstained .
Since Parliament and the Council make decisions together with regard to objectives and content , and taking into account the fact that the Council adopted its position on 10 December 2010 without , however , having taken into consideration Parliament 's amendments relating to the procedures applicable to the adoption of programming documents and those relating to functioning , I agree that the position adopted by Parliament at first reading should be restored in order to make sure that Parliament is treated on an equal footing with the Council / Member States and that the programming structure of the industrialised countries instrument recognises the changes introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the recommendation establishing a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories .
The primary objective of Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 is the eradication of poverty through the pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals .
The scope of cooperation for the geographic programmes with developing countries and regions established under that Regulation is furthermore limited materially to financing measures designed to fulfil the criteria for Official Development Assistance ( ' ODA criteria ' ) established by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( ' OECD / DAC ' ) .
It is in the European Union 's interests to further deepen its relations with the developing countries concerned , which are important bilateral partners and players in multilateral fora and in global governance .
The Union has a strategic interest in promoting diversified links with those countries , in particular in areas such as economic , commercial , academic , business and scientific exchanges .
It therefore needs a financial instrument that allows the financing of such measures which , in principle , do not qualify as ODA under the ODA criteria , but which are crucially important in terms of consolidating relations and which make an important contribution to promoting the progress of the developing countries concerned .
The Union 's cooperation should take into consideration efforts made by the recipient countries to comply with the International Labour Organisation international agreements and to participate in the general objectives of greenhouse gas emissions reduction .
I fully endorse the decision to resubmit the same amendments as were adopted at first reading but rejected by the Council .
The aim of the proposal , which fits into the broader context of interinstitutional negotiations on the use of delegated acts for the financing of the Union 's external action , is in fact to protect Parliament 's prerogatives as laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon , while also ensuring effective control over the implementation of EU legislation .
The Council has shown its reluctance to accept that the procedure under Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union applies to the instruments in question .
That not only demonstrates the Council 's unjustifiable refusal to grant Parliament its due role as co-legislator in making strategic decisions on the management of financing instruments , but also ends up legitimising an unacceptable democratic deficit in the implementation of EU legislation .
This refusal by the Council goes against the letter and the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I therefore believe that it is crucial to insist that the proposed amendments are accepted , for reasons of legal as well as political expediency , in order to strengthen Parliament 's role and ensure that it is placed on an equal footing with the Council in terms of respecting each other 's powers and the legislative changes introduced by the Treaty .
in writing . - ( PT ) I regard it as fundamental that Europe establishes strong relations with certain regional and global players by supporting them and establishing strong political and economic links .
I would mention in particular two countries with which Portugal has strong ties of history and affection , namely Brazil and Angola , two important global players in South America and Africa , respectively , which the EU must increasingly regard as partners .
Knowing that the principal general objective of Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 is to eradicate poverty through the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals , cooperation is essentially limited to the financing of measures aimed at satisfying the criteria applicable to public development aid as established .
Very often , this excludes other types of action that are not included within the scope of public development aid , but which are nevertheless essential as part of EU external policy .
It is precisely to regulate such practices - which include economic , commercial , academic , business and scientific agreements and exchanges - with developing countries that approval of the present Regulation is proposed , with due note being taken of Parliament 's proposals .
Parliament has a duty and obligation to defend the conditions necessary for the exercise of its powers and responsibilities under the Treaty of Lisbon .
In addition to the importance of this instrument in supporting emerging countries - especially in Africa and Latin America - so as to assert the EU 's role as a promoter of social development and peace in global terms , I would like to highlight the need for Parliament to be given better information to ensure the proper implementation of such resources aiming to promote development cooperation in third countries .
I would also like to point out the acknowledgement of the strategies at the level of renewable energy , environmental-protection policy , culture , and small- and medium-sized enterprises , as well as the importance of taking measures to prevent crises in terms of food and raw materials .
I voted in favour of the establishment of a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries , to complement European development aid .
The financing is intended to support economic , financial , technical , cultural and academic cooperation with partner countries and to strengthen economic links and bilateral agreements with those countries .
In this text we also ask to be better informed about the measures financed , but also to be involved upstream , when programmes are developed , and downstream , when they are assessed , after several years of implementation in some cases .
The different ways in which Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is interpreted by Parliament and the Council has led me to support this legislative recommendation .
We cannot forget the legislative role of Parliament , as enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon , but it seems to have been overlooked by the Council .
This intransigence is blocking a series of legislative processes , and is doing nothing to benefit the EU .
Cooperation with industrialised countries is of enormous importance for the EU economy .
That is why I voted as I did .
The current commitment has brought hardly any improvements .
On the contrary , governments have been made dependent on aid and , what is even worse , millions of euros of development aid often disappear because of corruption or are siphoned off into the bank accounts of third-world dictators .
As a result , development aid is not only ineffective , but sometimes even harmful , because it does not deal with the specific problems of the country in question and , in addition , there is a lack of coordination and control .
In my opinion , it is highly doubtful whether an EU-wide financing instrument for development and human rights can improve this situation .
On the one hand , giving money to small African farmers , while , on the other hand , bringing them to the brink of ruin with our subsidised agricultural products , means that we are throwing European taxpayers ' money down the drain .
Because of my doubts concerning the viability of the planned finance instrument , I have abstained .
My decision to vote for the establishment of a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries , which was adopted by an overwhelming majority in this House , fully supports the common line of applying Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the criteria of Article 290 cannot be the matter of political bargains or any special arrangements .
I believe cooperation with industrialised countries is a step that the European Union has to take , so that all the Member States can benefit from a financing instrument that serves to enhance the Union 's growth and development .
In the current situation , the EU must move towards a future of change , economic development and prosperity , which is why cooperation with industrialised countries would make the process simpler and more widely shared .
Since 2007 , the EU has been streamlining its geographical cooperation with developing countries in Asia , Central Asia and Latin America , and with Iraq , Iran , Yemen and South Africa under Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 of 18 December 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation .
The primary and overarching objective of this regulation is the eradication of poverty through the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
In the light of the new powers granted to Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon , the rapporteur explains the need to amend Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 by extending its geographical scope , while at the same time putting Parliament at the heart of the decision-making process , alongside the Council .
The proposed changes were introduced with this in mind .
I would like to highlight the allocation of powers to the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
This amendment will enable greater consideration to be given to Parliament at all stages of the process , from negotiation to adoption , making the EU more democratic and legitimate .
With specific regard to this recommendation for a second reading , what is at issue here is the implementation of the procedure relating to delegated acts , as outlined in Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , to the financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries .
I voted in favour because I believe that it is vital to ensure that Parliament is treated on an equal footing with the Council , and that the programming structure for the financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries is harmonised with the changes introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution because I believe it contains recommendations to the Commission and to the Council that are fundamental for fair compensation for the negative effects of the agreements established , namely their effects on the regions of Europe .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the conclusion of an Agreement on Trade in Bananas .
I welcome the ending of one of the most technically complex , politically sensitive and commercially significant legal disputes ever brought before the WTO .
I believe that the deal reached is a solution , but that it could not fully reconcile the legitimate interests of all the parties , and therefore call on the Commission to submit at the earliest opportunity an impact assessment of the Agreements on Trade in Bananas on banana-producing developing countries and Europe 's outermost regions over the period to 2020 .
I welcome the fact that the Agreements on Trade in Bananas will constitute the EU 's final market-access commitments for bananas and will be included in the final results of the next round of multilateral market-access negotiations for agricultural products to be successfully concluded under WTO auspices ( Doha Round ) .
I would like to stress that the deal reached represents a step forward in the Doha Round talks , but only a limited one , given that the difficulties encountered go well beyond the simple issue of bananas .
I welcome the adoption of this Agreement on Trade in Bananas , but I would like to stress that we must protect the interests of all parties .
Producers from African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries , and the EU and its outermost regions may be significantly affected .
It is essential that the Commission provide an impact assessment on this agreement .
It is also important for the EU to increase support for the main ACP banana-supplying countries , with assistance aimed at improving competitiveness and economic diversity , and at mitigating the social consequences of adjustment .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on the Agreement on Trade in Bananas because this agreement puts an end to a dispute lasting almost two decades and also marks a step in the right direction towards concluding the Doha Round .
The decision has been made in this agreement to reduce the tariffs for Latin American banana exporters , while also guaranteeing financial aid targeted at boosting the competitiveness of banana producers in the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States .
in writing . - ( SV ) It is important to bring the long drawn-out dispute regarding import tariffs for bananas within the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) to an end , and therefore ratification of the 2009 Geneva Agreement concerning tariffs and trade was necessary .
It is also important to point out that , on account of the previous agreement , the ACP countries were often dependent on the narrow production of bananas instead of a more comprehensive type of production and were therefore more vulnerable .
With the phase-out period that we have now decided on , these countries will receive support to explore other production options .
This is important support and we understand that the adaptation can take time .
This adaptation is necessary , however , because the ACP countries will otherwise run the risk of remaining with the narrow production of bananas , which despite preferential treatment has not succeeded in becoming competitive on the EU 's internal market .
We would , in particular , like to emphasise that , if we really want to help the ACP countries to adapt , it would be more effective to ensure the coordination of the EU 's agricultural , trade and development policies with the aim of free and fair trade than to demand increased compensation from the EU 's budget for the adaptation period .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats support the conclusion of the Geneva Agreement on Trade in Bananas between the EU , the United States and several Latin American countries and the fact that the ACP countries will be guaranteed support through the Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) programme .
However , we do not support the passages concerning an increase in agricultural aid through POSEI for EU producers affected by the agreement .
We believe that the EU 's agricultural aid should be phased out .
The agreement reached on 15 December 2009 between the EU , a group of Latin American countries and the United States regarding customs duties on banana imports appears to have advantages , but does not fully reconcile the legitimate interests of all the parties .
Therefore , it appears to be important to proceed with specific measures aimed at improving the application of the agreements at various levels , in particular by means of an impact assessment for the banana-producing developing countries and for the outermost regions of Europe , by assessing the Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAMs ) 18 months before the end of the programme , proposing measures together with the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) group of countries to help those countries that very much depend on the cultivation of bananas to diversify their economies , and also reviewing and adapting the package to support producers within the EU foreseen in the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) budget , in particular the French overseas departments of Guadeloupe and Martinique , the Azores , Madeira and the Canary Isles .
These and other measures of equal importance are highlighted in the present motion for a resolution .
The Geneva Agreement signed on 15 December 2009 between the EU and Latin American banana-supplying countries settled a long dispute within the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
These negotiations , which were conducted in the context of the Doha Round , involve not only the Latin American countries , but also the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States ( ACP ) and the US , which have pledged to end the disputes in the WTO over the EU 's banana import regime and with which the EU maintains trade relations .
The aim of this agreement is to introduce a gradual decrease in EU customs duties over seven years .
I therefore welcome the negotiations undertaken by the Commission and hope that these agreements on trade in bananas - the Geneva Agreement and EU-US Agreement - will be concluded as soon as possible .
Finally , I hope that these agreements will contribute to improving competitiveness and promoting economic diversification policies , as well as policies that raise the social , economic and environmental level of these countries in the developing world , without forgetting , of course , the measures of assistance under the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity to support banana producers in the outermost regions of the EU .
The draft amendments that we put forward , and which the majority of Parliament turned down , summarise the reasons for our final vote against this resolution .
The end of a dispute - commercial in this case - is not , in itself , a reason to rejoice .
Obviously , everything depends on the way in which the dispute was resolved , who won and who lost through the final solution , and whether it is fair or unfair .
That is what the majority of this Parliament seems to ignore .
The end of this dispute benefits the US multinationals in the sector , but penalises European and ACP producers , particularly the small and medium-sized ones .
The motion for a resolution recognises it , not without some hypocrisy , since those who are proposing it are the same ones who approved the agreement that is causing the negative effects mentioned ; the same ones who now express pious concerns about these effects , but who made them possible with their vote ; the same ones who are demanding an impact assessment of the agreement , but who are not waiting for the results of this assessment to endorse it ; the same ones who are now calling for respect for the Decent Work Agenda of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , but who tune blindly to the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) tuning fork and close their eyes to the reports of violations of human rights by US multinationals in the countries of Latin America .
Once again , Brussels has given in to non-European interests and abandoned in the middle of nowhere the principles that it claims to defend in relation to development , social and environmental clauses , support for its overseas territories , and so on .
No principle or value is upheld in the face of the will to impose on all nations the laws of the market and free trade , no matter what the economic and social consequences .
The Geneva Agreement will not put an end to the trade war that pits us , in fact , against the United States , since , at the same time as it was selling off the banana sector in Europe and in the ACP countries , in exchange for the legal disputes at the WTO being dropped , the Commission was negotiating even more advantageous agreements with a handful of Central and South American countries .
Who actually believes that the signatories to the Geneva Agreement will put up with second-rate treatment for very long ?
We must apply Community preference and impose our social , environmental and safety standards on those who wish to export to us .
We must demand reciprocity and access to foreign markets for our own products .
We must put a stop to this headlong flight towards globalised free trade , which benefits no one , except perhaps China .
The Members of the European Parliament have voted in favour of a motion for a resolution in support of the ' Geneva Agreement ' , which is supposed to end the ' banana war ' .
In reality , this agreement directly threatens all European producers , but especially French overseas producers , when , moreover , various Latin American countries have already renegotiated in order to obtain further reductions , or even zero quotas .
This scandal shows that , far from having settled this matter , they have opened up a new can of worms that will see us become a little more overwhelmed in trade terms not only in the area of bananas , but also with regard to other agricultural products .
Viewed as they are as the cash cows of the world , Europe and France , bound hand and foot , are being left to the mercy of the full liberalisation of our markets with the criminal consent of political leaders obedient to the globalist and ultraliberal pro-Europeans .
Instead of reducing import tariffs , we should establish a sensible policy of protectionism at our economic borders .
This is one of the solutions , at the heart of the international trade war , that will protect French farmers and farming jobs , particularly in the overseas territories , where the economic and social situation is already disastrous enough .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution and for Amendments 7 and 11 .
Amendment 7 draws attention to the fact that some Latin American countries gained additional benefits after the WTO agreement through negotiating free trade agreements and that these agreements further weaken the position of ACP countries .
Amendment 11 draws attention to human rights concerns in Columbia and Honduras .
This motion for a resolution is idle talk designed to make people forget that Parliament can only accept or reject .
However , the resolution does do something else : it dresses up the submission to the United States and its multinationals , which are some of the cruellest and most brutal around .
It does not say a word about the part linked to Honduras , even though the country is run by a putschist regime .
I have to welcome the end of one of the most technically complex , politically sensitive and commercially meaningful legal disputes ever brought to the World Trade Organisation .
However , I believe that this agreement is not perfect and may cause some problems in the future .
I therefore urge the Commission to submit at the earliest possible opportunity an impact assessment of the effects of the banana trade agreements on banana-producing developing countries and the European outermost regions until 2020 , so that we can appraise these countries ' difficulties and act accordingly and , if necessary , adjust and strengthen the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity .
in writing . - ( ES ) I agree with the motion for a resolution when it mentions the importance of banana cultivation to the outermost regions of the EU , such as the Canary Islands , the Azores , or Madeira , where it is a key agricultural sector .
I also believe that the increase in aid to banana producers in these regions is positive .
Nonetheless , I did not vote in favour because , like other free trade agreements concluded by the EU , it does not take into account the precarious situation of the agricultural labourers in developing countries , or the negative impact on the population .
It also fails to mention the traceability of products or the need for the EU to demand that imports comply with labour rights and with health standards similar to those existing in the EU , which would have a decisive influence on improving the deplorable living conditions of farmers in developing countries .
Moreover , in contrast with paragraph 10 of the resolution , which states that Ecuador 's rejection of the Multi-Party Agreements concluded between the EU and Peru and Colombia is regrettable , I welcome the stance taken by President Correa 's government on this issue , and I support his alternative , known as the Treaty for Development .
An agreement has been reached concerning banana imports into the EU which will no longer put the Latin American supplier countries at a disadvantage when compared with the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) Group of States .
This brings the banana import rules into line with the World Trade Organisation regulations .
Under the agreement , the EU will gradually lower its import tariffs on bananas from Latin America from EUR 176 per tonne to EUR 114 per tonne by 2017 .
I have abstained from voting , because it is possible that this agreement will bring about a relative deterioration in the competitiveness of some countries .
In view of the situation of the trade in bananas , whereas bananas are the world 's fourth biggest agricultural export and their production has a major impact on local communities , and whereas the EU 's tariff-rate quota system has created the conditions which enable the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries to export substantial quantities of bananas to the EU and has protected a large number of jobs linked to banana production , my favourable position on the subject underlines the fact that the agreements reached settle the various disputes that have arisen so far .
In saying that , I wish to stress that the EU will gradually cut its import tariff on bananas from Latin America , and therefore the ACP banana-exporting countries will receive extra support through a new programme - the ' Banana Accompanying Measures ' ( BAM ) .
I also believe that due account should be taken of the socioeconomic importance of the banana sector as a means for achieving social and economic cohesion , on account of the income and employment that it generates .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because I believe that it includes important recommendations to the Commission and the Council in terms of fair compensation for the negative externalities of the agreements that have been made , particularly as regards Europe 's outermost regions .
The agreement that has been reached does not fully reconcile the legitimate interests of all the parties , so it is important to undertake certain actions aimed at better implementation of the agreements at various levels , especially through an assessment of the impact on developing countries that supply bananas , and on Europe 's outermost regions .
It would therefore be important to review and adjust the support package for EU producers under the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity budget , particularly the French overseas departments of Guadeloupe and Martinique , the Azores , Madeira and the Canary Islands .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution following the agreement reached on 15 December 2009 between the EU , a group of Latin American countries and the US on customs duties on imports of bananas , which calls attention to the need to conduct an assessment of its impact on banana-producing developing countries and Europe 's outermost regions , and the need to provide adequate support to banana-producing countries in the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States and in the EU , to enable them to adapt to the new reality of the international market .
These agreements have strengthened the dominant position of the US multinationals , which already control more than 80 % of the world market , and thus act against the interests , in particular , of the ACP countries , the outermost regions and Ecuador .
Once again , small producers will be the ones who suffer .
There must be an urgent , radical overhaul of international trade rules to ensure that priority is no longer given to export-driven production .
It is imperative that we change our model to guarantee food sovereignty and the development of local production for all .
The financial measures proposed by the European Commission to assist ACP producers ( Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) ) and the outermost regions of the European Union ( Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) ) are insufficient .
It would be unacceptable if these countries were to pay the price for poor international trade policy .
The European Union must ensure that an impact assessment is carried out in relation to these agreements , but above all it must amend its legislation accordingly so as to promote sustainable production .
According to the terms of the agreement signed with the countries of Latin America , the EU will gradually reduce the duties applicable to banana exports from the current EUR 176 per tonne to the final value of EUR 114 per tonne by 2017 .
The objective is to achieve a more predictable and more stable world banana market with a view to more investment and growth in the sector and putting an end to a decades-old conflict based on complaints against the EU when it introduced changes to customs duties applicable to bananas in 2006 .
The question of EU relations with third countries in the banana sector also includes the treatment directed towards African , Caribbean and Pacific countries through new accompanying measures .
It remains to be seen which measures will be adopted to take into due account the interests of the producers in the outermost regions , allegedly already compensated in the budget of the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) .
Bearing in mind that POSEI was last revised in 2006 , it is not acceptable to argue that these changes in the framework of commercial relations in the sector have already been taken into account .
It is both urgent and necessary that compensatory measures are adopted in the forthcoming revision of the regulation to guarantee funds for banana producers of the European outermost regions to minimise the impact resulting from the liberalisation of the sector .
Whilst agreeing with the rapporteur 's position with regard to the need for the Commission and the Council to agree specifically to undertake an impact assessment of the consequences of the agreements for the regions and for developing countries , I disagree with the way in which the process developed without impact assessments having been carried out beforehand , when it was known that crops were concerned that were important for some regions of the European Union , like the regions .
In this respect , I express my objection and abstain from this vote .
I voted against this international trade agreement .
The history of international trade proves that the trend for monoculture is not a viable or sustainable economic development model .
The free trade agreements concluded in this context are ill-considered in my view .
What is more , the European Union has a duty , as I see it , to honour its commitments and to provide adequate financial support to the outermost regions .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the draft decision on the conclusion of an Agreement on Trade in Bananas .
Bananas are the world 's fourth most important crop , and make a major contribution to food security .
However , in most banana producing countries , production is exclusively for the domestic and occasionally regional markets , with only 20 % of global production being traded internationally .
Control of the banana trade is concentrated in the hands of a limited number of companies , with just five major multinationals controlling more than 80 % of all internationally traded bananas .
On 15 December 2009 , the EU , a group of Latin American countries and the United States reached an agreement on the EU 's tariffs on banana imports , bringing to a close one of the most protracted and bitter disputes in the multilateral trading system 's recent history .
The agreement consists of three basic components : an agreed schedule of tariff reductions for most-favoured nation ( MFN ) banana exporters ; agreement on how to deal with ' tropical products ' and products subject to ' preference erosion ' in the wider WTO negotiations ; a financial package , amounting to EUR 190 million , of assistance to ACP banana exporters , to be known as the Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) programme .
The disputes on bananas have destabilised the climate for production and trade in the countries concerned .
The deal will make the global market in bananas more predictable and stable , and thereby encourage investment and growth , and increased attention to wider production condition issues in the banana supply chains .
I voted in favour of this report and I congratulate the rapporteur on the work she has done .
I agree with the liberalisation process for the trade in bananas following the agreements reached in the World Trade Organisation and the bilateral agreements concluded with Central and South American countries .
I feel , however , that there is also a need to safeguard European producers , who have always been committed to the production and processing of bananas and play a crucial social role in certain EU regions , such as Guadeloupe , Martinique , Madeira and the Azores .
I therefore think that the Council and Commission should address that situation by carrying out long-term economic impact assessments and providing financial support for those areas , to ensure that European producers remain competitive as the banana market is gradually liberalised .
in writing . - ( CS ) I voted in favour of the agreement on the banana trade , which brings a definitive end to the 16-year commercial dispute over banana imports between the EU and American countries .
The seriousness of the problem is documented by the judgements of the European Court of Justice , which has been confronted with a discriminatory regime for EU banana imports .
I applaud the fact that banana imports are finally being put on an even footing , ending the unjustified favouritism towards former European colonies , which distorts global trade in bananas .
Even after commercial conditions have been put on an even footing , however , the hitherto favoured farmers from Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific will not cease to receive preferential treatment .
As a compensation measure , support of EUR 200 million has been drawn up , which is supposed to help them prepare for the tougher competition .
I fear that we will sooner or later have to accept the fact that African bananas simply cannot compete against Latin American ones , however , because of lower quality and higher production costs .
At the same time , I would like to express the hope that , after a successful end to the banana negotiations , attention will turn to reducing import duties on other tropical fruit as well , which should reduce the price of such fruit and thereby be of benefit to all EU citizens .
in writing . - ( DA ) We support the conclusion of the Geneva Agreement on Trade in Bananas between the European Union and a number of Latin American countries and the United States of America .
In this regard , we support the fact that , in addition to regular EU aid , the main ACP banana-exporting countries will receive extra support in what will be known as the Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) programme .
We are opposed to increasing EU aid for EU producers affected by the agreement ( paragraphs 19 and 20 of the draft ) , and , in general , we believe that EU agricultural aid should be phased out .
I voted in favour of the recommendation relating to the agreements on the banana trade , because I believe that the signing of these agreements will put an end to the disputes within the WTO and contribute to the stability of the world banana market .
However , I do believe it necessary to guarantee respect for the interests and specific needs of the banana producers of the outermost regions , namely by increasing the funds available under the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) .
Banana growing represents the fourth biggest market in the world and only a limited number of producer countries are participating in it .
Of the total production , only 20 % is destined for international trade .
On 15 December 2009 , the EU , a group of Latin American countries and the United States reached an agreement regarding customs duties on banana imports .
This ended a dispute in the World Trade Organisation centred on European discrimination against Latin American producers compared with African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) producers , imposing a review of EU policies and a gradual reduction from the current EUR 176 per tonne to a final value of EUR 114 per tonne by 2017 .
Therefore , the ACP countries will lose competitiveness , which , in spite of the exemption from customs duties that they enjoy , may have a negative economic and social impact .
The agreement appears to have some advantages , but it is important to have an impact assessment with regard to the ability of the ACP countries to react to the changes in the market .
This resolution addresses the conclusion of a Geneva Agreement on trade in bananas between the EU and certain Latin American countries , and on another agreement on trade in bananas between the EU and the US .
I voted in favour of this resolution not only because it asks the Commission to clarify whether the financing agreement provides for an increase in the current amount for development , but in particular because it gives special attention to European producers in this agricultural sector , which is located in the outermost regions of Europe .
This is the case with Madeira , where unemployment rates are high , and so the resolution contributes to increased social and economic cohesion .
I therefore hope that the amounts allocated to the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity are increased so that European banana producers can resist the competition created by the growing liberalisation of this sector as a result of new agreements .
in writing . - I voted to give assent to the agreement on trade in bananas with 11 Latin American countries and the United States .
By giving our assent , the European Parliament today put an end to the long-lasting ' banana war ' .
I welcome the fact that , to reduce the impact of the agreement on the poorest ACP countries whose basic economy is based on bananas , the agreement foresees a financial instrument to help them modernise and diversify production .
in writing . - ( CS ) With regard to the proposals that have been tabled , the opinions of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on the materials submitted concerning changes to regulations governing access to EU markets for this agricultural commodity , and the associated international trade regulations on imports and exports , I would like to state my position , which accords with the opinion of the Czech Government in this area .
The Czech Government supports the change to import regimes which modifies the reduced customs duties levied on imports of this agricultural commodity from third countries , and welcomes the Geneva Agreement regulating trade in this commodity .
Actual agricultural output and international trade in this commodity , and especially access to the EU market , are key issues for many of the affected countries .
We should always take this into account when drafting the common agricultural policy of the EU .
As the texts suggest , the negotiated conditions should help to establish some stability in this area .
The basis , however , should continue to be an assessment of the impacts on affected countries , together with an estimate of possible development in the longer term .
Despite the priority accorded to the amendment of international trade regulations , we should not forget the importance of this commodity for end consumers .
It is important to maintain the appropriate nutritional values of this food and for it to be produced in an environmentally friendly way .
Decent quality should not ultimately be forgotten , but rather given a higher priority than quantity .
These agreements are simply the result of the pressure exerted by the main banana multinationals under the kindly eye of the WTO .
It establishes an artificial level playing field between banana-exporting countries .
It actually sanctions the appalling wage policies and the destruction of democracy that multinationals such as Chiquita and Dole bring to the countries of Latin America .
It does not say a word about their environmental crimes .
It is in the context of the Economic Partnership Agreements that equality should be established , otherwise there can be no equality .
So far it has been the opposite of equality that the European Commission has been negotiating throughout the world .
This agreement is therefore an illusion and part of a harmful policy .
Bananas are the world 's fourth most important crop , after rice , wheat and maize , and so I have to welcome the end of one of the most technically complex , politically sensitive and commercially meaningful legal disputes ever brought to the World Trade Organisation .
I also believe , however , that this agreement is not perfect and may lead to future problems .
I therefore urge the Commission to present at the earliest possible opportunity an impact assessment of the effects of the banana trade agreements on banana-producing developing countries and the European outermost regions until 2020 , so that we can appraise these countries ' difficulties and act accordingly and , if necessary , adjust and strengthen the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) .
These agreements put an end to a dispute that , for more than 15 years , has seen Europe at odds with the Latin American banana-producing countries and the United States , which condemned the preferential treatment given by Europe to exports from the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) Group of States .
From now on , the European Union will gradually reduce its import tariffs on bananas from Latin America .
However , bananas from the ACP countries will continue to enjoy duty-free access within the European Union .
Furthermore , the main ACP banana-producing countries will receive aid from the EU budget ( up to the sum of EUR 200 million ) to help them adapt to tougher competition from Latin America .
We must , however , take particular care to ensure that the agreement does not harm small producers by strengthening the monopoly position of the large US multinationals , which control the banana market in the countries of Latin America .
The impact of these agreements on producers in developing countries and in the outermost regions of the European Union will have to be assessed .
An agreement has been reached in December 2009 which has brought the long-term dispute over bananas between the EU and the World Trade Organisation to an end .
It consists of three main requirements which the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) states and the Latin American countries that supply bananas must meet .
The aim is to close some alleged loopholes .
In addition , the EU undertakes to apply strictly controlled tariffs to banana imports .
I abstained from voting , as some of the points in the report , in particular those concerning tariff agreements , could not be completely resolved .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Geneva Agreement is intended to put an end to the so-called ' banana war ' .
Further conflicts are to be expected , however , because the Latin American countries have demanded a significantly greater reduction in customs duties .
Furthermore , many third countries are attempting to bring their banana production onto the European market duty-free under the guise of ' customer-specific treatment ' .
This could result in considerable damage .
Once again , the EU has made some unjustified concessions from which , ultimately , only the multinational companies will profit .
For these reasons , I voted against this report .
The draft Council decision on the conclusion of the agreements on trade in bananas between the European Union and countries of the Americas and of Latin America is important from the point of view of making it easier to trade in one of the most common foodstuffs in the world , after rice , wheat and maize .
I voted in favour of Mrs Balzani 's text because agreements such as this one allow for more extensive marketing and greater differentiation in the distribution of the product , given that only a small number of producer countries are involved in the trade in bananas , which is limited to a select group of multinationals which control more than 80 % of internationally traded bananas .
I voted in favour of the recommendation on the Agreements on Trade in Bananas , since these agreements put an end to the disputes in the World Trade Organisation and contribute to the stability of the world market in bananas .
I believe , however , that it is essential to ensure respect for the interests and specific needs of banana producers in the outermost regions , in particular by increasing the funds available to the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) .
The situation in the European Union is very special , since bananas are the world 's fourth most important crop and there is only a limited number of banana-producing countries .
Only 20 % of global production is traded internationally .
On 15 December 2009 , the EU , a group of Latin American countries and the United States reached an agreement on the EU 's tariffs on banana imports , bringing to a close a protracted dispute over the EU 's preferential treatment of banana imports from African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries to the detriment of bananas from Latin America .
Under the terms of the deal , the EU will gradually cut its tariffs on imports of Latin American bananas from the current level of EUR 176 / tonne to EUR 114 / tonne by 2017 , which will naturally have a negative impact on banana-producing ACP countries and EU outermost regions .
It is therefore important to carefully assess the repercussions of the agreement and to adopt appropriate support measures for producers in ACP countries and EU outermost regions .
In this respect , in addition to the planned supplementary aid for the main ACP banana-exporting countries - known as the Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) - it is essential to make changes to the support package for EU domestic producers within the budget of the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) , so as to help them adapt to the effects of the changes on the world market in bananas .
Bananas are the world 's fourth most important crop and make a major contribution to global food security .
Nevertheless , only 20 % of production is traded internationally .
The trade is concentrated in the hands of just five major multinationals , which alone control more than 80 % of all internationally traded bananas .
On 15 December 2009 , the EU reached an agreement with the United States and a group of Latin American countries on a new tariff regime , bringing to a close a protracted dispute over the fact that African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries could export bananas to Europe under favourable tariffs , distorting the market to the detriment of South American producers .
The agreement will make the global market in bananas more predictable and stable , and thereby encourage investment and growth in the sector .
Parliament should now ensure that the Commission and the Council put forward specific initiatives to strengthen the commercial position of banana growers ; they should provide Parliament as soon as possible with an impact assessment on the agreement 's effects on banana-producing developing countries and the outermost regions of the European Union .
Finally , under no circumstances should we attempt to finance banana-producing ACP countries by reallocating funds from development cooperation .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this because the EU has been accused of violating trade rules by importing bananas from Africa , Caribbean and Pacific countries without any levy while imposing heavy taxes on other countries .
Therefore I welcome the end of this trade war .
It is impossible to separate the Geneva Agreement from the other agreements that the Commission has subsequently negotiated .
Shortly after the Geneva Agreement was signed , Colombia and Peru obtained a greater tariff reduction , thus proving that the agreement provides no legal certainty and has not settled the banana dispute as it claims .
This differential treatment prompted Ecuador and Guatemala to demand equal treatment and threaten to lodge further appeals at the WTO .
Furthermore , this agreement seriously harms a sector that provides countless jobs not only in our ACP partner countries but also in the outermost regions ( ORs ) .
The aid the EU is providing to support producers in the ORs has been calculated on the basis of the laws approved at the WTO in 2006 .
However , neither the December 2009 agreement nor the agreement with the Andean countries was anticipated in the POSEI .
As for the aid earmarked for ACP producers , it is not sufficient to enable them to adapt to the new tariff situation .
To give one 's assent to this agreement is to support the Commission in a strategy that is inconsistent with the EU 's effort in favour of the ORs and the ACP countries .
Taking into account the positions expressed in my previous declarations of vote and because I disagree with the way in which the process was developed , without impact assessments having been carried out first , when it was known that crops were concerned that were important for some European Union regions , like the ultra-peripheral regions , I am abstaining from this vote to demonstrate my objection .
Bananas are the world 's fourth most important crop , after rice , wheat and maize , and make a major contribution to food security .
In December 2009 , the European Union , a group of Latin American countries and the United States reached an agreement on the EU 's tariffs on banana imports .
Conclusion of this agreement brought to a close one of the most protracted disputes in the multilateral trading system 's recent history .
EU banana import policies had recently been the subject of a decade-long row at the World Trade Organisation , pitting the EU against several Latin American banana producers and the US .
We cannot ignore the possibility , however , that the tariff changes resulting from implementation of the agreement will have a negative impact on the livelihoods of the Union 's own banana producers .
I therefore call on the Commission to ensure that a serious , independent impact assessment is conducted in the coming months to check for any negative effects and the consequences of the entry into force of the agreement for EU banana producers .
It should also perhaps revise upwards the aid measures foreseen under POSEI ( Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ) .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal repealing the Council Regulation on the tariff rates for bananas .
The EU 's banana import regime allowed 775,000 tonnes of the fruit from ACP countries to enter the EU duty-free each year , with a EUR 176 / t tariff on bananas from all other exporters ( most-favoured nation ( MFN ) suppliers ) .
Many Latin American countries long insisted that this import regime illegally discriminated in favour of bananas from ACP countries and violated WTO rules on quantitative restrictions .
Under the terms of the deal , the EU will gradually cut its tariffs on Latin American banana exports , until they are reduced to the level of EUR 114 / t .
The agreement also contains a clause stating that Latin American banana exporters will drop all actions against the EU in the WTO : ' once the WTO certifies the EU 's new tariff schedule , Latin American banana-supplying countries will drop all their disputes on bananas with the EU at the WTO , and any claims they made against the EU after new member countries joined the Union , or when the EU changed its banana tariff in 2006 ' and will not seek further tariff reductions on bananas in the Doha Round .
I voted in favour of the report on the customs duties applicable to bananas , which aims to apply the new duties provided for in the Geneva Agreement , the signing of which should contribute to the stability and predictability of the world banana market .
On 15 December 2009 , the EU , a group of Latin American countries and the United States reached an agreement regarding customs duties on banana imports .
This ended a dispute in the World Trade Organisation centred on European discrimination against Latin American producers compared with African , Caribbean and Pacific producers , imposing a revision of EU policies and a gradual reduction from the current EUR 176 per tonne to the final value of EUR 114 per tonne by 2017 .
Following approval of the Geneva Agreement concerning the banana trade , it will be essential to make the necessary legislative amendments and corrections that will guarantee its effective implementation .
In this respect , the current Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 on the tariff rates for bananas , which provides for a duty of EUR 176 per tonne , must be revoked .
The tariff rates applicable to the trade in bananas were laid down in Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 .
Following the recent negotiations between the European Union and the banana-producing countries , which gave rise to new agreements - namely the Geneva Agreement - and ended protracted disputes within the World Trade Organisation , it is necessary to abolish the above-mentioned regulation .
Although it was not possible to achieve total consensus , I welcome this further advance towards the EU 's final commitment on this matter to be included in the next round of negotiations , and I express my full agreement with the revocation of the tariff rate established in Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 of 29 November 2005 .
This agreement is a good example of the power of the multinationals and the role of the World Trade Organisation as a forum that defends their interests .
It also shows us , once again , how the European Union also sees itself as an instrument in the service of the interests of transnational monopolies .
With this agreement , the US multinationals , which today already control more than 80 % of the world 's banana trade - interests that the Commission agrees it was trying to ' tranquillise ' with this agreement - will see their market share get even bigger .
It is these multinationals that are accused and denounced for violating human rights , seizing land from indigenous peoples and promoting working conditions close to slavery , all to promote environmentally unsustainable , intensive production models .
In return , the Agreement - as the rapporteur herself admits - will threaten the survival of thousands of small and medium-sized producers , both in African , Caribbean and Pacific countries and in European countries .
Small and medium-sized producers , social and labour laws and the preservation of the environment continue to be sacrificed at the altar of free trade , transformed into mere hot air in the official debate and trampled on every day in practice , as we see yet again .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution to repeal Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 on the tariff rates for bananas .
This is necessary as a result of the vote to give assent to the agreement on trade in bananas agreed at the WTO .
Giving in to blackmail by the multinationals and reimbursing customs duties retroactively is an aberration .
The European Union could have the decency to use the millions that it is sinking into this affair to ease the suffering of overseas populations , who will be the victims of the agreements concluded at the very time when they are being hit by the crisis .
I have to welcome the end of one of the most technically complex , politically sensitive and commercially meaningful legal disputes ever brought to the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
Following the adoption of this new agreement , we have to bring Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 into line .
It needs to be revoked in order to comply with the agreement to reduce tariff rates , which requires them to be cut from the current EUR 176 / tonne to EUR 114 / tonne by the end of 2017 .
Judging from the burst of ' enthusiasm ' with which Members of this Parliament met the vote on tariff reduction for bananas imported from Latin America , it became clear that many fellow Members fail to understand how important this issue is to the European Union .
Every year , we approve a budget including funding for aid , including aid to Latin American countries .
If , today , we reduce import tariffs on bananas from Latin America , this produce will become more competitive .
This means that the number of bananas grown will be increased , and extra jobs will be created , which will enable financial assistance to Latin American countries to be reduced .
This means that the European Union will make significant savings on the funds dedicated to relations with developing countries .
However , that is already the next issue .
I supported this initiative knowingly , without a smile on my face .
After rice , wheat and maize , bananas are the world 's fourth most important food crop .
In the EU alone 5.4 million tonnes of bananas were sold in 2008 .
However , the EU is faced by a problem .
Five multinational corporations control 80 % of the international banana trade .
A dispute between the EU and the World Trade Organisation which has lasted for decades and which concerned preferential treatment given by the EU to banana imports from African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries compared with those from Latin America , has finally been brought to an end by an agreement reached in December 2009 .
I have abstained , because it is not possible to guarantee that we have properly taken into account the legitimate interests of everyone involved .
I voted in favour of Mrs Balzani 's report on the repeal of the 2005 Council regulation on the tariff rates for bananas from the countries of Latin America .
The issue has also been debated within the WTO , since some Latin American countries denounced the discriminatory and illegal nature of the regulation on the EU 's import regime , which included tariff rates for the countries of South America and concessions for the ACP countries .
I felt it my duty to vote in favour of repealing a regulation that has caused nothing but disputes at international level and destabilised the production and commercial environment of the countries concerned .
The new agreement will make the global market in bananas more predictable and stable .
I voted in favour of report , but I endorse the idea that an impact assessment must be presented on the consequences for the outermost regions , since banana growing is vital for the local economy in many of these regions .
Since the regulation establishing the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) is currently being reviewed , the Commission must examine the possibility of guarding against the negative externalities caused by this agreement in the above-mentioned regions .
The Geneva Agreement on the Trade in Bananas between the European Union and countries in Latin America , such as Brazil , Colombia , Costa Rica , Ecuador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua , Panama , Peru and Venezuela , has resulted in a reduction in the tariffs on banana imports by 2017 .
European internal legislation will have to be adapted by revoking Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 on the tariff rates for bananas .
The eventual outcome of the agreement , namely the gradual liberalisation of the sector and the opening-up of the European market to banana imports , will inevitably have negative consequences for European domestic banana production , which need to be addressed .
Bananas are the world 's fourth most important crop , after rice , wheat and maize , and make a major contribution to food security .
However , in most banana producing countries , production is exclusively for the domestic and occasionally regional markets , with only 20 % of global production being traded internationally .
According to the data given in the report , EU consumers bought more than 5.4 million tonnes of bananas in 2008 .
The EU imported almost 90 % of the bananas it consumed ( 72.5 % from Latin America and 17 % from African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries ) .
I am therefore convinced of the importance of this agreement and confirm my vote in favour of the agreement reached .
On 31 May 2010 the Geneva Agreement on Trade in Bananas between the European Union and Brazil , Colombia , Costa Rica , Ecuador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua , Panama , Peru and Venezuela was signed , providing for a gradual reduction in tariff rates on banana imports from those countries .
A first cut , which was applied retroactively as of 15 December 2009 , the date of initialling of the agreement , reduced the tariff to EUR 148 / tonne .
The subsequent cuts will be applied in seven annual instalments , with a possible freeze of up to two years if there is a delay in reaching agreement on the modalities for agricultural products in the World Trade Organisation Doha Round .
The final tariff rate of EUR 114 / tonne should be reached by 1 January 2019 at the latest .
Following the conclusion of this agreement , therefore , it is now necessary to revoke Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 of 29 November 2005 , which established the EU 's most-favoured nation tariff rate for banana imports at EUR 176 / tonne .
The signing of the international Geneva Agreement on the banana trade between the EU and Latin American countries , such as Brazil , Colombia , Costa Rica , Ecuador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua , Panama , Peru and Venezuela , aims to progressively reduce the customs duties on imported bananas by 2017 .
Therefore , European internal legislation will have to be adapted to the terms of this Agreement .
That will mean revoking Regulation ( EC ) No 1964 / 2005 on the tariff rates for bananas , which we are voting on today .
The conditions of this Agreement , namely the progressive liberalisation of the sector and opening the European market to banana imports , will inevitably have consequences for European internal production in this sector .
It is urgent for the European Commission to present an impact assessment of the consequences for the outermost regions , such as Madeira , which is where I come from .
Banana production is essential for the economy of various outermost regions , whose status , enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon , requires , in my view , future adjustments to be made to the Programme of Options Specifically Relating to Remoteness and Insularity ( POSEI ) .
I approve the present report , because it takes into account the current need to integrate and increase the functionality and effectiveness of the disposal of waste electrical and electronic equipment .
In spite of the positive figures , according to which approximately 85 % of this type of waste is collected , it is nevertheless found that if we compare the quantity collected with the quantity of such equipment sold on the market , we see that 65 % of the equipment sold is collected , while a large part of these data is not reported to the authorities or suitably processed .
I also approve the idea that implementation of the Directive may increase the rate of waste processed and reported , particularly with regard to the collection rate , responsibility for achieving the collection target and the responsibility of consumers .
Application of the directive will provide clearer rules on collection , processing and recycling standards and also clearer information on the resulting costs of collection and processing .
Whether it be in economic terms or in environmental terms , the treatment of waste has become a major issue in this consumer society of ours .
The recycling of waste in Europe has been accorded an important place in this part-session : with the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment and the resolution on the management of waste in Campania , we have voiced our opinion on a subject that is both technical and political .
No one will be surprised to hear that , every year , we produce more electrical and electronic waste .
The products in question are , in fact , all ones that we use in our everyday lives ( telephones , televisions , computers , and so on ) .
It is estimated that only a third of the 9 million tonnes of electrical and electronic waste produced each year is recycled at present .
The aim of this directive is to increase this rate and to stop wastage , but it is also a question of making producers more responsible .
Indeed , we are calling on the Member States to ensure that producers foot the bill for the collection and treatment of products to be recycled .
Consumers , who already make a significant contribution to waste management , must be supported and assisted in this task by retailers and product sellers .
I believe that the efficient and innovative use of energy , materials and resources is a key issue in a globalised economy .
As the report in question points out , waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) represents the fastest-growing waste stream in the EU .
The WEEE directive currently in force requires the Member States to carry out separated collections of electrical and electronic equipment and sets recovery and recycling targets .
A number of problems relating to implementation have come to light during the process of revising the directive .
In particular , the problem of expanding the scope of the directive has emerged .
Experience with the directive has revealed a huge diversity in Member States ' interpretation and application of it .
Proposing a definitive list of products would not be feasible because the electrical and electronics market is a rapidly changing one , so the directive would have to be revised continually and would never be up to date .
I therefore think it is essential both to work towards better harmonisation of the WEEE Directive and also to reduce the administrative costs to small and medium-sized enterprises in the sector , without damaging the level of environmental protection .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the proposal for a directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment represents the fastest-growing waste stream in the EU and we therefore face a range of challenges .
According to the Commission 's impact assessment , 85 % of electronic waste is already being collected .
A comparison of the quantity of waste equipment collected with the number of appliances coming onto the market yields the figure of 65 % as the proportion of appliances sold which will subsequently be collected .
However , these quantities are not being reported to official registers and , indeed , much of the waste concerned is not being properly treated : only 33 % of waste equipment is being officially reported , collected and treated in line with the directive 's stipulations .
The challenge in the current review , therefore , is to increase these rates .
Efforts to prevent illegal shipment need to begin , notably , at Member State level .
It is the Member States ' responsibility to see that the directive is implemented and , specifically , that its implementation is enforced and monitored .
Large quantities of waste equipment are still being shipped illegally to countries outside the EU .
In too many cases , such equipment is being declared as used but functional and , on that basis , is being exported beyond the Union .
A simpler distinction between waste and used equipment therefore needs to be introduced with the help of the directive .
in writing . - ( CS ) I voted in favour of the report on waste electrical and electronic equipment , which addresses a very topical issue .
On the one hand , it is true that there will be inevitable environmental and health consequences if this equipment is not dealt with properly .
On the other hand , we are tackling the problem of loss of raw materials here , which is one of the key issues in the globalised economy .
According to the available data , 85 % of electronic waste is currently recycled , although only 33 % of this waste is officially recorded and handled in compliance with the provisions of the EU directive , of course .
I cannot unequivocally support the view of the ENVI Committee , according to which costs connected with the collection , processing , exploitation and environmentally friendly disposal of waste from electronic equipment should be borne on the basis of the ' polluter pays ' principle .
On the contrary , I take the view that producers , retailers and consumers should not pay for the collection of waste from households and transportation to collection points , and that responsibility for this should now rest directly with local authorities .
At the same time , I do not see any difficulty with producers having the option , when selling a new product to a consumer , to indicate the costs for collecting and recycling the product .
I would consider it beneficial for consumers to be informed of these costs , as this will encourage them to behave in an environmentally responsible way .
The prevention of waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) and the reuse and recycling of such waste are essential for sustainable production and consumption .
It is vital to reduce the amount of waste to be disposed of and to contribute to the efficient use of resources .
I call for an improvement in the environmental performance of all operators involved in the life cycle of electrical and electronic equipment , namely producers , distributors and consumers and , in particular , those operators directly involved in the collection and treatment of waste electrical and electronic equipment .
Separate collection is a precondition to ensure specific treatment and recycling of WEEE and is necessary to achieve the chosen level of protection of human health and the environment .
I appeal to consumers to actively contribute to the success of such collection .
For this purpose , convenient facilities should be set up for the return of WEEE , including public collection points , where private households should be able to return their waste at least free of charge .
in writing . - ( DE ) In overall terms , the German Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) in the European Parliament supports the waste disposal directive .
However , the subject of photovoltaic modules remains a problem .
There is no understandable reason for excluding the entire sector from the regulations .
We have a wide range of legislation governing waste streams .
Therefore , it is not clear why a complete industry , which is expected to produce significant waste streams , is being exempted .
For this reason , some of the FDP Members of the European Parliament have abstained from voting on the report .
I fully agree with the aim of this directive and am convinced of the need to separate waste in order to reduce its environmental impact and increase the amount recycled .
Two changes are needed to achieve this : used household appliances must be disposed of properly , and their management needs to be improved .
The directive addresses both of these , for purposes with which I fully agree .
However , I find I have to point out a few critical flaws .
First of all , the set targets are too ambitious and could be counterproductive .
I also think that disposal costs should be included in a wider system of incentives and penalties , and should also be transparent to those who have to bear them .
Apart from that , some very important points also emerge .
I believe , for example , that consumer information should be given in the most effective way possible , so as to avoid people developing bad habits due to a lack of information .
Given the objectives and overall structure of the directive , I am in favour of adopting it .
I am sure , however , that there is room for changing details that I think could be improved , and in particular I am referring to the additional burden that collecting small appliances for disposal will place on retailers .
Making such changes involves trade-offs between the health of the environment and the sustainability of our lifestyle .
in writing . - ( DE ) In overall terms , the German Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) in the European Parliament supports the waste disposal directive .
However , the subject of photovoltaic modules remains a problem .
There is no understandable reason for excluding the entire sector from the regulations .
We have a wide range of legislation governing waste streams .
Therefore , it is not clear why a complete industry , which is expected to produce significant waste streams , is being exempted .
For this reason , I have abstained from voting on the report .
in writing . - ( RO ) I believe that producers too must play an important role at EU level in the process of recovering waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) .
It should be remembered that the recovery of WEEE offers an important source of secondary raw materials , which is a reason why producers should encourage consumers to participate as much as possible in this process .
A responsible approach from producers fosters innovation and helps ensure their long-term competitiveness , both objectives in line with the EU 2020 strategy .
I voted for this report because I think that electrical and electronic waste management needs to be made more efficient , given the current inappropriate balance in this area and the increasingly rapid growth rate of this waste .
Amending this directive will help improve collection rates and the illegal export legislation , as well as ensure a fairer distribution of the responsibilities involved with managing electrical and electronic waste .
Furthermore , compared with the environmental benefits , this amendment will also have a positive socio-economic impact in terms of creating new jobs in the sector for collecting , treating and recycling used electrical and electronic equipment .
I voted in favour of the report on waste electrical and electronic equipment because it presents proposals that should contribute to reducing administrative charges and strengthen the protection of the environment and human health by preventing or reducing the adverse effects resulting from the management of waste electrical and electronic equipment , with benefits for society .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment has increased exponentially throughout the EU and today its processing and recycling constitutes a particularly important problem in the European context .
Apart from the environmental and public health issues , which are a concern in themselves , failure to re-use raw materials results in inefficiency and additional cost for the production system , which could be resolved by making better use of the materials that constitute the equipment concerned .
Now that we are more enlightened about the products covered by the Directive , I want the EU to make increasingly efficient use of electronic and electrical mechanisms and equipment and to re-use them in an environmentally safe and socially responsible manner .
It is absolutely crucial to establish clear rules and objectives for the management of waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) in order to sustainably consolidate the internal market and improve environmental quality in the European Union , as well as to recover strategic raw materials .
We really need to know how to make better use of the resources available , particularly in view of the known scarcity of raw materials , and to value the wealth or added value that waste represents for our economy .
Given the discrepancies within the EU in WEEE collection - from 16 kg per person per year to just 1 kg - I would highlight the need to ensure a greater effort at harmonisation , with a minimum of 4 kg per person by 2012 being perfectly reasonable .
In a developed Europe , it is important to achieve the target of collecting 85 % of electrical and electronic equipment by 2016 ( according to the draft amendment that I tabled in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and which was adopted ) and recycling between 50 % and 75 % of that .
I would also highlight the proposal I made , and which was adopted in committee , for the Member States to submit data every year on the volumes of WEEE generated .
Flows of waste electrical and electronic equipment are increasing in the European Union .
Taking this reality into account , an amendment is proposed to the 2002 Directive , which has been in force up to now .
The collection and processing of waste electrical and electronic equipment are important and necessary , bearing in mind not only the potential consequences of this waste for the environment and public health , but also the loss of secondary raw materials if such processes are not performed , which represents a serious problem .
Approximately 85 % of the waste electrical and electronic equipment produced is already collected in the EU .
However , there are illegal shipments of this waste outside the EU , which reinforces the important role of Member States in the monitoring and inspection of collection and processing .
The proposed directive provides for various possible approaches for Member States : from restricting the number of companies authorised to collect waste equipment , through increasing the number of collection points , to forcing producers to create incentive systems for consumers to deliver waste equipment .
In any case , the objective is more recycling and greater re-use .
Therefore , we voted in favour of this report .
Electrical and electronic waste are recycled in completely different ways .
Electrical waste is dismantled and then recycled , while electronic waste , following initial dismantling , is usually subjected to chemical processing .
These two groups differ significantly in weight , which means that electrical waste makes the collection rate higher , while electronic waste , which is rich in gold , silver and rare earth metals , often ends up on rubbish tips .
Progress in the area of electrical and electronic equipment means a longer usable life span , a reduction in the weight of individual appliances as a result of miniaturisation and a reduction in energy consumption .
Part of our innovative activity should be directed towards these ends , and this should also include design to facilitate recovery .
Unfortunately , the provisions of this directive do not stimulate innovativeness , and the waste streams are growing at a terrifying pace .
In order to achieve this proposal , an appropriate tax should be imposed on the producer or importer when a product is put on the market .
The funds obtained in this way can be used by innovative small and medium-sized enterprises which are engaged in the market-based recovery of secondary materials from waste electrical and electronic equipment .
This directive turns over to the Member States the administrative necessity of organising the collection and subsequent processing of very different and complex technical structures which are also very difficult to recycle .
These products are reaching the markets of these countries and they should be subject to the laws of the market there .
Unfortunately , the fact that market mechanisms are not being adequately used in the recycling of waste products means that the draft resolution requires further work .
Therefore , I abstained from voting .
I voted in favour of the directive because there is definitely a need to return and recycle waste electrical and electronic equipment .
However , the European Parliament is applying double standards in stipulating that all electrical and electronic equipment , including lamps and small body-care appliances , such as shaving equipment and toothbrushes , should fall within the scope of the directive , when photovoltaic modules are exempted .
Although solar energy should be encouraged , photovoltaic modules contain materials that are at least as harmful to the environment as an electric toothbrush .
The public has the right to know whether the cost of a new product includes its collection , treatment and disposal costs , by means of appropriate labelling .
I regret that this measure was not adopted today by Parliament , and I shall campaign , during the negotiations , for this visible eco-contribution to be maintained in those Member States in which it is practised .
Just one third of the 9 million tonnes of electrical and electronic waste produced each year in Europe is collected and treated properly .
We must , as a matter of the utmost urgency , promote the reuse , recycling and recovery of all of this waste .
The Member States must also ensure that distributors put in place appropriate collection and awareness schemes for certain common types of waste , such as used mobile telephones , not enough of which are recovered today .
We must establish an ambitious electrical and electronic waste management system which involves at the same time public authorities , manufacturers and consumers , all of whom must be reminded of their responsibilities .
Obviously , in order to achieve this in the best possible conditions , the administrative burdens on all those involved will have to be reduced .
I support in particular the strict rules that have been introduced to prevent the illegal shipment of potentially hazardous waste to developing countries .
The ball is now in the court of the Council , which seems to be having difficulty in agreeing to the objectives we have set .
in writing . - ( DE ) In overall terms , the German Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) in the European Parliament supports the waste disposal directive .
However , the subject of photovoltaic modules remains a problem .
There is no understandable reason for excluding the entire sector from the regulations .
We have a wide range of legislation governing waste streams .
Therefore , it is not clear why a complete industry , which is expected to produce significant waste streams , is being exempted .
For this reason , some of the FDP Members of the European Parliament have abstained from voting on the report .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this proposal , because waste electrical and electronic equipment represents the fastest-growing waste stream .
On the one hand , we need to address the environmental and health consequences if this equipment is not properly treated and disposed of and , on the other , there is a serious problem of loss of raw materials .
In a globalised economy , the efficient and innovative use of energy , materials and resources is a key issue .
Stepping up the collection and proper treatment of this waste in accordance with the directive thus constitutes a major challenge and necessity .
We must consider and promote the appropriate collection and treatment of waste electrical and electronic equipment , because decisive measures help to promote balanced economic growth without harming the environment and clean and healthy surroundings for our citizens .
I agree with the opinion that not just manufacturers and Member States , but we consumers ourselves must contribute to the creation of clean and healthy surroundings and must bear a significant share of responsibility for ensuring that waste equipment is disposed of properly .
Too many appliances either lie forgotten and unused in drawers or cupboards or end up , illegally , in the domestic waste bin .
The Member States must use all available means to achieve ambitious collection rates , although the objectives outlined will not be easy to achieve .
That the task is possible is clear from the rates already achieved in some countries .
If we want to maintain a high level of consumption in the future , we must act more responsibly with natural capital that remains and not waste it .
in writing . - ( DE ) In overall terms , the German Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) in the European Parliament supports the waste disposal directive .
However , the subject of photovoltaic modules remains a problem .
There is no understandable reason for excluding the entire sector from the regulations .
We have a wide range of legislation governing waste streams .
Therefore , it is not clear why a complete industry , which is expected to produce significant waste streams , is being exempted .
For this reason , some of the FDP Members of the European Parliament have abstained from voting on the report .
The proposal for a directive put to the vote today relates to the amendment of the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment , which requires the Member States to carry out separated collections of electrical and electronic equipment and sets recovery and recycling targets , including a 65 % WEEE collection rate to be achieved by 2016 .
As we all know , the efficient and innovative use of energy , materials and resources is a key issue in a globalised economy .
Moreover , it is a responsibility that applies to all market operators , from public authorities to consumers and producers .
Producers undoubtedly play a key role , in line with the producer responsibility principle , but consumers too must take responsibility and ensure that they dispose of equipment properly .
I also consider it vital , in addition to the commitment to follow the Commission 's guidelines , not to lay down any onerous administrative requirements or excessively burdensome obligations for producers , distributors and retailers .
I think we should demand stricter standards for the recycling of electrical and electronic equipment .
Currently , not only in the European Union , but also in the world at large , there is a problem with organising the recycling of waste equipment .
The collection and transport of waste electrical and electronic equipment should be done separately , in order to ensure optimal re-use , recycling and reduction of dangerous substances , which from the point of view of the citizen is extremely important .
It is good that we are dealing with this subject , because it has been raised many times in our regions and at local authority level .
It is important to talk about monitoring the problem , so I endorsed the Florenz report .
in writing . - ( NL ) The delegation of the Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) in the European Parliament has today voted against a number of amendments to the report on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) .
We are against measures which impose obligations on small shops to collect , without limitation , small appliances without the consumer being required to purchase a new , similar appliance in return .
The VVD takes the view that the current collection potential could , and should , be better exploited , instead of imposing new unworkable and unrealistic obligations .
in writing . - I welcome this report which introduces new targets to stop toxic chemicals from discarded electrical items seeping into the environment .
I voted in favour of the report on waste electrical and electronic equipment , which is intended to improve the text currently in force .
It is important to establish the most effective criteria possible given the growing number of these appliances being produced and their health and environmental impact when they are not treated at the end of their life .
We call for the creation of new targets for the collection , recycling and reuse of waste , part of which is of interest due to its recoverable raw material content .
Consequently , this waste must be treated and not exported to developing countries , often in dangerous conditions .
With more inspections , we hope to limit the volume of electronic waste that is falsely declared as ' reusable ' .
Economic growth and the constant technological advances in electric and electronic equipment have led to the major problem of how to deal with the resulting waste .
This situation involves various kinds of problem , not least in environmental , public health and economic terms , which are now made worse by the crisis being experienced around the world , which is reflected in the cost of processing this waste .
We must therefore find ways of processing the waste that do not also affect the necessary sustained growth of the EU 's economies .
I voted for this legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( recast ) because I am in favour of implementing measures to make progress with the sustainability of production and consumption of electrical and electronic equipment .
Although , to some extent , this measure does nothing more than paper over the cracks caused by the disproportionate parameters of consumption that sustain the destructive capitalist production model and by incessant production based on the creation of false necessities , I believe that promoting the reuse , recycling and recovery of such waste is positive .
I also agree with the text that there is a need to prevent waste from being generated and to retrieve strategic raw materials .
I voted for this resolution , but I believe that there should be an insistence on regulating the quality of electrical and electronic equipment : production techniques based on planned obsolescence should be banned and the repair of this type of product should be promoted .
The quantity of waste electrical and electronic equipment is steadily increasing each year .
It thus raises many health and environmental issues when it is disposed of or reprocessed badly .
All of these appliances - computers , televisions , mobile phones and household appliances - also result in the wastage of what are at times scarce raw materials .
Today , only a third of this waste is collected and treated properly .
This amount must therefore be increased .
The proposed text enables us to tackle several aspects so as to ensure the proper disposal of electrical and electronic waste , whether it be in terms of the collection rate ( 85 % of collected waste ) , the collection target , the delegation of responsibility to consumers , the equipment type , or collection , treatment and recycling standards .
It is equally important to prevent illegal shipment outside the European Union and in particular to development countries .
Increasing the number of collection points should enable citizens to dispose of their waste more easily .
This is a further step towards the protection of the environment and people 's health .
in writing . - The S & D Group and I voted in favour , because it is obvious that the amount of waste from electronic and electrical equipment is constantly increasing .
In order not to squander EU funds it is necessary to offer countries which supply electrical and electronic devices to the EU either to pay a special fee for utilisation at the moment of selling a device or take on an obligation to accept back old devices meant to be re-used / recycled .
This can significantly harmonise the process of reuse / recycling and delivery of devices , and will allow not a return to this question in future .
The amount of waste electrical and electronic equipment is constantly increasing .
For environmental reasons it is essential that this type of waste is properly disposed of , because it often contains large quantities of toxic substances , including heavy metals , such as mercury , lead and cadmium , and CFCs .
In order to raise awareness of this among the Member States , the business community and individual consumers , the EU has specified collection targets , which the new directive aims to amend .
I have not voted in favour of the report , because , in my opinion , this represents excessive interference in the powers of the individual countries .
The purpose of the report on the revision of the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment was to encourage the separated collection , recovery and recycling of this kind of waste .
In theory , therefore , I would have wanted to support this approach .
However , a number of amendments have been added to the report that are particularly burdensome for small shopkeepers , who are forced to shoulder further bureaucratic costs and requirements that will be difficult to bear .
For that reason I decided to vote against the proposal .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this directive , because I believe that the disposal of waste electrical and electronic equipment is another challenge that we have to overcome .
Unfortunately , my country Lithuania currently lags far behind the EU average as regards the disposal of WEEE .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment are an excellent source of precious metals and other resources imported to the EU .
If all such waste were to be appropriately disposed of , re-used and recycled , we would save spending a lot of money on raw materials .
The entry into force of the new directive , which should give us a better system for collecting , re-using and recycling , is still some time away , but I hope that it will both provide new possibilities for businesses and will reduce trouble for the end consumer .
Electrical and electronic equipment today represents an enormous consumer goods category , and it therefore accounts for an equally enormous amount of waste , with risks of serious damage to the environment and people 's health due to the nature of that waste .
The report on the proposal for a directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment is intended to regulate at EU level the collection , treatment and recycling of this type of equipment waste and to lay down quantities and percentages .
I therefore endorsed Mr Florenz 's report , which requires the Member States to carry out separated collections of at least 4 kilograms of electrical waste per inhabitant per year , and to achieve a 65 % selective collection target by 2016 and a minimum 5 % material reuse target , not least to prevent raw material waste .
in writing . - ( DE ) I share the concerns of the Member States in respect of this Commission proposal .
The interests of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) have been largely disregarded .
SMEs would have massive problems to contend with when implementing these regulations .
Currently , waste electrical and electronic equipment represents the fastest-growing waste stream in the European Union .
This fact entails several other matters which require an efficient solution .
First and foremost , we need to take account of the effects of recycling this equipment improperly on protecting health and the environment .
Another challenge is to reduce the level of loss of materials - their recovery means that industry regains valuable secondary materials - and the necessity of intensifying the collection and proper treatment of waste .
According to data collected by the European Commission , currently around 85 % of electronic waste is being collected .
Despite the fact that as much as 65 % of the equipment which is sold is subsequently collected , little more than 30 % of used electrical and electronic equipment is being treated in line with the directive 's stipulations .
Therefore , it is difficult not to agree with the rapporteur that it is the Member States which are responsible for correctly implementing the directive and establishing effective control procedures for the storage and processing of waste equipment .
It is clearly incumbent on the Member States , the producers of new equipment and consumers to try to achieve higher collection rates by every conceivable means .
I voted in favour of adopting the report , which is designed to increase the rate of separated collection , to reduce the loss of waste equipment and to prevent illegal shipment , and also to ensure appropriate high-quality treatment of this kind of waste .
in writing . - ( LT ) Waste electrical and electronic equipment is one of the fastest growing types of waste .
This can be put down to the increasing pace of life , technologies that are developing ever more quickly and the desire to have the latest and most modern equipment .
Spinning around in this wheel , we face two major problems - resources and waste .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree with the objective of collecting as high a percentage of used equipment as possible , and recycling and reusing it .
Only then will we be able to reduce the need for resources and the amount of items going to landfill .
I believe that the objectives outlined can be achieved but it will not be easy .
The new EU Member States will need to make a particular effort .
Sadly , we do not have a spare planet .
If we want to maintain a high level of consumption in the future , we must act more responsibly with the natural capital that remains and not waste it .
I voted today in favour of the European Parliament 's report on the management of electronic waste , which is extremely important to Greece , where over 150 000 tonnes of electronic waste were identified in 2010 .
Our basic ambition is for high-level legal treatment ( given that , at present , just one-third of electronic waste in the EU is subject to legal collection and treatment ) , proper collection , recycling and re-use of the valuable substances contained in waste and action to prevent illegal shipments of waste , which is an obligation incumbent primarily upon the Member States .
Raising awareness among all the players involved ( manufacturers , consumers and public authorities ) and incentives for everyone to dispose of this type of waste properly are the key points of the overall endeavour .
I voted in favour , having regard to the fact that the Consultative Working Party of the Legal Services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission concluded , in its opinion , that the proposal in question does not comprise any substantive amendments other than those identified as such therein and , as regards the codification of the unchanged provisions of the earlier act with those substantive amendments , that the proposal contains a straightforward codification of the existing text , without any change in its substance .
I join Parliament in calling on the Commission to refer the matter to Parliament again if it intends to amend the proposal substantially or replace it with another text .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on achieving this important goal .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) represents the fastest-growing waste stream in the EU and we therefore face a range of challenges .
On the one hand we need to address the environmental and health consequences if this equipment is not properly treated and disposed of and , on the other , there is a serious problem of loss of raw materials .
In a globalised economy , the efficient and innovative use of energy , materials and resources is a key issue .
Stepping up the collection and proper treatment of this waste in accordance with the directive thus constitutes a major challenge .
The proposed amendments are designed to increase the rate of separated collection , to reduce loss of waste equipment within the ' WEEE system ' , while preventing illegal shipment , and also to ensure that WEEE receives appropriate , high-quality treatment .
In addition , red-tape at national level should be reduced , thus removing impediments to the internal market .
in writing . - Waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) represents the fastest-growing waste stream in the EU and we therefore face a range of challenges : 9 million tonnes now , growing to 12.3 million by 2020 .
Taking into account these quantities , there is a good business case for retrieving more WEEE : more revenue and jobs for the waste treatment sector ; a contribution to the employment of the long-term unemployed and disadvantaged ; recovered material has an estimated value of around EUR 2 billion a year .
There are important scarce raw materials in WEEE that we should retrieve to lower the need for imports .
The recast was very urgently needed in order to tackle climate change , to avoid environmental damage through bad waste management and to keep hold of the valuable resources in electric and electronic equipment .
We will need high collection rates , high recycling rates and adequate recycling standards , strong legislation against illegal exports , far-reaching producer 's responsibility , better designed equipment and a fair distribution of responsibilities and costs between producers , consumers and public authorities .
I voted in favour of this report on the proposal for a directive recasting Directive 2002 / 96 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 2003 on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) .
WEEE represents the fastest-growing waste stream in the EU , and it is essential to step up the collection and proper treatment of this waste .
Indeed , we need to avoid the serious consequences that improper disposal of WEEE can have in terms of damage to the environment and public health and loss of raw materials .
The changes now proposed are therefore welcome , since they are designed precisely to increase the rate of separated collection , reduce loss of waste equipment within the ' WEEE system ' , prevent illegal shipment and ensure that WEEE receives appropriate , high-quality treatment .
in writing . - ( DE ) In general , I support the waste disposal directive .
However , the subject of photovoltaic modules remains a problem .
There is no understandable reason for excluding the entire sector from the regulations .
We have a wide range of legislation governing waste streams .
Therefore , it is not clear why a complete industry , which is expected to produce significant waste streams , is being exempted .
For this reason , I have abstained from voting on the report .
Eight years after the adoption of the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment , the European Parliament is once again giving its opinion on the important issue of recycling high-tech equipment waste .
Despite undeniable improvements in the treatment , recovery and disposal of this type of waste ( of the 5.8 tonnes of waste produced per person per year in Europe , it accounts for a tiny 20 kilograms per person on average ) , progress still needs to be made .
I therefore welcome the adoption , this lunchtime , of the Florenz report , which strengthens the European Commission 's objective of achieving an 85 % collection rate and a 50-75 % recycling rate , depending on the type of waste , throughout the Union in 2016 .
How could one possibly overlook , for example , the importance of recovering the precious materials contained in a whole range of equipment : one tonne of mobile phones contains around 280 grams of gold and 140 grams of platinum and palladium !
This is good economic sense being used to protect the environment .
In the same spirit , I supported the five-year exclusion of solar panels from the framework of the directive .
I believe this is an excellent way of promoting this clean technology .
in writing . - Today 's vote is a welcome step to tightening up EU rules on electric waste , notably ensuring more effective collection and treatment of WEEE .
The EP has voted to redress the low collection rates , improper treatment and illegal exports of WEEE to third countries .
By 2016 , at least 85 % of the waste that is arising annually should be collected , and all of it properly treated .
This is an important step forward .
Another important improvement is the provision to ensure that retailers will now be obliged to take back very small waste appliances , such as light bulbs or mobile phones , regardless of whether a new appliance is sold at the same time .
This applies to all retailers , including distant sellers ( with the exception of micro-enterprises ) .
Increasing the collection of these appliances and raising consumer awareness about this should reduce the amount of these small appliances ending up in the general waste stream and thereby escaping adequate treatment .
With this vote the 2003 directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) is to be updated , addressing such topics as the consistent application of the relevant provisions , the simplification of rules and the reduction of administrative costs .
The final objective , as already pointed out by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , is to succeed in collecting 85 % of WEEE by 2016 and recycling between 50 % and 75 % of it depending on the category .
The aim of the text that has been adopted is not only to recover precious raw materials but also to stop the illegal shipment of electronic waste out of the EU , which carries health and environmental risks when the waste is treated under substandard conditions .
It will now be essential to reach an agreement with the Council , which has promised to reconsider its position after today 's vote .
in writing . - Electronic and electrical equipment is the fastest growing kind of waste .
Presently one third of it is collected .
Therefore I voted in favour of the revision of this directive because I welcome the new target to collect and treat 85 % of this waste by 2016 .
in writing . - ( DE ) In overall terms , the German Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) in the European Parliament supports the waste disposal directive .
However , the subject of photovoltaic modules remains a problem .
There is no understandable reason for excluding the solar industry from the regulations .
We have a wide range of legislation governing waste streams .
Therefore , it is not clear why a complete industry , which is expected to produce significant waste streams , is being excluded , particularly as the solar industry is likely to be responsible for a large amount of waste in the near future , when the first solar cells installed on large numbers on European roofs have to be replaced .
Solar cells may contain toxic substances which can be reused .
For this reason , I have abstained from voting on the report .
in writing . - I fully support the decision to update the Waste Electronic and Electrical Equipment ( WEEE ) Directive .
The hazardous substances often produced by waste from electrical and electronic equipment can cause huge health and environment risks .
By ensuring that waste is recycled and reused , the directive will improve the environmental performance of producers and distributors .
New targets for recycling , reusing and collecting waste include an 85 % collection rate for Member States .
The updated directive will also harmonise Member States ' reporting and regulation measures , in order to simplify administrative procedures and cut costs for companies .
I am certain that approving the amendments to this directive has the potential to produce health and environmental benefits and will contribute to the objectives of the EU 's resource efficiency agenda .
However , in light of the cuts facing local authorities , it is important that councils wanting to introduce kerbside collection are supported financially by producers .
in writing . - ( DE ) I naturally support the idea of improving the levels of collection of electrical equipment throughout Europe , not least because it will enable us to reuse scarce raw materials more effectively .
I would like to highlight the fact that my home country of Germany is in a particularly good position in this respect and has put in place balanced recycling solutions for businesses and consumers .
This system does not need to be changed to improve the way in which we reuse raw materials .
The Commission also did not want to introduce any changes .
However , the report that we have just voted on unfortunately imposes a number of additional burdens which may have an excessive impact on businesses , including electricians , with small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) being hardest hit .
For this reason , I have not voted in favour of this report .
The obligation to collect equipment , even that which does not form part of a company 's product range , which in some circumstances involves separating products that do and do not contain toxic substances and broken and reusable products , will involve additional costs and a great deal of extra bureaucracy .
We must not allow this to happen , in particular to SMEs .
Excluding the smallest companies which have very small premises is not enough .
The approach that has been taken is admirable , but it fails to tackle the problem as a whole and does not follow the ' think small first ' principle , laid down in EU policy on medium-sized companies .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Tunisia and wish to express my total solidarity with the Tunisian people , who , motivated by legitimate aspirations of democracy and improved social conditions and access to work , have led their country to an historic political watershed ; in this context it salutes the courage and determination shown by them during the demonstrations , offers its condolences to the families of the victims and shows its solidarity with the injured .
I also believe that the end of the authoritarian regime in Tunisia may contribute to a stable democracy and also contribute to the affirmation of the same aspirations for other peoples .
In this respect , I support the democratic process and underline the importance of creating the right conditions for holding elections , to allow all the opposition forces and all the media to structure themselves at national level and for the new parliamentary assembly responsible for formulating a democratic constitution to respect the balance between the executive and legislative powers and also the independence of the judiciary .
in writing . - ( RO ) The recent events in Tunisia have raised for discussion again the effectiveness of the EU 's neighbourhood policy in the Mediterranean basin .
The European Parliament 's resolution sends a powerful signal in this respect .
Unfortunately , the citizens ' battle for respect for their rights did not receive European support due to the lack of a specific mechanism in the association agreement .
As a result , the trouble was violently suppressed and human lives were lost .
I therefore welcome the initiative to set up a commission of inquiry .
Moreover , I believe that monitoring the application of the human rights clause will avoid a recurrence of such incidents .
The Tunisian people need support in developing properly working state institutions .
At EU level , the case of Tunisia urgently necessitates a change of priorities with regard to third countries .
Respect for human rights should form the basis for political dialogue .
The EU must maintain its consistent message so as not to lose its credibility .
This motion for a resolution reaffirms Europeans ' commitment to the root-and-branch reforms sought by the people of Tunisia .
Europe has maintained a special relationship with the people of Tunisia for a long time .
It was the only international organisation to introduce clauses relating to respect for human rights and democratic values into its relations with Tunisia .
European economic assistance , provided within the context of the neighbourhood policy , has helped to improve the average standard of living , to create employment , to train young people and to provide access for women to positions of responsibility .
Europe is today anxious to support the people of Tunisia in the democratic transition that is beginning .
The people of Tunisia have opened a new page .
With this motion for a resolution , the European Parliament is making its contribution to what must be the European position .
The European Parliament welcomes , firstly , the courage of the Tunisian people , who have brought their country to an historic political turning point .
The European Union must now meet the legitimate expectations of the Tunisian people .
Europe must prioritise its relations with those entities that respect fundamental freedoms .
Lastly , since offences have been committed , we have rightly requested the immediate application by the European Union of the decisions to freeze the ill-gotten assets of the Ben Ali family and its associates .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because it is important that all political , social , civic and democratic forces in Tunisia should be represented in the interim government , as this is the only way to secure for that government the confidence of the people and endow it with the legitimacy it needs to prepare elections and the transition to democracy .
The EU and Tunisia were in the process of formulating the Action Plan for the period 2011-2016 , and this process will require both partners to commit themselves to achieving greater progress on all the issues involved , in particular that of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The European Parliament condemns the repressive measures and the disproportionate force employed by the security forces , but gives its strong support to the democratic process in the country .
It is therefore very important to create the necessary conditions for the holding of elections , within a time frame which gives all opposition forces and all the media time to organise at national level , for a new parliamentary assembly with the task of drawing up a democratic constitution which strikes a proper balance between the powers of the executive and the legislature and the independence of the judiciary .
Parliament hopes that all democratic forces , which respect freedom of conscience , arrangements for the democratic handover of power and freedom of speech , will be able to take part in that election .
The Egyptian people are out on the streets at the moment to make their voices heard , just a few weeks after a similar scene in Tunisia .
The situation in the Arab countries is being compared by analysts to that in Central and Eastern Europe in the 1990s .
History is repeating itself 20 years later , with hundreds of thousands of people coming out on the streets .
The European Union must express its solidarity with the peoples in the Arab countries who are on the streets now or have been .
However , it is important that the motivation for coming out on the streets is driven by legitimate democratic aspirations and the need to improve social and living conditions .
With its democratic tradition , the EU must condemn the acts of repression and disproportionate use of force by law enforcement , which has led to fatalities .
The democratic process in these countries where the situation is still uncertain must be supported with conviction .
Indeed , the European Union has a great duty in this regard .
The necessary conditions must be created now for organising free elections , along with the adoption of democratic constitutions which will guarantee freedom of expression , political pluralism and the principle of electivity .
The EU 's High Representative must play an active role in assessing the needs of these countries which are undergoing radical transformations because they do not have the practical experience of democracy .
I would like to express my solidarity with the Tunisian people , who , prompted by legitimate democratic aspirations and a desire for better social conditions and easier access to employment , have brought their country to a historic political watershed .
I applaud their courage and determination during the demonstrations and condemn the way in which the peaceful protest movement was violently repressed , resulting in over 100 deaths .
I extend my condolences to the families of the victims and express my solidarity with the injured .
The Arab world has been shaken for a month and a half , from Tunisia to Yemen , by a shockwave or wind of freedom .
It is difficult for us to say yet which one it is , given the complicated implications of the protests which have sent Ben Ali into exile and are now rocking Mubarak 's throne , with , in the meantime , the Jordanian Government falling as well , as a preventive measure .
The Tunisian president 's departure does not also mean the disappearance of his regime , which remains a source of tension .
I share the concern of Tunisians about keeping ministers from the previous regime in power , some of whom were involved in quelling the demonstrations .
I believe that it is the EU 's duty to encourage a process for establishing democracy on sound foundations so as to discourage the conditions for replacing one form of totalitarianism with another .
Tunisia actually offers not just a model for those wishing to see the fall of Arab autocrats , but also continues to provide a precedent which can help us understand subsequent developments in a complex eastern equation .
Europe cannot , in my view , remain indifferent to the strength of the intense popular protest movement that is sweeping through several countries in North Africa and the Middle East .
As I said in this House during the debate on this motion for a resolution , I truly think that we are currently experiencing a rare moment in history : one of those that change its course and construct new realities .
However , instead of just a few leaders acting together or in isolation , what is needed is for Europe as a whole to take a leading role in aiding these reforms and to find a new paradigm for the Middle East that avoids radicalism and respects human rights , with security , democracy , dignity and tolerance .
I know that nothing will ever be the same again .
I extend my solidarity to the peoples who are fighting for their rights in North Africa and the Middle East , as I did to the peoples of Eastern Europe not so long ago .
Because I realise that Islamic extremism has emerged as a political - and not religious - response to these problems , fed by and as a response to social exclusion , I hope that these peoples will soon prove that everyone can live together in this region in peace and mutual respect , irrespective of religious faith , political choice or ethnicity .
I voted in favour of this resolution since it expresses solidarity with the people of Tunisia , who , motivated by legitimate aspirations of democracy and improved living conditions , have brought their country to an historic political watershed .
The EU cannot shirk its responsibilities , and therefore the High Representative must promote the establishment of a task force , with the participation of the European Parliament , which will allow it to assess the need for assistance in the democratic transition process , particularly with regard to preparations for free and democratic elections .
The present situation in the Middle East has shown how little we know about ordinary Arabs : about what those demonstrating in Tunis and Cairo are thinking , and what they really feel and want .
Television companies with global cover , like the CNN and Al-Jazeera , and the social networks point to the first steps of a global civil society capable of following events , such as those in Tunisia and Egypt , in real time .
For a long time , the West has preferred a policy of containment out of fear of Islamic extremism , instead of obtaining partners who share the same ideas and advocate societies that are politically structured under democracy , freedom and the rule of law .
It has done so because , allegedly , such partners do not exist .
It would appear that that is not strictly true .
Their effective weight and their capacity to mobilise their respective countries in this direction still has to be ascertained .
Therefore , caution , careful monitoring of events and European assistance for democrats that reject both secular militarism and religious fundamentalism are recommended .
The democratic values of freedom and the right to self-determination must be respected by all peoples .
Therefore , I cannot but welcome the adoption of this motion for a resolution on the political situation in Tunisia , in which Parliament extends its solidarity to the Tunisian people .
Despite the repressive measures and the use of force by the security forces , Tunisians have , through their demonstrations , succeeded in putting an end to the dictatorial regime of President Ben Ali .
However , I am disappointed by the European Union 's failure to develop a more consistent and effective external policy towards some of its partners , so that it could contribute to bringing down the totalitarian regimes that still persist , like the one that was in power in Tunisia .
We have signed a motion for a resolution of our group on the situation in Tunisia , where we salute the determination of the Tunisian people to regain their freedom and put an end to the existing regime , and show solidarity with all Tunisian progressives and with its people .
In the resolution , we also highlight the need , should the Tunisian people so request , to provide the necessary financial aid both to complete the reforms already introduced and to satisfy the economic and social needs of the people of Tunisia .
It is clear to us , however , that interference in the internal affairs of Tunisia must be avoided .
It is not for the European Union to say who must or who must not govern these countries .
Their people are waking up on their own and it is for them to choose who they want to govern them .
We must not impose anything on them .
in writing . - It is sad that the EU has taken so long to address the political and social unrest in the Middle East - that in Tunisia and recently that in Egypt .
It was our duty as a Union to put our political antennae out there and identify that a crisis was underway , and more importantly be proactive about it .
Instead we stood on the sidelines with passivity and complacency ; refusing to read the signs that clearly indicated a situation of political and social turmoil , one which ultimately drove people to the streets in protest .
We must find a way to truly relate and actively support the people in these countries .
We must not do this in an imposing manner but in a way that will reassure these citizens that Europe will actively support social stability , economic prosperity and freedom within their respective regions .
Having said that , just as with regard to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict , the EU has chosen not to take the necessary action .
There is not one person or institution that speaks for Europe with one voice .
Ultimately this issue must be addressed if we want to have any meaningful influence and relevance in international relations , especially in connection with a region as close to us as this one .
in writing . - ( DE ) I support this motion for a resolution , despite the fact that I believe that the democratic forces in these countries need more regular support at an earlier stage .
Many EU Member States have problems with doing this , often because their economic interests are at stake .
Egypt , Russia and China are good examples of ' political discretion ' or keeping ' silent ' .
I hope that the developments in North Africa will cause the EU to take a more courageous approach .
In voting for this motion for a resolution on Tunisia , I am clearly expressing my full support for the Tunisian people and for the historic democratic revolution that they have started .
I regret that the European Union was slow in reacting , thus giving a very poor impression of our diplomatic service , which is still not equal to its responsibilities and which struggles to speak with one voice on the international stage .
The Union must now provide all the technical , legal and financial assistance necessary for the smooth organisation of free elections in Tunisia .
We must also urgently review our neighbourhood policy with third countries and make the inclusion of human rights clauses an essential condition of all our trade agreements .
in writing . - I voted for the resolution on Tunisia to express my solidarity with the wish of Tunisian people to achieve freedom of expression and restore free elections .
It is alarming that the EU has been caught by surprise when massive popular demonstrations against the previous authoritarian regime started .
May these events remind us that stability of economic and political relations with our partners can be based only upon genuine democracy and full exercise of civil rights .
I call on the High Representative to promote the establishment of a task force to assist Tunisia in its progress towards democracy .
In recent months the European Union has examined its neighbourhood policy , emphasising the distinction between the political objectives pursued by the Member States of the Mediterranean and those of Central , Eastern and Northern Europe .
None of this , however , has resulted in an analysis capable of preventing what has happened and is still happening in various African countries .
I fully support the objectives contained in the motion for a resolution tabled today in this House ; they are objectives which the European Parliament as a whole wishes to pursue with regard to the situation in Tunisia .
Condemning the repressive measures and the disproportionate use of violence , requesting the freezing of the ill-gotten assets of the Ben Ali family , and supporting the establishment of three committees aimed at combating the corruption that has characterised Tunisia 's system of government for the last 23 years : those were the requests made today by the European Parliament .
Lastly , we call on the High Representative to take the decision to intervene in support of the population via a task force , which Parliament should also be involved in organising .
I consider it vital at this time for the European Union to make its presence felt among the Tunisian people and to put them back on the path to real democracy .
The European Parliament has quickly adopted a position on the situation in Tunisia in view of the situation in the entire region .
We sympathise with the will of nations who want a better life , empowerment and a better tomorrow .
We are witnesses of the enforced departure of authoritarian rulers .
Tunisia needs a judicious partnership with us .
We need a systematic strengthening of recognition of the values which we hold .
We have a new External Action Service , which should facilitate this work .
As well as Tunisia , we must keep in mind the development of the situation in Egypt and other countries in the region .
I welcome the fact that we have adopted the joint motion for a resolution , which was tabled by five political groups .
in writing . - I voted for the resolution on Tunisia .
I believe it to be vital that Parliament shows itself unequivocally on the side of democracy , the rule of law and the protection of human rights in Tunisia and elsewhere in the Middle East .
I welcome the demonstrations in Tunisia , which have led the Tunisian people to regain their freedom and put an end to the regime established in 1987 by the now deposed president , Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali .
All political , social , civic and democratic forces in Tunisia now need to be duly represented , because that is the only way to secure for the provisional government the confidence of the people and to endow it with the legitimacy it needs to prepare elections and the transition to democracy .
I also believe we must examine ways to help Tunisia , including financially , as well as the support and assistance that European civil society can give to Tunisian civil society , particularly to human rights associations and the social partners .
I support the position adopted in the motion for a resolution on Tunisia .
Tunisia has reached an historic turning point in its history : we have a duty to support the Tunisian people by helping them to build a stable democracy and by supporting and strengthening civil society , which , with its power of advocacy , is doing a great deal to strengthen democracy .
I fully support Tunisia 's democratic transition and development process . Consequently , I encourage the interim government in its efforts to organise democratic elections in which all political sides are represented .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on the situation in Tunisia as I agree that we need to express our solidarity with and support for the Tunisian people , and their demands for democracy and social improvements .
I think it is extremely important for Parliament to take up a position of robust support for the bravery and determination of oppressed peoples ; in this case the people of Tunisia , where there have been mass demonstrations struggling to bring an end to the tyranny imposed by the now ex-President Ben Ali .
It seems particularly important to me that the resolution believes that the neighbourhood policy needs to be revised , since - and I have condemned it numerous times for this - it is aimed more at concluding unfair free trade treaties than at development for the people , human rights , or ending autocracies and social injustices .
I also voted for this resolution because I agree with its condemnation of the repression carried out by the Tunisian Government during the popular demonstrations , and because I agree with the demand for an independent investigation to be carried out both into that repression and into the widespread corrupt practices of the Ben Ali Government .
in writing . - As a rule , once the Constitution is changed and a new form of governance has been created , the country needs democratic and fair elections .
We can start the discussion about the financial or other type of support only after Tunis has performed all the recommendations of the OSCE , the European Parliament , the European Union and the European Council .
Unfortunately , history teaches us that the countries that aspire to democracy become centres of corruption and abuses .
This process is linked to the high crime rate and violations of law and social rules .
I voted in favour taking into consideration the fact that financial support to Tunis should take place only after free elections and under the strict control of the institutions responsible for financial support .
I have voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Tunisia , because it expresses the European Parliament 's attitude to the events in Tunisia in a clear and balanced way .
It is essential that the transitional government organises elections as soon as possible , so that the country can move from authoritarian rule to stable democratic government .
The resolution also calls on Baroness Ashton to take rapid action and to provide Tunisia with the EU aid it needs .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Parliament motion for a resolution on the situation in Tunisia supports the efforts of the Tunisian people to move towards democracy .
It also underlines the fact that the necessary conditions need to be created to enable a parliamentary assembly to be elected .
Such an assembly would then have to draw up a democratic constitution that ensures the separation of powers .
The repressive measures and the disproportionate force employed by the security forces are condemned .
For these reasons , I support the motion for a resolution on the situation in Tunisia .
In view of the recent events which have taken place in Tunisia , I would like to express my solidarity with the people of that country .
As the European Union , we must support the Tunisian people , whose protests and demonstrations have enabled them to free themselves and regain their liberty from a regime which has lasted for many years .
I would also like to condemn the repressions and acts of violence committed by the security services and directed at the demonstrators .
I fully endorse the appeal made by the European Union .
Unfortunately , the events in Tunisia have yet again revealed the weakness of Union foreign policy .
The European External Action Service and the European Commission should be called upon to take more tangible measures .
In its joint external actions , the Union should call greater attention to issues related to the protection of human rights and democracy .
During the vote on the motion for a resolution of the European Parliament describing the situation in Tunisia I voted in favour , because I think that we , the European Union , have the perfect opportunity to help build civil society in Tunisia .
in writing . - I express my solidarity with the Tunisian people , who , prompted by a desire for better social conditions and easier access to employment , brought their country to an historic political turning point .
The events in Tunisia also rocked the foundation of undemocratic regimes in other countries .
It is still not clear where the change of government will lead .
I hope that all democratic forces which pledge to respect pluralism , freedom of conscience and arrangements for the democratic handover of power will be able to take part in the election of a new parliamentary assembly .
I voted for this resolution because I am in favour of the EU support for Tunisia 's economy in the form of loans and subsidies that would offer Tunisians the prospect of skilled jobs , as part of a genuine development contract to foster local and foreign productive investment .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the situation in Tunisia so as to express , together with my fellow Members , the European Parliament 's position on the ' Jasmine revolution ' .
The partnership between Tunisia and the European Union , the relations with the North African countries within the Union for the Mediterranean and all the neighbourhood relations must be effectively brought to the fore so as to enable the people of Tunisia , with whom we stand shoulder to shoulder , to achieve an orderly and peaceful transition towards an effective democratic system .
EU assistance must serve as a warning so as to ensure a proper electoral process and to guarantee respect for human rights , the aim being to support and advise the people of Tunisia in order to prevent any drifts towards fundamentalism .
The EU certainly must not fail to honour its commitment to the cause of democracy and human rights .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on Tunisia , as did all the political groups , in a bid to send a message of support to this country .
Stability in the area is a basic and permanent European ambition .
In future , the creation of a basin of prosperity , in which democratic regimes and respect for human rights prevail , should form the basic pillar of the EU 's neighbourhood policy in the Mediterranean .
We must not forget that the sources of instability in the European neighbourhood may set off chain reactions and generate even bigger waves of refugees and immigrants than those caused in the past by conflicts in Central Asia .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on the current situation in Tunisia .
I join Parliament in expressing solidarity with the Tunisian people , who , prompted by legitimate democratic aspirations and a desire for better social conditions and easier access to employment , have brought their country to a historic political watershed .
In that connection , I applaud the courage and determination shown by the Tunisians during the demonstrations , and I join in condemning the repressive measures and the disproportionate force used by the security forces .
I firmly support the necessary democratic process that Tunisia will undergo and stress the importance of creating appropriate conditions for elections to be held , within a time period that will allow all the opposition forces and all the media to organise themselves nationally and create the democratic basis for a new society .
I welcome Parliament 's request to the Commission and the European Investment Bank to make provision for support for Tunisia in the form of loans with interest-rate subsidies in order to enable the Tunisian economy to diversify and offer young Tunisians the prospect of skilled jobs , as part of a genuine development contract to foster local and foreign productive investment .
I have given my support to this motion for a resolution , and join in expressing solidarity with the Tunisian people , who , prompted by legitimate democratic aspirations and a desire for better social conditions and easier access to employment , have brought their country to a historic political watershed .
I sincerely hope that the conditions will now be created and every support will be given for Tunisia to make progress with the reforms needed to build a solid , tolerant democracy that respects minorities .
In voting in favour of the motion for a resolution on the situation in Tunisia , I want first of all to express my solidarity with the Tunisian people who , driven by legitimate democratic aspirations and the will to improve their country 's social situation , have brought it to an historic political turning point .
I call on the European institutions to refocus - and increase - the funds for the various instruments for financing cooperation between the EU and Tunisia .
This must be done quickly .
I also urge the European Union to learn from these events and to review its policy of supporting democracy and human rights by making their strict observance an essential condition of EU cooperation with third countries .
in writing . - With this resolution , the EP expresses its solidarity with the Tunisian people , who , prompted by legitimate democratic aspirations and a desire for better social conditions and easier access to employment , have brought their country to a historic political watershed .
In that connection , Parliament applauds their courage and determination during the demonstrations , extends its condolences to the families of the victims and expresses its solidarity with the injured .
Parliament also condemns the repressive measures and the disproportionate force employed by the security forces but applauds , in contrast , the actions of the armed forces , which refused to fire on the demonstrators .
It calls for an independent inquiry into the incidents leading to death and excessive use of violence during the past weeks and into corruption , and for those responsible to be brought to justice .
The disturbances taking place in Tunisia over recent days have already resulted in at least 35 confirmed deaths .
Parliament 's Delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries has already called for an independent enquiry into whether the government is to blame for the use of violence during the clashes in the streets .
The state of emergency prevailing in this country , which has traditionally been secular , progressive and democratic , must be immediately lifted to allow the Tunisian authorities to resume normal democratic processes .
For their part , all the governments of Europe , including the Swiss , must agree to cooperate with a view to returning the money and property acquired by President Ben Ali 's family .
Lastly , any sign that the Salafi movement is growing and spreading must be curbed immediately , since it would promote a radical version of Islam in Tunisia .
It was about time the European Parliament ended its silence on the Tunisian uprising .
How can one remain deaf to the appeals , how can one remain unmoved by this dearth of democracy , how can one stay calm upon seeing men and women , rich and poor , young and old , demanding to be freed from a regime of fear ?
Tunisia had a tacitly accepted autocratic model , a scenario in which the poorest , and even the middle class , were unable to imagine one day becoming the masters of their own destiny .
This one and only approach has now been reduced to dust .
These steps towards freedom lay the foundations for a new society and create hopes of a new equilibrium .
The days of the dictatorial and technocratic East are over .
It now remains to create a different kind of East .
Let us hope that the European institutions will be more receptive than ever to any requests for collaboration from these new states .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am in favour of this motion for a resolution , and in particular the provisions regarding the very specific instruments at our disposal for influencing the systemic changes going on in the country .
I am talking here first and foremost about political support for the greatest possible involvement of the High Representative , the review underway of the EU neighbourhood policy , negotiating a new action plan for Tunisia for the period 2011-2016 and sending an EU observation mission , which would undoubtedly provide support for the elections that have been announced .
The global spread of tuberculosis remains a concern , with this disease continuing to feature among the main causes of mortality worldwide , causing the death of around 2 million people every year .
In spite of the advances made , a dramatic rise has been seen in the incidence of this bacterial infection in recent years due to the socio-economic decline of the countries in the former Soviet bloc , the weak infrastructure of public health systems and the inequitable access to treatment .
I welcome the joint motion for a resolution on the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative as I think that vaccines combined with the most effective tests for detecting the infection and the best treatments are a key weapon in the fight against this disease .
I also think that access to drinking water and a balanced diet , as well as free access to healthcare services play an important role in improving living conditions and in the battle against poverty and tuberculosis .
In view of these considerations , I voted for the joint motion for a resolution on the tuberculosis vaccine .
According to the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative approximately 9 million new cases of tuberculosis are identified each year , and 2 million people a year die from tuberculosis : a death every 18 seconds .
There are only four years left before the Millennium Goal target date in regard to the elimination of diseases , and tuberculosis is still one of the main causes of death worldwide , and the most dangerous one for people who also have HIV / AIDS .
The EU must fulfil its responsibility to reach the UN Millennium Goal of combating tuberculosis and of eradicating it before 2015 .
I voted in favour of this important motion for a resolution and I agree that combating tuberculosis should be included in the Europe 2020 strategy .
As stated in the resolution , the Commission and the Member States must make every effort to ensure that a proper portion of the money available for health care reaches poor people in developing countries and every effort must be made to ensure that health care services in poor areas are improved and supported .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative , because this disease remains one of the main causes of death in the world , with nearly 2 million people dying as a result of it every year .
This initiative would be applied in the interests of tuberculosis sufferers worldwide , particularly those in the least advanced countries .
It would also contribute towards implementing the Europe 2020 objectives and achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 .
Furthermore , the vaccination programme could enhance the EU 's strategic independence in the fight against tuberculosis and other contagious diseases .
It should be pointed out that vaccines are an essential means of combating tuberculosis , together with better testing .
Testing must be reliable , low-cost and accessible to all patients , along with more effective diagnosis and treatment .
This implies a major shift in the focus of research and an increase in sustainable funding for the vaccine package .
Therefore , the European Commission and the Member States should stand by their funding commitments and do everything necessary to ensure that funds allocated to health care also reach the most impoverished and vulnerable people in the country .
Vaccinating against TB and investing in research aimed at developing new treatments for this disease are the only solutions to eradicate it by 2050 .
Unfortunately , Romania has a poor record in terms of the spread of this disease , topping the league table for tuberculosis patients in the European Union , where it will remain for a long time , according to the experts .
In these circumstances , the programmes run by the EU and finances allocated for TB treatment are especially welcome , and the investment in Europeans ' health is important .
According to data from the Romanian authorities , 30 000 new cases of tuberculosis appear in Romania every year .
One possible explanation for detecting this large number of cases every year is precisely the increase in the level of progress through the emergence of new prevention programmes , the majority of which are funded by the EU .
Although Romania still has the highest incidence of tuberculosis in Europe , the values for this indicator have seen a significant reduction in the last five years .
There has also been a downward trend in the mortality figures recorded for tuberculosis in Romania , from 10.7 % in 2002 to 7.6 % in 2008 .
The funding granted to the TB eradication programmes is particularly welcome as no new diagnostic or treatment instruments have been discovered in the last 35 years .
in writing . - ( CS ) I supported the motion for a resolution on combating tuberculosis for a whole range of reasons .
I would first like to emphasise the need to look at the humanitarian aspect of this disease , as it is a disease that can be prevented simply by vaccination , and the death of more than 2 million people a year is therefore not only a very high number , but is above all unnecessary .
I fully agree that tuberculosis is a graphic example of inequality between nations , as it has almost been eradicated in the industrially developed countries .
The TVBI Foundation helps tuberculosis sufferers the world over , and particularly in less developed countries .
Personally , I consider this way of combating tuberculosis to be an expression of the solidarity of European citizens and an attempt to limit entirely unnecessary deaths resulting simply from a lack of funding for vaccinations in less developed countries .
Through this motion for a resolution we welcome the European Union 's initiatives to combat tuberculosis in the poorest countries , but we call for more scientific research to be undertaken to develop new drugs and new vaccines against this disease .
Vaccines are the cheapest and most effective public health measure for protecting Europeans from infectious diseases , but it is also important for healthcare to reach developing countries , so as to contribute to increasing life expectancy and to combating poverty .
As I said , there has been some progress and we are on the right track , but the EU must redouble its efforts and call for more coordinated action to integrate European research into fighting poverty-related diseases .
That is the only way that we will manage to alleviate the tragic health situation that several developing countries are experiencing .
I should like to ask the Commission how it intends to follow up on scientific research efforts in this area , to intensify these efforts , and to translate the results of this research into benefits for Europeans in the light of the Europe 2020 strategy .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the tuberculosis vaccination initiative , because only a broad vaccination campaign can contribute to realising the targets defined in the Millennium Development Goal , which is to halt the increase and reverse the trend in the incidence of tuberculosis by 2015 and to eliminate it by 2050 .
Innovative financing initiatives need to be urgently explored , in order to help to reinforce health systems and combat inequality , particularly with regard to maternal health and infant mortality .
Though tuberculosis is one of the diseases that has practically disappeared from the focus of health concerns in developed countries , the truth is that today it is still one of the main causes of death in the world , costing the lives of 2 million people a year .
In developing countries in particular , this disease is still fatal in many cases , particularly when associated with HIV / AIDS .
It is , therefore , an example of the health inequalities between the industrialised world and the developing countries .
In addition , though tuberculosis is still a killer , research is being abandoned for simple reasons of commercial profitability .
Therefore , it is important for Europe to subscribe to scientific research and support TBVI ( the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative ) so that large-scale vaccination can have a positive effect towards the elimination of tuberculosis by 2050 .
As we are aware , vaccines constitute an essential instrument when associated with better , cheaper and more reliable tests for detecting the infection , as well as more efficient diagnoses and treatments .
That means a major re-alignment of research and increased and sustained funding , in which I believe that the EU can play an essential role .
This joint motion for a resolution , replacing the motions by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , is intended to promote the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative ( TBVI ) with a view to meeting the targets defined by the United Nations in the Millennium Development Goals . These include reversing the trend in the number of patients with tuberculosis by 2015 and eliminating the disease by 2050 .
Improving the state of health of the world population is one of the European Union 's major concerns .
Although tuberculosis can be said to be controlled in Europe , it still causes the deaths of millions of people in developing countries , in association with other contagious diseases .
It is essential to pool political and financial efforts in order to put a swift end to this worldwide scourge .
I therefore welcome the approval of this initiative to eradicate this contagious disease , which even in the 21st century is still causing many deaths , especially in developing countries .
Efforts in the field of the research and development of new drugs and vaccines that are effective against diseases such as tuberculosis , which , with each passing year , continues to take millions of lives throughout the world , must be stimulated and positive results warmly welcomed .
Once these results have been obtained , it is necessary to make available the new advancements in science and technology to those who need them , without any kind of exclusion .
Therefore , the sole criterion for access must be need .
In the third world , the payment of foreign debt and interest for servicing debt to rich countries represents a major drain on resources , which therefore do not go to health and education budgets , which are reduced to almost insignificance .
The so-called ' structural adjustment programmes ' , imposed from outside , also contribute to this .
Therefore , the fight against diseases , which , like tuberculosis , spread in poverty , includes combating these mechanisms that create and sustain dependence and poverty .
In this context , it is regrettable that making the new tuberculosis vaccine available to less developed countries - which obviously we advocate - can be advocated in the name of strengthening the role and leadership of the EU in these countries , as is done in the question that gave rise to this motion for a resolution .
How can one fail to support an initiative aimed at eradicating tuberculosis by 2050 , when it continues to kill 2 million people a year worldwide ?
I do find it surprising , however , that a text which deplores the inadequate health services in developing countries should choose to overlook one of the greatest scandals of our time : the plundering of doctors from these countries by wealthier countries , which have given up training their own doctors sufficiently in the belief that they can cut back on their social protection .
Hence , in France , the numerus clausus , or the number of students allowed to proceed to the second year , is around 7 000 , whereas every year almost 3 000 doctors with degrees obtained outside Europe are allowed to practise in France .
This is without mentioning the foreign students that we train , who thus have French degrees and who never leave .
At the same time , the WHO estimates that there is a shortfall of 4.5 million health professionals in poor countries .
It is also strange how the text chooses to overlook the 5 500 to 6 000 cases of tuberculosis in France .
The disease had been eradicated there , and its recurrence can be directly linked to mass immigration .
I do not believe that we are an isolated case in Europe on this issue , either .
The presence of tuberculosis in the world continues to be a cause for concern .
However , it appears that only a large-scale vaccine can avert the threat that this disease poses to the health of many people living in developing countries .
Hence I supported this resolution in order to call for a greater long-term investment from the Member States and the European Commission so that they have the means to combat tuberculosis , in particular through research and innovation .
However , the resources put in place should not stop there : the health situation and health services are where support is needed , so this is another area in which work must be done and which cannot be overlooked .
in writing . - We abstained on the final vote on the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative .
We fully support the objective of the Vaccine Initiative but could not support the citation which refers back to another Parliament vote which supports , inter alia , abortion and runs counter to a previous explanation of vote which we put on the record of Parliament .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , since we must combat tuberculosis , because this disease kills nearly two million people worldwide each year , and almost a third of the world 's population is infected by it .
It is a disease which represents a serious danger to people and is the second greatest cause of death among infectious diseases worldwide .
Tuberculosis is heavily linked to social and economic problems , such as poverty , unemployment , alcoholism , drug addiction and HIV / AIDS , as well as the inadequate and poor state of healthcare systems in poor countries and delays in diagnosis .
I am pleased that the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative model has been drawn up , because all patients suffering from this disease worldwide will be able to benefit from the results of research and work activities .
I would also like to point out that there is still insufficient funding for the fight against tuberculosis , and it is necessary to provide for specific funding mechanisms that will contribute to the licensing in Europe of tuberculosis vaccines , vaccine accessibility , clinical research into tuberculosis and more effective diagnosis and treatment , and money allocated to healthcare services must reach countries ' poorest and most vulnerable inhabitants .
Tuberculosis is , unfortunately , one of the main causes of death in the world .
Indeed , nearly 2 million people die as a result of the disease every year .
Parliament 's aim , in tabling this motion for a resolution , was to invite the European Union to pursue the United Nations Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , which provide for halting the increase in the incidence of this serious disease by 2015 .
The estimated data are worrying , and we are deeply concerned about the gravity of the situation , especially with regard to the poorest countries , in which tuberculosis-related deaths are becoming increasingly common .
The joint motion for a resolution on the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative therefore has my full support because , as well as highlighting the healthcare conditions in developing countries , it tries to tackle the problem at the root , through granting more funds and supporting scientific research .
Although in the majority of European countries vaccinations against tuberculosis are compulsory , world statistics are disturbing .
The number of people who contract this disease makes us aware that today , in the 21st century , not only do we have to run a comprehensive information campaign and provide the right prophylaxis , but , above all , we have to increase funding for protective vaccinations .
Only this will allow us to reduce the prevalence of this disease .
This is why I endorsed the motion for a resolution . Thank you .
in writing . - I fully support calls for an increase in funding and alternative means of funding for TB programmes .
As the Chair of this Parliament 's Working Group on Innovation , Access to Medicine and Poverty-related Diseases , I think it is vital to focus our efforts on research and innovation if we are to meet the Millennium Development Goals .
Global TB levels are still unacceptably high and I welcome new means of funding the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative for a large-scale vaccination campaign .
Despite being practically extinct in developed countries , tuberculosis remains a threat in poor and underdeveloped countries , particularly in Africa , where it continues to kill millions of people every year .
Only a vaccination plan at global level can bring an end to this scourge and make the total elimination of this disease by 2050 a reality , as part of achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
I agree with much of what this motion for a resolution says , with its ultimate goal and with its view of access to healthcare as a right , the guaranteeing of which falls to governments that ' must meet their obligation to provide public health services to their entire population ' .
Nevertheless , I have not been able to support it because I view the majority of the proposals and goals that it sets out as lacking ambition and clearly insufficient .
I believe that it is not enough to suggest eradicating by 2050 a disease that affects the poorest and is one of the main causes of death in the world , leading to more than 2 million deaths every year .
This is because , as a number of studies carried out by non-governmental organisations point out , this period could be halved with a robust policy and the resulting increase in resources intended for combating it .
Furthermore , while I agree with the statement in paragraph 2 that it is important to improve detection and vaccination procedures with more effective diagnosis and treatments , I object to the failure to expressly mention that such services should be carried out by public health services ; it is these that should be strengthened by receiving European aid and cooperation .
I am very happy to lend my support to a pan-European project that offers added value not only to Europe but also to the world in its aim of eventually eliminating tuberculosis .
In 2009 , tuberculosis killed 1.7 million people , or 4 700 people per day .
The World Bank estimates that it causes an annual economic loss to Africa of USD 52 billion .
The cases reported in the United Kingdom and Ireland in summer 2010 also remind us that this disease remains a serious problem for the European Union .
Thanks to the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative ( TBVI ) , it will be possible to create effective vaccines that are affordable for developing countries and adapted to emerging countries and Europe .
The European Commission is the largest donor of official development aid , providing EUR 49 billion per year .
It is not enough , however .
We must find other sources of funding , such as the establishment by the Member States and / or the European Union of a financial guarantee to enable funding to be obtained from the European Investment Bank .
The TBVI is a practical way of implementing the EU 2020 strategy .
By making Europe more attractive , it is preparing the new economy for future generations .
in writing . - The tuberculosis vaccine programme is very important , but what is the European Parliament going to do before 2015 ?
In Latvia , for example , the process of medical treatment for tuberculosis currently consists of diagnosis-making and staying in quarantine .
In fact , all the funds that were supposed to be spent on the purchase of medical equipment and the construction of specialised hospitals were spent in vain .
For instance , in a town called Olaine there was a hospital constructed on the territory of a prison to treat people infected by tuberculosis .
The amount of money spent to equip the hospital amounted to two million euro .
That hospital is not functioning now since there is no medical staff !
Therefore I would like to draw the attention of my colleagues to the fact that it is not enough merely to create and produce a vaccine , it is necessary to prepare specialists with focused specialisation and highly qualified medical personnel and to deploy them in a battle against tuberculosis .
Otherwise , the effect of today 's voting will be no more than emotional .
It is highly important to have absolutely transparent scrutiny of funds allocated to the fight against tuberculosis in order not to repeat the Latvian situation .
Every year EUR 2 billion is spent on treating people with tuberculosis in the European Union .
Alongside HIV and malaria , tuberculosis is one of the most widespread epidemics in the world .
Around one third of the world 's population is infected .
It is clear that we are far from eradicating tuberculosis .
As in the case of all diseases , increasing resistance in the form of multi-resistant or even ultra-resistant bacteria and the resulting lack of treatment options are presenting modern medicine with a major challenge .
The standard drugs , which have been used since the 1960s , have no impact on mutated variants .
As a result , other medicines are prescribed which are more expensive and have more powerful side effects .
The subsequent treatment costs can be up to one hundred times higher than those of normal tuberculosis .
If a patient stops taking the standard drugs for the normal form of tuberculosis before the end of the six-month period , the result is not only severe side effects , but also resistance .
In addition , it is only possible to stop the disease spreading by investigating all the people with whom the patient has had contact .
Some countries have not complied with these requirements .
If these well-known basic rules are not followed , research projects costing billions of euros are unlikely to bring about any major changes and new types of resistance will occur .
For this reason , I have abstained from voting .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative .
In many cases , tuberculosis and its prevention remain a challenge not just for the developing world , but also for developed countries .
We should share good practice , allocate funding to the tuberculosis vaccine and use various measures in an attempt to reduce the horrifying statistic of around 2 million deaths from tuberculosis worldwide each year .
On the other hand , some of the main risk factors increasing morbidity are alcoholism , drug use and huge poverty .
It is therefore necessary for us to not only take vaccination into account , but also long-term programmes to reduce these factors .
Once again I welcome this EU initiative to contribute to active EU support for vaccine programmes , which when implemented have managed to significantly reduce tuberculosis infection rates , as EU Member State statistics demonstrate .
Given that tuberculosis remains one of the main causes of death in the world , claiming millions of lives every year , and that , despite this , insufficient research is currently being conducted into the most neglected diseases , which affect only people in developing countries , I am clearly in favour of the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative .
In this context , only a vaccination programme involving a large-scale vaccination campaign could have a positive impact in terms of achieving the goal .
I am convinced that vaccines are an essential means of combating tuberculosis , together with better testing , and that this implies a major shift in the focus of research and an increase in sustainable funding .
I therefore take the view that tuberculosis vaccination ought to be carried out as a priority in clinics in developing countries and that EU assistance should support developing countries ' internal efforts to build human capacity .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative .
This specific motion for a resolution , which was supported by all the political groups , follows the increase in this disease in Europe and the United States of America over the last ten years .
However , the most basic cause of the re-emergence of this disease is mass immigration , especially illegal immigration , where basic rules of hygiene often cannot be safeguarded .
Greece , which is currently trying to cope with illegal immigration , is a country with relatively high rates of tuberculosis in the developed world and , therefore , the proposals in this specific motion for a resolution , such as a sweeping campaign of vaccination in the Member States , funding from the European Investment Bank for the purpose and the call for guaranteed public health services in the most remote areas , are important to our country .
Today , tuberculosis is one of the examples of how inequality between peoples impacts on the area of health , given that this disease has been almost eliminated from the industrialised countries and is still spreading in other parts of the world .
It is currently also important to remember that tuberculosis is one of the infections that take advantage of the condition of those who are seropositive or have AIDS , making it particularly serious in these cases .
These issues are the reason for this motion for a resolution , which advocates the need for a large-scale vaccination campaign , with a view to achieving the sixth Millennium Development Goal after 2015 , and in particular , to eradicating tuberculosis by 2050 .
These worthy goals were also the reason why I voted in favour .
Vaccines are an essential means of decisively combating tuberculosis , together with better testing for detection of infection that is reliable and low cost , as well as more effective diagnosis and treatment .
This implies a major shift in the focus of research and an increase in sustainable funding .
The EU , through the European Commission , should explore innovative funding channels , such as the establishment by the Member States and / or the Union of a financial guarantee to enable funding for the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative to be obtained from the European Investment Bank , with a view to guaranteeing finance and research in this area .
Despite the progress made , the incidence of tuberculosis at global level is still a major cause for concern , as this disease remains one of the main causes of death in the world , especially in developing countries .
Research and funding in this area should therefore be increased .
It is important to mobilise resources for the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative , as only a large-scale vaccination campaign can contribute to halting the increase in the incidence of tuberculosis by 2015 , reversing the trend and eliminating this disease by 2050 , as provided for in the United Nations Milliennium Development Goals and in the World Health Organisation 's Stop Tuberculosis programme .
Tuberculosis kills almost 2 million people each year , mainly in sub-Saharan Africa and in Asia .
It is a scourge that highlights the inequalities between the North and the South , and the lack of resources , treatment and research available to us to halt the disease .
Our motion for a resolution points out the efforts that must be made to detect and diagnose the disease more quickly and effectively .
Above all , however , it stresses the need to implement a large-scale vaccination programme , which is the only way of achieving one of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG 6 ) and eradicating the disease by 2050 .
At the same time , it is essential for pharmaceutical research efforts to focus on this neglected and ' uneconomical ' disease .
Funding for this research must be guaranteed , for example through European Investment Bank funds .
As we know , USD 3 billion are needed to conduct the WHO 's ' Stop Tuberculosis ' programme .
This is a crucial investment if we want to make progress in research and innovation and thus help to increase the support given to the poorest populations .
in writing . - With this resolution , the EP firstly underlines the fact that only a vaccination programme involving a large-scale vaccination campaign could have a positive impact in terms of achieving MDG 6 after 2015 , and in particular the eradication of tuberculosis by 2050 .
Secondly , it considers vaccines to be an essential means of combating tuberculosis , together with better - reliable , low-cost and soundly based - testing , as well as more effective diagnosis and treatment , and that this implies a major shift in the focus of research and an increase in sustainable funding .
Thirdly , it calls on the Commission to explore innovative funding channels , such as the establishment by the Member States and / or the Union of a financial guarantee to enable funding for the TBVI to be obtained from the European Investment Bank , with a view to securing finance for research in developing countries into neglected diseases and those involving little profit potential .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative .
Tropical diseases such as malaria , tuberculosis and sleeping sickness claim millions of victims every year .
This is due in particular to the fact that these diseases are becoming more resistant to drugs and to the lack of treatment options , which has come about because research has been stopped for the simple reason that it is unprofitable .
In view of the fact that the number of new cases of tuberculosis throughout the world is still a cause for concern four years before the deadline for achieving the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , we should intervene immediately .
Health services in the majority of developing countries come nowhere near meeting the needs of local populations .
The structural adjustment programmes of the 1990s made matters worse by causing drastic cuts to social budgets .
I believe that tuberculosis vaccinations should be carried out primarily in clinics and hospitals in developing countries , and a public healthcare system should be restored to this end .
Governments must fulfil their duty of ensuring public healthcare services for the entire population , since this is an elementary right enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
I support the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative .
In my opinion , it is our moral duty as Europeans not only to assume some of the responsibility for research and for seeking new cures , but also to assist poor countries to train health workers and to develop at least a basic healthcare network .
Human solidarity must reach out beyond the borders of countries and continents .
If we cease to feel this solidarity , we cease to be human .
It is in the interests of preserving our humanity that I am unable to support the approved text of the motion for a resolution .
The text contains a reference to the killing of unborn children , which a majority of those in this Parliament regard as being a component of reproductive health .
I abstained from voting , because I cannot agree that the fight against the tuberculosis pandemic in the poorest parts of the world is in any way connected with the inhuman practice of usurping the right to decide on the life and death of the unborn child .
in writing . - I voted for the closure of the CEPOL accounts for which I had refused discharge last year because this is the normal procedure that should happen every year immediately there is clarity from the European Court of Auditors ' report that there is no need for further adjustment , independent of the fact that discharge has or has not been granted .
Given the irregularities observed , CEPOL should be closed down .
Concerns with the administration model of the European Police College meant that Parliament refused to discharge its 2008 accounts .
This fact is worrying and unheard of , as this is the first time that a European agency has been refused such a procedure .
Therefore , the present resolution only aims to close the corresponding accounts in accordance with Article 5 ( 2 ) ( b ) of Annex VI to the European Parliament Rules of Procedure .
I recall that , on 7 October 2010 , Parliament adopted the decision not to discharge the 2008 accounts of the European Police College by 618 votes to 0 , with seven abstentions .
This decision to close the 2008 accounts does not equate to their being discharged , but is only a technical measure resulting from Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , under which if accounts are not discharged there must be a formal vote on whether to close them in a subsequent sitting .
I therefore voted in favour of this decision .
On 7 October 2010 , Parliament adopted by 618 votes to 0 , with 7 abstentions , a decision to refuse to grant discharge to the Director of the European Police College for the financial year 2008 .
In accordance with Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , if discharge is not granted , a formal proposal to close the accounts shall be submitted at a subsequent part-session .
The decision , of which I voted in favour , is a technical measure designed to close the accounts for the financial year in question , not the granting of discharge .
It is being taken during this part-session because I and my colleagues from the Committee on Budgetary Control wished to hold a hearing with the Director of CEPOL , the Chair of the Governing Board and the President of the European Commission in order to obtain more details and clarification , in particular with regard to the accounting corrections made in July 2010 for the year 2008 and to the responsiveness of the Governing Board .
It is regrettable that a European institution financed from the public purse should not have a transparent administrative model that enables the supervisory body to discharge its accounts .
The rarity of such an event makes it necessary to analyse the causes and find solutions that prevent it from reoccurring .
Therefore , this resolution aims only to close these accounts , pursuant to Article 5 ( 2 ) ( b ) of Annex VI to the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament .
in writing . - Inefficient use by the Police College of funds allocated to it has already led to disruption in financial support for small agencies .
There are cases of inappropriate use of funds which border on financial crimes .
All these transgressions may happen when there is not enough scrutiny from the Commission .
Parliament 's decision on this issue gives a clear signal to all other agencies and institutions that it is necessary to stick to financial discipline and to be more responsible in respect of the duties they have .
Nor would it be wasteful to relieve of their posts those Commission officials who stood by for a long time and failed to act resolutely and efficiently .
I know of many cases in which Commission officials - either because of their unconstructive position or sometimes even laziness - closed their eyes to serious violations in European Union financial projects .
I consider this resolution to be very timely and useful .
The European Police College ( CEPOL ) was established in 2000 .
Its purpose is to promote close cooperation between the different police forces within the European Union .
CEPOL helps national bodies to work together to prevent and combat crime .
In addition , it works closely with police services from third countries .
I believe that CEPOL is a useful institution , which is why I have voted in favour of the motion .
The European Police College ( CEPOL ) brings together senior police officers from across Europe , with the aim of encouraging cross-border cooperation in the fight against crime and maintenance of public safety , law and order .
Established as an agency of the European Union in 2005 , CEPOL operates as a network in which activities - courses , seminars , conferences and meetings - are organised in and by the Member States , mainly at the national training institutes .
Between 60 and 100 courses , seminars and conferences are organised per year which cover a wide range of topics relevant to policing in Europe today .
CEPOL 's activity is fundamental to the creation of synergies between the police forces of the various Member States.In fact , it is currently the primary source of learning and development in the field of education and training for better cooperation and policing in Europe .
For the above reasons , and particularly in the light of the positive opinions of the Court of Auditors and the Council , I am voting in favour of the closing of CEPOL 's accounts for the financial year 2008 .
Following the decision of 7 October 2010 not to discharge the European Police College 's accounts for the financial year 2008 because of problems detected with its administration , we have now moved onto closure of the accounts , pursuant to Article 5 ( 2 ) ( b ) of Annex VI to the Rules of Procedure .
in writing . - It is crucial that the new authorities and their chairs carry out their functions in the interest of Europe 's citizens .
To this end , the Greens pushed for greater transparency as regards the relations between industry representatives and the authorities and their chairs , and we are happy that all three candidates have committed in writing to ensuring this .
Shadowy lobbying relations will undermine the credibility and effectiveness of these authorities and it is important that they carry out their work in the utmost transparency .
We must now move forward and ensure that these authorities can effectively carry out their crucial oversight role over EU financial markets .
in writing . - ( LT ) As the vote by Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control demonstrated , many people were unhappy with the way the European Police College managed its finances in 2008 and previous years .
This is a unique situation - until now no European agency has ever failed to be granted discharge .
However , now it is important to look to the future .
General Banfi , the new head of the European Police College , has taken over a difficult situation and must regain the trust of Parliament and taxpayers .
Furthermore , I believe that the ongoing discussions on the College 's ineffective management of the budget and human resources are only diverting our attention from a greater problem - the lack of integrity and professionalism in police and security bodies throughout Europe , including Lithuania .
We must devote more attention to efforts to improve the Police College 's basic functions - we must take more robust measures to combat crime , through education and special training .
As I said during the part-session last October , the European Police College has noble objectives - to promote common European policing standards and strengthen the rule of law and legislation .
What happens to the European Police College in future is not important , but all Member States must ensure that these objectives are achieved .
in writing . - I voted to close the accounts for the European Police College as I believe it is important to draw a line under the discharge procedure for 2008 .
By not granting discharge , MEPs sent a strong message to the management of all EU agencies that Parliament will not tolerate shoddy accounting , or spurious spending .
MEPs now need to turn our attention towards the discharge procedure for 2009 , which is underway in the Committee on Budgetary Control , and introducing changes to ensure stronger accounting procedures are put in place .
There can be no repeat of the shortcomings that were highlighted in the Court of Auditors report on the 2008 accounts .
I welcome the positive steps that have been taken by CEPOL 's new Director , Ferenc Bánfi , and hope that the cooperation between the Committee on Budgetary Control and the College continues , and big steps are taken to ensure the College is run efficiently and in line with all financial rules .
in writing . - I voted for the motion for a resolution to oppose the appointment of the Chair of the European Banking Authority , not because I found any deficiency in the individual appointed , but because I object in principle to the creation of this new authority .
We are told that it is necessary to prevent future economic and financial crises occurring .
In fact it adds another level of bureaucracy to existing supervision .
There will be confusion about who is responsible for what .
The rule book they will concoct will undoubtedly not suit the City of London and will contribute to the loss of jobs in Britain .
Furthermore , the process is not transparent with Parliament being presented with only one candidate and , to top it all , the final vote is secret .
If there was a lesson to be learnt from the recent crisis , it was that we need to reform the institutional supervisory structure by creating European agencies and , with this , reformulate the entire concept of macro and micro-economic supervision .
It is this that gives rise to the European Banking Authority .
Confidence in banks having been dealt a severe blow by the global financial crisis , it is important for the markets , and Europeans in general , to start trusting the solidity and robustness of the banking institutions again and , in particular , regain confidence in the supervisory bodies .
This is why the role reserved for this new European Banking Authority is so critical for the future .
That is why I am voting in favour of the choice of Mr Andrea Enria as the first Chair of the European Banking Authority , in the hope of an active , attentive and successful mandate .
The recent financial crisis has highlighted major weaknesses in financial supervision , both in individual cases and in relation to the financial system as a whole .
Supervision models had a national perspective and did not adapt to the globalisation that has occurred within the financial system , where various financial groups conduct their operations across borders , with the systemic risks that this entails .
There has , therefore , been no cooperation , coordination or consistency whatsoever in the application of EU legislation .
I have understood that the creation of the European Banking Authority is essential to achieve an effective supervision model .
However , many other steps need to be taken to prevent truly immoral situations such as those that took place in the recent past - which have damaged economies , shareholders , depositors , taxpayers and the credibility of the system - from reoccurring .
I am therefore voting in favour of the choice of Andrea Enria as first Chair of the European Banking Authority , and wish him a term of high quality in all senses .
In the new central European Supervisory Authority , national interests are represented by the bodies that supervise the financial markets , in the case of Austria , for example , the FMA , which are members of the new authority and have voting powers .
The national banks also take part in the authority 's meetings , but they are not entitled to vote .
I am opposed to the appointment of the specified candidate as the chair of the European Banking Authority .
Therefore , I support the report , as in my opinion this will result in costly duplicate structures , which is demonstrated , among other things , by the fact that the individual supervisory bodies are based in different cities .
In addition , financial supervisory authorities only represent part of the overall solution .
The sanction mechanisms aimed at Member States with high budget deficits must also be tightened up .
in writing . - I voted for the resolution to oppose the appointment of the Chair of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority , not because I found any deficiency in the individual appointed , but because I object in principle to the creation of this new authority .
We are told that it is necessary to prevent future economic and financial crises occurring .
In fact it adds another level of bureaucracy to existing supervision .
There will be confusion about who is responsible for what .
The rule book they will concoct will undoubtedly not suit the City of London and will contribute to the loss of jobs in Britain .
Furthermore , the process is not transparent with Parliament being presented with only one candidate and , to top it all , the final vote is secret .
One of the consequences derived from the crisis was the need to create independent European agencies for supervising the banks and insurance of the financial markets .
These agencies will not replace national supervisory agencies , but will work with them , exercising their mandate for prudence and systemic risk analysis in order to prevent a new crisis of the proportions of the one we are faced with from striking the countries of Europe once more .
Today , I am very proud to vote for a Portuguese citizen , Mr Gabriel Rodrigo Ribeiro Tavares Bernardino , as the first Chair of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority .
His reputation for integrity and his technical qualities , revealed throughout a demanding selection process , promise an attentive and active mandate in the supervisory authority over which he will now preside .
I would like to take this opportunity to wish him every success in his new job .
in writing . - ( PT ) The recent financial crisis has highlighted major weaknesses in financial supervision , both in individual cases and in relation to the financial system as a whole .
Models of supervision have had a national perspective and have not adapted to the globalisation that has occurred within the financial system , in which various financial groups conduct their operations across borders , with the systemic risks that this entails .
There has , therefore , been no cooperation , coordination or consistency whatsoever in the application of EU legislation .
The creation of a European authority for the insurance and occupational pensions sector is essential in order to achieve an effective supervision model , alongside many other monitoring mechanisms , to be decided on and implemented as a matter of true urgency .
Naturally , I am pleased that a Portuguese , Gabriel Rodrigo Ribeiro Tavares Bernardino , has been nominated as first Chair of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority .
I wish him the greatest happiness in carrying out his duties .
I am very pleased with the outcome of this morning 's vote , in which Parliament has given the green light to the appointment of Mr Bernardino from Portugal to head the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority .
It is a victory for the European Union and for Parliament , which fought hard for this authority to be established , but most of all it is a victory for the people of Europe , who will now , I am sure , be better protected .
In November 2010 , the European Parliament and the Council adopted , at first reading , an ambitious series of legislative proposals to reinforce supervision of the financial markets in Europe .
These proposals provided for the creation of three new European supervisory authorities in the areas of insurance , securities and banking .
The European Parliament has an important role in nominating the heads of these institutions : this House is competent to hold hearings with the chairs nominated by the national supervisors , on the basis of a shortlist compiled by the Commission , and can oppose their nomination .
The candidates have had hearings before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which has given its approval .
On the basis of these premises , I voted for the Portuguese nominee for Chair of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority who , as is stipulated , is subject to strict rules regarding independence .
in writing . - I voted for the resolution to oppose the appointment of the Chair of the European Securities and Markets Authority , not because I found any deficiency in the individual appointed , but because I object in principle to the creation of this new authority .
We are told that it is necessary to prevent future economic and financial crises occurring .
In fact it adds another level of bureaucracy to existing supervision .
There will be confusion about who is responsible for what .
The rule book they will concoct will undoubtedly not suit the City of London and will contribute to the loss of jobs in Britain .
Furthermore , the process is not transparent with Parliament being presented with only one candidate and , to top it all , the final vote is secret .
Since the financial markets were hit hard by the crisis , it is important to restore confidence , which is largely happening through the role to be performed by the supervisory authorities , which have to exercise their mandate with competence and efficiency in order to signal the necessary confidence to investors and companies .
It is in this context that the European Securities and Markets Authority has been created , which , while not claiming to replace national supervisory agencies , will have an important part to play in the new European supervisory framework .
Therefore , it is important that this agency starts to operate soon .
I vote in favour of the choice of Mr Steven J. Maijoor as the first Chair of the European Securities and Markets Authority in the hope of an active , attentive and successful mandate .
The recent financial crisis has highlighted major weaknesses in financial supervision , both in individual cases and in relation to the financial system as a whole .
Supervision models had a national perspective and did not adapt to the globalisation that has occurred within the financial system , where various financial groups conduct their operations across borders , with the systemic risks that this entails .
There has , therefore , been no cooperation , coordination or consistency whatsoever in the application of EU legislation .
The creation of the European Financial Markets Authority is essential to achieving an effective supervision model .
However , many other steps need to be taken to prevent the reoccurrence of the truly immoral situations that have arisen in the recent past .
I am therefore voting in favour of the choice of Steven J. Maijoor as first Chair of the European Securities and Markets Authority , and wish him a term of high quality in all senses .
The financial supervisory authorities may be more useful than many other EU institutions .
However , one body based in one place , instead of three located in three different cities with the accompanying costly duplicate structures , would have been sufficient .
Supervision at a European level should involve , among other things , coordination of the national supervisory bodies .
With the current division of responsibility , this will be difficult . In addition , an efficient early warning system is needed , together with an appropriate supportive contribution from speculators and a discussion without taboos .
As I believe that the establishment of three European financial supervisory bodies is a waste of money , I support the fact that the report firmly opposes the appointment of the specified candidate as chair of the European Securities and Markets Authority .
I voted against and so I am very pleased with the outcome of this morning 's vote , in which Parliament has given the green light to the appointment of the Chairperson of the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) .
The recent financial crisis has shown the extent to which close , careful supervision is needed in sectors which in the past have succeeded in dodging regulation .
Many of the legislative proposals that we are examining in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , from derivatives to short selling , give ESMA considerable powers of surveillance and control , and so it is crucial that this authority should be enabled to get up to speed as quickly as possible .
In November 2010 , the European Parliament and the Council adopted , at first reading , an ambitious series of legislative proposals to reinforce supervision of the financial markets in Europe .
These proposals provided for the creation of three new European supervisory authorities in the areas of insurance , securities and banking .
The European Parliament has an important role in nominating the heads of these institutions : this House is competent to hold hearings with the chairs nominated by the national supervisors , on the basis of a shortlist compiled by the Commission , and can oppose their nomination .
The candidates have had hearings before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which has given its approval .
On the basis of these premises , I voted for the Irish nominee for Chair of the European Securities and Markets Authority who , as is stipulated , is subject to strict rules regarding independence .
There was total confusion during the votes held in plenary today , Thursday 3 February 2011 , on the appointment of the chairpersons of the European Supervisory Authorities .
Whether it be the European Securities and Markets Authority ( motion for a resolution , the European Banking Authority ( motion for a resolution or the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ( motion for a resolution , none of the people nominated were women .
In the name of equality , a fundamental value upheld by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I cannot possibly vote in favour of such appointments .
in writing . - The 2008 financial crisis clearly showed the need for European Supervisory Authorities to coordinate the regulation and supervision of the finance sector in the European Union .
With today 's vote to accept the three heads of these new Authorities we are giving the green light for them to get down to work .
We have also seen over the last two years that parts of the financial services industry are intent on resisting necessary new rules and regulations .
During the hearing process I have therefore asked the candidates to commit to the highest standards of transparency and open government .
To maintain public confidence and trust in these new Authorities , they must be able to do their job in an independent , fair and objective way .
It is essential to ensure that these fledgling institutions are not bullied into weakening or undermining key rules to reform the finance sector .
I therefore welcome the commitment of the candidates to work to the highest principles of transparency , including disclosing the outcome of regulatory meetings with lobbyists and industry representatives .
I voted against , for the sole reason that I did not know the name of this candidate for high office .
What I especially ' liked ' was that the representative of the European Commission did not want to reveal the candidate 's surname .
Perhaps something has changed in our world when Members of the European Parliament have no right to know the name and CV of a person who wishes to hold office in the European Union .
If three new EU agencies based in London , Paris and Frankfurt , together with a risk advisory board at the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , are to be established , the result is likely to be confusion regarding the powers of these bodies .
The financial supervisory authorities may be more useful than many other EU institutions , such as the so-called European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights .
However , one body would have been sufficient .
The three new financial supervisory authorities only represent part of the overall solution .
In addition , the Member States need to change their attitudes .
The current motto of ' if you do not hurt me , I will not hurt you ' which allows Member States to save each other from financial penalties under the deficit procedure has resulted in disaster .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of the report and against the candidate for the position of chair of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority .
In November 2010 , the European Parliament and the Council adopted , at first reading , an ambitious series of legislative proposals to reinforce supervision of the financial markets in Europe .
These proposals provided for the creation of three new European supervisory authorities in the areas of insurance , securities and banking .
The European Parliament has an important role in nominating the heads of these institutions : this House is competent to hold hearings with the chairs nominated by the national supervisors , on the basis of a shortlist compiled by the Commission , and can oppose their nomination .
The candidates have had hearings before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which has given its approval .
On the basis of these premises , I voted for the Dutch nominee for Chair of the European Banking Authority who , as is stipulated , is subject to strict rules regarding independence .
in writing . - This whole selection procedure was an unsatisfactory mess and marks an inauspicious start for the new financial supervision authorities .
The Commission and Council share the responsibility for this situation and it is important that lessons are learned for the next round of appointments .
These new authorities must provide rigorous and effective oversight of the financial sector to avoid the mistakes of the past and it is regrettable that the status of candidates was not higher .
The Greens were particularly unhappy with the candidate for the chairmanship of the new insurance and pension authority , Gabriel Bernardino .
There are real concerns that Mr Bernardino is not committed to providing meaningful European supervision and will be a lap dog of the national authorities .
He also appears to be downplaying the potential risks the insurance sector poses to financial stability .
For this reason , the Greens voted to reject his candidature .
It is crucial that the new authorities and their chairs carry out their functions in the interest of Europe 's citizens .
To this end , the Greens pushed for greater transparency as regards the relations between industry representatives and the authorities and their chairs , and we are happy that all three candidates have committed in writing to ensuring this .
in writing . - I voted to approve the appointment of the Chairs of the EBA , EIOPA and ESMA as they demonstrated during their hearings that they were competent and knowledgeable of the issues related to the tasks they would face .
I also believe that it is unfortunate that there is no female candidate for a post at this level and hope that the candidates for the position of Executive Director would reflect a better choice .
It is also unfortunate that two political groups , the Greens and the ALDE ( some , not all ) , managed to direct their disapproval at these Chairs for issues unrelated to the tasks they will face as Chairs .
Consequently , one can only imagine that there are other issues behind their choices which demonstrate the lack of sensitivities to this European project .
After all , we demand independence for the actions to be undertaken by these European Supervisory Authorities and yet they contradict that independence by disqualifying the results of that independent choice with an unwarranted rejection vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the waste crisis in the province of Campania , because I believe that , in the context of the waste management crisis , it is essential to implement the derogation from the regulations and controls , which includes , for example , exemption from conducting environmental impact assessments and the non-application of legislation on public contracts .
I also believe it essential that fulfilling EU waste legislation in Campania and in other regions of Europe demands a major effort to reduce the volume of waste and tip the balance towards the prevention , reduction , re-use and recycling of waste by providing adequate infrastructure , and that greater emphasis must be placed on the recycling of organic waste , particularly in this markedly agricultural region .
We understand the Commission 's reasons , but the waste crisis in Campania will not be solved by imposing financial penalties and nor will it be solved by suspending the payment of EUR 135 million in contributions for the period 2006-2013 , plus a further EUR 10.5 million for the period 2000-2006 , which was intended for the funding of waste-related projects .

The solution to the crisis lies instead in the healthy renewal of the political and operational situation .
The new regional government , which was only installed in June last year , has unfortunately inherited 15 years of neglect and delays .
Even so , it has already launched an integrated waste collection and disposal plan , which also includes putting the necessary facilities in place and reaching agreements with five regions of Italy for the temporary transfer of waste until the plan becomes fully operational .
Future action to be taken must focus on transparency and dialogue between the people and the local authorities , on making citizens accept responsibility for the disposal of domestic waste , and also on better use of organic waste .
I hope the Commission will appreciate the willingness and commitment of the new regional government and will soon see fit to release the European funding intended for this region so as to encourage its growth , subject of course to proper , rigorous controls and compliance with EU legislation .
Whereas the vote on the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment was rather technical , the vote on the motion for a resolution concerning the waste crisis in Campania is eminently political .
In rejecting the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which would have distorted the text , Parliament has voted by a majority for Italy to comply with the European rules on waste treatment .
In this joint motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , we call on Italy to take immediate action to comply with the rules , and this means combating the involvement of organised crime in an area that is regarded as a very lucrative market .
The health and environmental situation in that region is already very alarming .
Hence we believe that European funds should not be released until something is done to improve the situation .
It is unthinkable to see the development of a Europe of ever stricter health and environmental rules on the one hand , and of areas exempt from all legislation on the other .
During the last part-session in Strasbourg , the Commission took the floor in the debate in response to the oral questions from the House on the waste crisis in Campania .
I was pleased with the exchange of views with the European Commissioner for the Environment , Mr Potočnik , who showed particular sensitivity over the case of Campania .
The impact of the waste crisis on the tourism sector is extremely bad , as shown by alarming figures recently published by the tourism organisations .
The situation has damaged not only the transport companies but also small and medium-sized businesses and the hotel and catering facilities in the region .
The impact on employment in the sector is liable to get even worse if appropriate action is not taken urgently .
The Italian authorities have already provided the Commission with a plan to restore legality .
The policies currently being implemented are aimed not only at cleaning up the regional capital but , above all , at organising an integrated waste system involving separate collection , a reduction in the waste produced , the construction of modern facilities and the restoration of former landfill sites .
I am looking forward to a swift and definitive solution to the problem of waste disposal so as to protect both Italy 's image and the tourist economy .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the waste crisis in Campania .
Compliance with EU law on waste in Campania calls for very energetic efforts to cut the volume of waste and tip the balance towards waste prevention , reduction , re-use and recycling .
More emphasis must be placed on the recovery of organic waste , particularly in this largely agricultural region .
Furthermore , it is recommended that the data should be verified and that a system of exchanges of best practice be established .
The European Parliament considers that the exceptional measures employed over long periods by the Italian authorities , including the appointment of special commissioners or the designation of waste sites as being of ' strategic interest ' under army control , have been counterproductive .
It calls , therefore , for much greater transparency on the part of the various authorities responsible .
Furthermore , it is important to rebuild trust by means of structured dialogue between the public and the various authorities involved and between the various levels of government .
Waste management has recently represented a problematic issue in many regions of Italy and , in particular , in the region of Campania .
It is essential to ensure that waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment .
There is an urgent need to identify a sustainable solution through the application of a waste management plan .
It is important to reduce the volume of waste and tip the balance towards waste prevention , reduction , re-use and recycling .
I call for the recovery of organic waste to be given greater emphasis , particularly in this largely agricultural region , for data to be verified , and for a system for exchanging best practices to be established .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the waste crisis in Campania since it underlines the importance of this issue in environmental terms , particularly with regard to the protection of Natura 2000 sites .
It is necessary to find a sustainable solution to the waste crisis in the province of Campania , the most complex situation of all the episodes of problematic waste management in Italian regions .
It is necessary for the EU criteria to be met , in particular the implementation of a waste management plan in accordance with Directive 2008 / 98 / EC .
There is an urgent need to make an effort to reduce the volume of waste and tip the balance towards the prevention , reduction , re-use and recycling of waste by providing adequate infrastructures .
The fulfilling of the acquis communautaire and the last two decisions of the Court of Justice by the Italian authorities is fundamental at all levels .
The European Union has taken on the role of setting an example in the fight against climate change and in promoting environmental quality .
It is well known that efforts need to be redoubled in the area of the proper collection and treatment of waste , in order to improve quality of life and economic development by managing and disposing of it better .
It is in this context that I support measures that will incentivise environmental best practices in the problematic region of Campania , in Italy .
I would stress that the local risks , in terms of harmful effects , resulting from the inadequate treatment and storage of waste will certainly have repercussions on the public 's quality of life .
Public awareness needs to be raised and mobilised regarding proper waste management as a decisive factor in protecting the environment and promoting the quality of life of both current generations and future ones .
However , the efforts and ability of local authorities need to be acknowledged : they took extraordinary measures during the last urban waste crisis , in autumn 2010 , in order to comply with the 4 March 2010 judgment of the Court of Justice of the European Union .
As part of the urgency to find a solution to the problem of the waste crisis in Campania , Italy , the approved document refers to the need to ' tip the balance towards the prevention , reduction and re-use and recycling of waste ' .
Something that the waste crisis in Campania does demonstrate is the danger of submitting environmental management - in its many aspects - to the simple logic of profit .
Given its nature and hazards , its obvious and close links with pressing public health and environmental issues , the question of waste is paradigmatic in that its management has to be ensured by efficient , high-quality public services , since it is not acceptable to leave it to market dynamics .
The indignation of the population , which has been vividly demonstrated , is entirely understandable in this case .
We must express serious concerns about the incrimination of citizens who demonstrated peacefully and also about the violence inflicted on them by the security forces .
I am truly appalled at the behaviour of Members of the Italian left .
Today 's vote is yet another demonstration of how the Italian left , although now a mere shadow of itself , tries to denigrate Italy in Europe in order to attack the Berlusconi Government .
Our 17 amendments , in fact , were aimed at softening some of the points made in this motion for a resolution , which was too hard on Italy without , amongst other things , taking into account a whole series of determining factors in the development of this crisis situation or the efforts made in recent months by the national and regional governments to resolve the crisis once and for all .
The resolution explicitly mentions and criticises measures introduced by the current government , but forgets that the current Mayor of Naples , Mrs Iervolino , belongs to the centre-left and , worse still , forgets the long reign of Mr Bassolino , who was Mayor of Naples from 1993 to 2000 and Governor of Campania from 2000 to 2010 , as well as special commissioner for the waste crisis for many years .
I also regret the fact that some Members from the centre-right of other countries have not understood the hidden agenda behind this resolution and have been led along by it .
We will remember that when we are called on to display group solidarity on matters of their interest on which they hold positions that are far less defensible than in this case involving Italy .
The motion for a resolution tabled by the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group is aimed at ensuring that the authorities of the Campania Region are held responsible for their actions .
The waste cycle and its attendant problems are the responsibility of the local authorities , in accordance with current legislation .
The document has my full support , insofar as it is a stand against those who are trying to blame others for their own negligence .
The image of Naples swamped by rubbish has spread around the world .
Everyone , therefore , knows the extent of the problem .
The tone used in the resolution , however , is unacceptable and tramples on the principle of subsidiarity , particularly since Commissioner Potočnik said that there is no case for imposing further penalties on Italy .
The Italian left has made the same mistake again and voted against Italy , manipulating Parliament for its own political ends .
That is unacceptable .
It is a real insult to Italy .
This attitude of theirs has fooled many Members from other countries who cannot even conceive of anyone going against their own country .
It is a paradox that the same left that governed the region of Campania for decades and is still governing the city of Naples , with absolute contempt for the whole community of Campania , should be teaching lessons and attacking those who are labouring to find solutions to this terrible situation .
That is why , with support from our colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , we have voted against this factious , politicised and aggressive resolution .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the joint resolution on Campania , which calls on the Italian Government to treat the matter of the waste crisis in the region with the urgency and seriousness that it deserves .
Unfortunately , the Commission had no other option but to withhold EU structural funds intended for Campania , funds which will only be released once the waste management plan for Campania becomes compliant and consistent with EU law .
Parliament has also called on the Italian authorities to examine and remove ' the 7 million tonnes of " Ecobales ” which have accumulated into stockpiles and to tackle the " illegal dumping of mixed and unidentified waste ” in the region . '
At this time , it is imperative that we do not underestimate the legitimate concerns and complaints of the people of the region .
Today 's vote was strongly opposed by Italy and by the majority of the representatives of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , who supported the fight against the joint motion for a resolution on the waste crisis in Campania tabled by the left-wing groups .
We have been forced to witness the exploitation of the crisis on the basis of a subjective document that contains false information and whose chief aim is to conceal the efforts made by the national government and the local authorities , which have been faced with an unpleasant situation due to the way in which the region was misgoverned in previous years .
The document tabled in plenary omits extremely important information , such as the ongoing talks between the government authorities and the European Commission , which in the space of a few months has been presented with no fewer than three draft adjustment and intervention plans .
A great deal has already been done , and huge efforts will continue to be made to ensure that the people of Naples and the whole of Campania can once again enjoy the right to a healthy environment and a decent quality of life .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution , which highlights not just the environmental consequences but the importance of tackling corruption .
I join those who call on the Italian authorities to fully implement EU law .
The waste crisis in Campania and other regions of Italy clearly shows the dangers of entrusting environmental management to private companies , whose sole objective is profit .
It is also an example of a case where the government acted in defence of private interests and not of the collective good .
The European institutions were silent accomplices of this attack on the people and on the ecosystem .
Therefore , I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , in the hope that this time , the Italian Government under Mr Berlusconi will comply with European legislation in this area and therefore look after the public interest .
The waste crisis afflicting Campania and other regions of Italy illustrates the danger of having our environment managed by companies that are driven solely by profit .
This is even more true when those companies are aided by governments that protect their interests .
The underworld , contemptible as it is , is profiting from the loopholes created by this system without anyone standing in its way .
Meanwhile , it is the people and our entire ecosystem that are paying the price for the Eurocrats ' complicit silence .
The waste crisis in Campania has been unsustainable for a number of years and goes against the rules adopted by all EU Member States .
It is therefore necessary to quickly implement a waste management plan under which , in accordance with Directive 2008 / 98 / EC , respect for the waste cycle hierarchy is fundamental .
The European Parliament must be kept informed of how the situation develops , especially regarding the implementation of a waste management plan , pursuant to the 4 March 2010 judgment of the Court of Justice of the European Union and to EU legislation .
in writing.- ( HU ) The waste crisis afflicting the province of Campania has caused serious problems in Italy recently .
Consequently , the observation of EU legislation on waste management must be strictly enforced in the region .
I believe it is regrettable that the authorities have taken violent action against people peacefully demonstrating against the opening of new landfills .
The Italian authorities must ensure that all the necessary measures are taken to guarantee that waste is properly collected , separated and treated .
In my opinion it is not taxpayers who should pay for cleaning the polluted area but , applying the principle of the ' polluter pays ' , those who caused the pollution .
However , a sustainable solution to the problem can only be found through the active involvement of citizens in the entire process .
I oppose , however , politicising the matter and using it as an excuse to attack the Italian Government .
I voted for this motion for a resolution because I agree that a solution should be decided on urgently that is sustainable and respects EU rules , with the application of a waste management plan under which respect for the waste cycle hierarchy is fundamental .
As a member of the Committee on Petitions , I have dealt with numerous petitions on the waste crisis and the counterproductive measures employed by the Italian authorities .
I am pleased that Parliament has adopted this resolution which , as well as being an important step towards solving the specific problem in Italy , is a mechanism for strengthening European legislation and preventing similar controversies in the future .
I welcome the regret expressed in the resolution at the Italian authorities ' treatment of their citizens who made use of their rights to demonstrate peacefully , with violence even being employed in some cases .
I also believe that the call on the Commission to amend the necessary directives in order to ban the locating of landfills in protected natural areas , natural parks , Natura 2000 sites and United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organisation heritage areas , or the expansion of existing ones into such areas , is of great benefit .
in writing . - I abstained on the resolution .
I would like to add that this is not a political but a technical issue .
It is strange that Members of European Parliament have to make an appeal for solving purely household issues .
If the trend continues in the same way , then it is possible that the EU will call on the public to stop swearing , smoking , drinking , sunbathing , eating unhealthy food and sleeping for a long time .
The fire brigade will be asked to extinguish fires faster ; medical personnel will be asked to treat people more attentively ; policemen will be asked to arrest criminals more effectively and teachers to teach children better .
If we carry on making such calls , the citizens of the EU will wonder why they need the European Parliament - to ask citizens to do things ?
Or there are real problems to be solved ?
The waste crisis in Italy , and particularly in the province of Campania , has been going on for years .
No effort is being made to reduce the amount of rubbish being generated or to ensure that the waste which is produced is disposed of properly or even recycled .
Huge mountains of rubbish have built up which are disposed of illegally , for example in the sea , giving rise to negative headlines .
Investigators recently discovered that untreated household waste has been tipped into the Mediterranean all around Naples .
I have not voted in favour of the motion for a resolution , because in my opinion it is primarily a statement of opposition to the right-wing government and does not take an unbiased approach to the problem .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the waste crisis in Campania , long-standing problem that it is , because I do not believe that the responsibility for the current situation can be attributed to one government alone .
It is disgraceful that no definitive solution has managed to be found to this issue .
I call for the political differences and animosity that are preventing the people of Campania from breathing clean air and eating wholesome food without constant threats to their health to be put aside .
The problem must be resolved , and exploiting the matter for media and political purposes will only make what has long been an unbearable situation even worse .
The priority of the citizens , small and medium-sized tourism enterprises and consumers of Campanian products is not to work out who is responsible for the situation that has been created , but to make sure that it has been resolved .
I therefore endorse the resolution on the waste crisis in Campania tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , and I support the request made to the Commission to release the European funds set aside to help manage and dispose of the waste , which were frozen following the launch of the infringement procedure against Italy .
At the same time , I hope that Italy will finally be in position to adopt long-term strategic measures in line with European legislation , for the good of the people , first and foremost , but also for the country 's reputation throughout the world .
Yet again , unfortunately , the European Parliament has been used as a sounding board for national issues .
Those professional manipulators , the Italian and European left , have launched an attack on Italy by means of a motion for a resolution full of lies and propaganda about the waste situation in Campania .
The serious situation prevailing in Campania today because of the waste problem is due to three very specific names : Bassolino , Prodi and Iervolino .
Today , here in Europe , the Italian left is trying to hide their 15 years of utter misgovernment , which led to the disaster we are witnessing , by manipulating the European institutions so as to shift their responsibility onto the centre-right national and regional governments , which are working hard to remedy their failures and misconduct .
On 4 March 2010 , the judgment in Court of Justice of the European Union ( CJEU ) Case C-297 / 08 was that Italy had infringed EU legislation by failing to have created an integrated and adequate network of waste disposal facilities in Campania , so as to ensure the recovery and disposal of waste , without human health being put at risk and without harming the environment This motion for a resolution is motivated by the fact that Italy has still not adopted the measures necessary for compliance with the CJEU 's judgment , and I voted in favour because I agree with the arguments of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this report because the progress made so far on waste management has been minimal .
This is why I call on the Italian Government to comply with EU regulations and the deadlines set by the Commission .
The latter should monitor closely this action and , if appropriate , impose sanctions in order to ensure that the local authorities in Campania comply with EU waste management provisions .
The structural funds , currently blocked by the Commission , must be released as soon as a regional strategy has been submitted , compliant with EU legislation , as well as a reliable waste management plan .
With regard to the location of new waste collection points / landfills , tighter controls must be applied to prevent sites opening up in protected areas , as in the case of those built inside the Vesuvius National Park ( the Terzigno landfill ) .
I wish to stress the need to restore ordinary citizens ' trust through dialogue with the local population because the public protests which have been held so far at a number of waste sites have not been taken seriously by the Italian authorities .
In recent years , the Italian region of Campania has been struggling with serious problems in terms of collecting and disposing of waste , which are having a grave effect on the wellbeing of the local population , and are leading to serious risks to the environment and to public health .
It is therefore essential , following the 14 May 2010 judgment of the Court of Justice of the European Union , for the Italian authorities to adopt the measures necessary to definitively and satisfactorily resolve the waste management crises in this region , whilst ensuring full compliance with EU law .
Despite the citizens ' protests , there has been no development in the dreadful waste management situation in Campania - in fact , there has been hardly any progress at all in my view .
Given the scale of the current crisis , I urge the Italian authorities to work towards finding a real solution to the situation , in accordance with the European rules in force .
As for the decision to open landfills in pr