Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 1 February 2001 .
Agenda
The next item is the final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 8 February , pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure .
I have received no requests for amendments to the agenda for Monday , Tuesday or Wednesday ; however , Mr McMillan-Scott has asked to be allowed to speak .
Madam President , I refer to the draft regulation on European political parties .
At the last part-session in Strasbourg the Commission was going to give us a statement on that matter .
Subsequently , it was withdrawn and I understand that the Commission has now come to a view on the funding of European political parties .
This is a matter of some sensitivity , especially since there are certain parties represented in this House that might regard themselves , for some reason , as ineligible for such funding , even if they approved of the funding in the first place .
Could you ask the Commission if it would make a statement on this matter at some stage before the House ?
Secondly , Madam President , while we are on Tuesday 's agenda , it is worrying to me that the European Parliament is holding a debate on the Commission 's work programme for 2001 but does not have a resolution on that matter .
This is especially important since there are some 200 measures contained in the Commission 's work programme for 2001 which Parliament will debate , but on which it will have no resolution .
This is a bad precedent .
There should be a resolution , especially since we are supposed to be scrutinising the work of the Commission .
Finally , could I make the observation that far from being the Commission 's work programme for 2001 , we might rename it the work programme of the Commission , Parliament and Council .
Mr McMillan-Scott , the reason that there is no resolution tabled is because the Conference of Presidents believed that there are no grounds for one .
Madam President , I may be mistaken but I understood that the intention was indeed to have a resolution .
But first we should refer the work programme to the relevant parliamentary committees to assess it , and should then bring forward a considered resolution with the committees responsible for the various areas adding their views .
That is my understanding : there will be a resolution , but not immediately .
Madam President , this is not just a matter of Mr Cox understanding what was agreed .
In line with the fact that there is a political programme for legislature , which began belatedly last year , the Commission has presented a programme for this year and the measures appear in the annex , which do not number 200 but 485 , according to my group 's counting ; 205 are legislative and the others are not , and of those there is a substantial number which is carried over , since they were not implemented last year .
Therefore , it is not sensible for us to table a resolution in which all these extremes are included ; the procedure which we have agreed is that the relevant committees will examine the resolution in detail and , all things being equal , in April we could vote on this in full knowledge of the facts .
In relation to extending this programme to the Council , that may be an interesting suggestion for the future ; but the interested parties at the moment are the Commission and Parliament .
Thank you , Mr Barón Crespo .
That , then , is the way we shall proceed .
Mr McMillan-Scott , as regards your second question , the Commission is not due to make a statement on political party funding during this part-session .
If you would like to include this item on the agenda , we could ask the Commission to make a statement on Thursday evening , for example , if you agree .
Madam President , thank you for that very helpful suggestion .
Not many of us will be here on Thursday evening , unfortunately .
It might be helpful if the Commission could take this on board and tomorrow morning , in the statement it makes on the Commission 's work programme for 2001 - or the Commission and Parliament 's work programme , as I like to call it - make such a statement in public .
Relating to Thursday :
President .
I have received a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists to withdraw from the agenda the oral question to the Commission , tabled on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , regarding the Stability Plans in Ireland and France .
Madam President , we are presenting this request for two reasons : one parliamentary and one political .
The parliamentary reason relates to the work of the committees in this Parliament .
At the moment , the examination of all the stability and coordination plans and the substantial improvement of the broad guidelines for economic policy is being studied by this Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which intends , if I am not mistaken , to present its report to Parliament in April .
This issue therefore interferes with the activity of this Parliament .
Secondly , there is a political reason .
The question tabled by the PPE was included in the Conference of Presidents dealing with Ireland .
It emerged at the Conference of Presidents including France .
If we add , in the crossfire of relations , parties which run governments , parties which are in opposition , and if we add all the desires of this House , on Thursday we are going to hold a debate , at a rather unfortunate time , on the 15 Member States .
Please have no doubt about that .
Therefore , we believe that the best thing would be for Parliament to obey its rules and to work in accordance with the method which it has conferred upon itself .
Madam President , it is quite understandable that Mr Barón Crespo , for whom I have great respect , should now want to amend a decision made by the Conference of Presidents .
That is totally legitimate and I would do the same on another issue .
However , I hope that he does not obtain a majority , because in this case we are not talking about an infringement of parliamentary procedures , we simply want some information from the Commission .
This does not adversely affect the normal working procedures in the relevant committee in any way .
But right now we require some information from the Commission .
Furthermore , deliberations in the Council of Ministers are continuing , and why should we not have an in-depth debate on this issue , given that we will not , after all , be making any decision ? That is the point I would like everyone opposing this question to consider .
We will , after all , not be adopting a resolution , but receiving information .
What is more , and Mr Barón Crespo is very well aware of this , this was discussed in the Conference of Presidents .
Mr Wurtz contributed some ideas - and I have to say that Mr Wurtz 's group and my own do not form a permanent coalition - but when we do share the same position on something , why should we not then act accordingly ?
We do not wish to exclude anyone , so I would therefore request that we should leave this oral question on the agenda , so that we can duly discuss this here .
Madam President , I want to put a question on the issue of our order of business , so I am not expressing a view for or against .
This is the question - both parliamentary and political - but for a different reason , to the President of the Socialist Group .
If the Commission is setting a precedent and , more to the point , if the Council sets a precedent this week , should we not be told , at the earliest date and when the House is as full as possible , of the precedent and the response of the House .
Is it really ideal , if we are setting precedents , that the European Parliament should contemplate a debate at 5.30 p.m. on a Thursday , which if it is anything like the 5.30 p.m. debate I attended on the Thursday of the January part-session , is not to be recommended as a time for setting precedents .

So , Madam President , can we invite the Commission and indeed the Council to express themselves in this House earlier in the week , so that we can treat this properly ?
My fear is that Thursday evening is not the optimum time to try to do it .
Madam President , I would very much like to say that Mr Poettering ' s comments about myself could be rather misleading .
I would , therefore , like to clarify matters .
I do not understand what underlying motives Mr Poettering or Mr von Wogau have in submitting this request .
I myself shall raise another issue . I believe that it is basically the right time to hold this debate , as it is the first time that the Commission will use the instrument bestowed upon it by the Treaties to send a recommendation , a sort of political sanction , to a Member State by referring to the requirements set out in the Stability and Growth Pact .
In other words , we are criticising Ireland extremely severely and France slightly less severely for having used some of the fruits of their growth to tackle social issues more , and even too much .
I believe that this is a political issue that warrants discussion .
Basically , we did not insist on a resolution at the close of this debate , so that the relevant bodies set up for this purpose could then be left to do what they have to do , but I do believe that a frank exchange of views on this issue is needed at this time .
I have some information for Mr Cox .
The Commissioner in charge , Mr Solbes Mira , has made himself available so that he can be present on Thursday afternoon at 5.30 p.m. in Strasbourg .
I do not doubt for a moment that Members will also make sure they are present , should the question be upheld , of course .
I shall now give Mrs Randzio-Plath the floor as the Rules of Procedure state that we must hear another speaker against the speaker of the group who tabled the request , and then we shall take the vote .
Madam President , as committee Chair I do not simply wish to point out that we actually have a report which enables us to carry out a careful analysis of the stability and convergence programmes ; this work is not only very substantial but also needs to be done very conscientiously , because what is really at stake is whether we as Member States of the European Union adhere to the Maastricht criteria , both before joining the single currency and , above all , after doing so , as there are already 12 Member States in the eurozone now .
This is an extremely demanding process , which really calls for very careful political judgment .
That is why , Mr Poettering , we do indeed need to have all the information , but the information that we receive is chiefly contained in written reports , and I believe that this House would be well advised to entrust this work to the relevant specialist committee in the first place .
I would like to recall the difficulties we had in agreeing the Stability and Growth Pact here at all , and that there was a big question mark hanging over whether investment in education should be added to the budget deficit .
At that point , this was questioned not only by Members of the PSE Group , but also by Members of the PPE-DE Group .
That is why I really urge that we should on no account hold a debate , which will happen of necessity if the question remains on the agenda , but that this should instead be done in committee .
Mr Solbes can help us in the committee , we can deliberate on this matter and that will allow us to reach a balanced and appropriate decision in the plenary session on the basis of the report by our rapporteur .
I shall now put to the vote the request to withdraw this item from the agenda .
( Parliament rejected the request )
The agendas for the current part-session and the following part-session at Brussels are thus adopted and we can now , therefore , begin to discuss the procedural motions .
Madam President , I would like to bring a matter to the Members ' attention which gave rise to considerable debate when the agenda was being drawn up .
The PPE-DE Group and certain other groups requested that the subject of euthanasia should be debated this week .
Unfortunately , the Conference of Presidents rejected this request .
However , we have refrained from requesting an amendment to the agenda , as we have been informed that some groups are in favour of debating this subject in the European Parliament in principle , but perhaps at some other time .
We would therefore like to enter into a dialogue with these other groups , because we are not against debate and discussions , we actually want a debate .
However , we are very disappointed that the Dutch minister , Mrs Borst , has not agreed to take part in these discussions and has refused an invitation to hearings .
Nevertheless , that should not stop us from entering into a dialogue with the other groups and perhaps requesting that this should go on the agenda in March .
I simply wanted to make this point clear , because so many questions have been discussed in this area .
Madam President , I just wanted to respond to the insinuation from Mr Liese that Mrs Borst does not want to enter into a discussion about euthanasia .
That is completely untrue .
The Dutch Government and , for that matter , all my Dutch colleagues here are willing to enter into an open , honest debate about the facts at any time , but not about insinuations and remarks that are rather near the knuckle .
We will give you the information .
I also understand that the Dutch Government is willing to receive all Members of the European Parliament who should like to obtain information or should like to enter into a discussion in order to discuss matters in the Netherlands , but Mrs Borst 's agenda unfortunately does not permit her to be here this week .
Madam President , I should like to dispute the fact that Mr Liese , whom we all know , would insinuate something .
A hearing has indeed been organised by a number of groups and , also in line with the wishes of a number of groups , Mrs Borst was invited to explain the precise legal situation .
If Mrs Borst cannot accept an invitation then naturally you must see whether she can come another time .
Then there is no question of insinuations .
In any case , I think it is extremely useful and necessary that the Dutch minister for health comes to provide clarification here before the Members of the European Parliament as well , because in our group , and in other groups too , there is exceptionally sincere concern about the Dutch euthanasia legislation concerned .
Madam President , I should like to say that I thought it was sensible of the Group of the Europe People 's Party not to speak about the complex and difficult and heavily laden issue of euthanasia this coming Thursday as an urgent matter .
In my country , in the Netherlands , we have had a societal discussion for about 20 years , a very good , societal and balanced discussion and , of course , we can never come to a conclusion on a Thursday afternoon in such a small debate , with one minute of allotted speaking time .
I think that when it comes to these matters we ...
And there is another thing .
We are always talking about subsidiarity here in this House .
An issue of national criminal law is under discussion here , which has been decided by the Dutch Parliament .
I think that we must keep a close eye on the term subsidiarity here in this House , too .
Madam President , like Mr Wiebenga , I am amazed that the Christian Democrat / Conservative Group thinks that euthanasia laws in Member States are an appropriate matter to raise at European level .
In the United Kingdom , Conservatives have been very quick to condemn European human rights guarantees as an outrageous interference in national affairs and as a breach of subsidiarity .
We will no doubt hear a great deal from them on that theme in the next few weeks and months in the run-up to a British general election .
It is quite extraordinary that they have supported raising the matter of euthanasia in a Member State at European level , and I note this for the forthcoming election campaign .
Madam President , this issue has everything to do with subsidiarity , it has been said .
It is indeed up to countries themselves to pass laws . But the question here is whether the Euthanasia Act conflicts with European and international Treaties .
This is a serious concern that we have and it is our responsibility to discuss this issue as well as the cross-border effects that it has .
So , apart from the subsidiarity which each of us respects , it is about that .
Anyway , I can read to Mrs van der Laan what Mrs Borst has written back to Mr Liese because I have a copy .
She writes that she seriously considered coming but her conclusion is that it would not be the right decision for the minister for public health to come and speak to us . That surprised us .
It surprised us that she does not think that Parliament is the right place to discuss this issue .
Madam President , I am amazed that an honourable Member should describe euthanasia as a matter for national criminal jurisdiction covered by subsidiarity .
We are , of course , all very proud and gratified that the death penalty does not exist in a single Member State of the European Union , because the sanctity of human life is something that should unite us all .
Madam President , very briefly in reply to Baroness Ludford 's speech on the question of whether or not there should be a debate on euthanasia , I think it is entirely proper that Parliament should debate euthanasia .
I would personally recommend that there be no vote at the end of such a debate , and indeed my own delegation would expect a free vote because it is a matter of conscience .
Just for the record , I wish to make it clear that my delegation has taken no position on this matter in the EPP Group .
Mind you , Baroness Ludford 's speech suggests to me that there might be some form of political euthanasia which I would support .
Madam President , it is obvious that we all face questions of life and death which we are also possibly confronted with in our personal life and in our family , that we wrestle with the question of what a dignified death is , what society 's responsibility is .
So at the very least we should have the courage to respect each other : both parties with their different opinions base these on ethical principles .
There is not one party here that has the exclusive right to ethical principles and nor is there one party which can address the other , the Liberals , the Greens and the Socialists , under the heading of human rights violations .
If we want to have a serious debate , an open debate - and that is what we want - then it is unrelated to subsidiarity because that is a separate issue .
With regard to content , it is a matter of showing respect for something which involves everyone very deeply .
The facts as they were presented by the PPE-DE Group in recent weeks , the tone in which they were presented and the heading under which they were described , i.e. human rights violations , have certainly not promoted this respect .
It is a false start .
If Mr Liese wants to organise a debate he can , but then he must not do so from one position , he must invite people to conduct a public debate together .
We are willing to do so , but not to take part in a vulgar party-political attack on something that is of great importance in Dutch and Belgian society and which is treated very fundamentally as such with different views , with respect for each other 's position but in a manner in which you could say that the whole of society has proceeded very carefully .
So I should also like to enter into this debate with Members who hold a different opinion to mine .
I was not intending to take the floor , but having heard many of the Dutch Members give their opinion on the problem of euthanasia , I should like to make a brief point as , at the Conference of Presidents , I spoke on behalf of my group to oppose the debate . This is not because I am against a debate on euthanasia - and my group is certainly not opposed to a debate on this - but we did not believe that it was a good idea to hold such a debate under the urgent procedure , and to rush through it , not to mention the risk of interfering in a national debate .
We are in favour of a debate , but a debate that is well-organised and which gives us the opportunity to hear from a wide range of moral authorities as well as experts , since we believe that this is a crucial ethical debate .
I also believe that the debate is taking place in other European Union Member States as well as in the Netherlands .
It takes a great deal of time and it has not yet been resolved , following sometimes several months of discussions .
In conclusion , we believe that if such a debate is to be held in Parliament , it must be organised in a serious and efficient manner .
Madam President , first of all I fully support the debate on euthanasia in this Parliament . But I would like to take the opportunity to inform you of the very deep concern among many of my constituents in Ireland , that a European Commissioner , in partnership with a Swedish minister , spoke on behalf of the European Union in condemning the new American administration 's actions in ending funding to family planning organisations that provide abortion in less developed countries .
On a point of subsidiarity , we do not have legalised abortion in Ireland and we do not support the use of tax-payers ' money in providing abortions ; but neither does the European Union .
In fact , within this institution we have voted that abortion should never be used as a means of family planning and that it never should be funded for that purpose .
The Cairo Conference and the Beijing Women 's Conference both stated the same thing .
I would like to ask why a Commissioner would presume to speak in this manner in direct conflict with agreements that have already been signed and why she should presume to overstep subsidiarity in speaking on behalf of my country .
Madam President , since the plenary session held in Parliament a few weeks ago , the bodies of 12 immigrants from African countries have appeared on the Spanish coast , specifically in Andalusia .
This is a further occurrence of something that has been happening for some time , every week and every month , and young people and even pregnant women continue to die .
I could send you photos which have appeared in the Spanish press so that you could see how serious this situation , this tragedy , really is .
Years ago - and with this I shall end , Madam President - we in Europe believed very hypocritically that these unfortunate events only happened on the Rio Grande , which separates Mexico from the United States ; these days they are happening on the Spanish coast and nobody is doing anything about it .
I believe that this Parliament should put this issue to the Spanish Government and should acknowledge that this is a European problem .
It is unacceptable to turn a blind eye to this grave problem .
Madam President , very briefly and in relation to Mr Nogueira 's speech , in which he rightly reminded this House of the human tragedy which is taking place on Spain 's southern frontier , with regard to which we all feel involved and profoundly moved , I would like to add that the Spanish Government , by means of its coastguard service , the Civil Guard helicopter service , civil defence units and every type of organisation , governmental and non-governmental , participates actively , continuously , permanently , often exhaustively , and endangering the safety and lives of those involved , in lifesaving and in attending to these shipwrecks .
Therefore , I would like to add to what Mr Nogueira has said by stressing that the Spanish authorities and Spanish society are doing everything within our power to deal with this terrible human problem .
Madam President , I have a message for you concerning my colleague Mrs Lucas .
She was arrested today at 9.30 a.m. while she was in Scotland taking part in a demonstration against a nuclear weapons base .
She said she was taking part because recently such weapons of mass destruction have on many occasions been deemed to be against international law .
It should not be able to happen that a Member of the European Parliament is arrested en route to a parliamentary sitting and we request that you take action in this matter .
In fact , a Member ' s immunity from arrest may only be waived after Parliament has debated the matter , and if that were to be the case now Parliament , for the first time , would have to discuss whether nuclear weapons are in violation of international law .
Mrs Hautala , I can assure you that we shall monitor Mrs Lucas ' situation very closely .
Madam President , I rise following Mrs Hautala 's statement about Mrs Lucas being imprisoned on her way to the part-session here today .
It seems strange to me that she was imprisoned on her way here because she represents the South East of England and was arrested five or six hundred miles further north .
Maybe , instead of telling the UK Government whom they can arrest and why , the parliamentary authorities could send her a map of the UK and some advice from our travel services as well .
Madam President , being consistent and on the same matter I wish to point out that the British Government is absolutely even-handed in its arrest policy .
It also arrested a couple of members of the House of Commons , a few members of the Scottish Executive and various others who were actually breaking the law , which is generally the reason you get arrested in the United Kingdom .
We were according equal rights to Euro-parliamentarians by arresting them along with all the others .
May they be kept locked up for a suitable period of time to deter them from being so stupid in the future !
Madam President , I protest against the rather intemperate remarks of Mr Balfe .
There is no power under Scottish law to keep people locked up just as long as it suits you .
The arrests that took place at Faslane today were in accordance with the law , and I do not doubt that the persons concerned will be speedily released .
It is very important that my colleague , Mrs Lucas , should have the opportunity in this House to raise the issue of whether her immunity extends to this case , given that there is serious doubt - already raised and tested in the Scottish courts - about the lawfulness of the nuclear weapons kept on Scottish soil .
Madam President , I know that this is not provided for in the rules , but I feel I have a moral duty , especially after Mr Balfe 's speech , to express my support with Mrs Lucas ' action .
Mrs Lucas may have done something illegal but I feel that there is a right to disobedience , especially since she was not just messing around but she had gone to protest against nuclear weapons , which are a hazard and a danger to us all .
I would like to thank Mrs Lucas and the other women who have been arrested and express my solidarity with them .
Madam President , first of all I should like to thank you very much because the aeroplane from Amsterdam to Strasbourg flew this morning and on time as well .
I think that your intervention with regard to the French Government was fantastic .
Thank you very much .
But I am taking the floor about another matter .
I put questions to the European Commission on 10 November about favouring public broadcasts regarding the auction of radio frequencies in the Netherlands .
Three months have passed since then . I have still not had a reply to these questions .
Now this is a very sensitive issue , so I understand that it is very difficult for Mr Monti to reply to it , but the auction is taking place this summer .
I should very much like an answer to these questions either this week or next week .
I have already informed the competent services of this but nothing has happened yet .
Perhaps you could do something for me .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , I would very much like to help you , but I am aware that the Commission has taken note of your comments , which should certainly bring about positive results .
Madam President , I should also like to say that the Portuguese Members who flew here today on the Lisbon-Frankfurt flight had to wait 45 minutes for a vehicle , sent from the Parliament in Strasbourg , to come and pick them up and then had to wait another forty minutes - together with our Italian colleagues , who were already there and who had been waiting for two hours - to be taken to Strasbourg .
It is totally unacceptable that Members of the European Parliament should travel less comfortably than chickens or pigs , which travel in accordance with European regulations .
Furthermore , I also wish to say that , according to the information given by Mr Moscovici to my head of delegation , there will be direct flights from Lisbon to Strasbourg starting in April , but according to information from Air France itself in Lisbon , this is not the case .
I should like to ask who is the higher flier , a member of the French Government or the French national airline ?
We shall look into this matter very carefully .
Madam President , while we are thanking Air France for the fact that the aircraft flew between Amsterdam and Strasbourg , I would point out that this was probably because the flight between Copenhagen and Strasbourg was cancelled .
On this occasion , it was therefore a case of one man ' s loss being another man ' s gain .
I would also ask you to consider the possibility that Air France might not have enough aircraft , given that the cancellation was due to technical reasons .
I think I can safely inform you that there will be some tangible improvements over the next few weeks .
Madam President , I should very briefly like to welcome a new Member of the European Parliament , Yiannis Patakis , who comes from the same town as I do . May I join everyone else in welcoming him and wishing him every success in his work .
Please join me in welcoming Mr Patakis .
Madam President , I would be grateful for your attention .
There are 30 people sitting up here .
But if someone on this side asks for the floor , it is rare that any notice is taken .
Mrs Flemming asked to speak right at the beginning .
I would simply like to ask you to look at the right-hand side of the House as well when requests to speak are being made .
Mrs Schleicher , we take note of requests from all sides of the Chamber .
You may be unaware that procedural motions are now tabled after the agenda has been adopted .
I think I am right in saying that this rule was received very favourably .
It is something that many Members had requested and when I proposed it , I believe that it met with the approval of the majority of the House .
Procedural motions , therefore , are now tabled after the agenda has been adopted and this is what we are currently doing .
Furthermore , it has not escaped your notice that few of the speeches were genuine procedural motions . However , as I am unable to determine this before we begin , I must allow Members to speak freely .
Madam President , I should like to inform both you and the House that a group representing the relatives of people who disappeared without trace in Cyprus visited Brussels last week .
They met the political groups and raised the question of their lost relatives for the umpteenth time , but purely from a humanitarian point of view .
Twenty-seven years after 1974 , there is still a huge number of cases - over 1000 - of people whose fate is still unknown .
Their relatives have every right to know what became of their loved ones .
Efforts to find out , including under the auspices of the United Nations Organisation , have proven futile and I should like to raise the question of the European Parliament 's possibly doing something to help .
Madam President , would you , as President of our Parliament , consider sending a message of congratulations to Ellen MacArthur , my constituent from Derbyshire who came second in the round the world yacht race ?
I know that the race was won by a compatriot of yours - a Frenchman .
He was gallant and kind in his congratulations .
If you , on our behalf , could congratulate them both , I and many others would be very grateful .
Request for waiver of Mr Ribeiro e Castro 's immunity
The next item is the report ( A5-0038 / 2001 ) by Mr Zimeray , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the request for the waiver of Mr Ribeiro e Castro ' s immunity .
, deputising for the rapporteur .
( ES ) Madam President , Mr Ribeiro e Castro has been accused of involvement in a crime of slander , a crime punishable under the Portuguese Penal Code of 1982 and under Law No 58 of 1990 .
The origin of this case is a report on the commercial practices of a private employment agency , broadcast on 16 February 1995 by TVI , Televisão Independente S.A. , of which Mr Ribeiro e Castro is director of programmes .
During the programme it was stated that the employment agency did not offer serious jobs and charged excessive commissions for searching for jobs , which , furthermore , were very unpromising .
The agency brought proceedings against Mr Ribeiro e Castro , and against other employees of TVI , seeking compensation for the damage done to its reputation .
Parliamentary immunity is not a privilege designed to benefit individual Members of the European Parliament , but a guarantee of the independence of Parliament and its Members with regard to other powers .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market considers that the waiver of parliamentary immunity by the Member does not have legal effects .

The alleged offence took place in February 1995 , the request was made in May 2000 and the mandate of Mr Ribeiro e Castro did not begin until 17 November 1999 , when he succeeded Mr Paolo Portas .
Much time has elapsed between the alleged offence and the request being presented ; this is an offence which affects freedom of expression , in relation to which this Parliament has always recognised immunity , and the fact that Mr Ribeiro e Castro has asked for a waiver of his immunity does not affect this decision .
Consequently , the Committee on Legal Affairs , in accordance with Rules 6 ( 4 ) and 6 ( 6 ) of the Rules of Procedure , having examined the reasons for and against the waiver of immunity , recommends that the European Parliament does not waive the immunity of Mr Ribeiro e Castro .

Mr President , I am surprised that Members can joke or argue about the fact that a Member of Parliament has been arrested on European Union soil .
It would appear to be a very serious incident which , moreover , is linked precisely to matters we have been discussing for some time in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .


To get to the point , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market proposes not to waive the parliamentary immunity of Mr Ribeiro e Castro .

This proposal - and this is what I would like Members to consider - is based on the contents of the Treaties and on certain well-established principles .
Firstly , immunity is a guarantee of the independence of the European Parliament and its Members in relation to all other authorities ; secondly , relinquishment of parliamentary immunity by the Member concerned has no legal effect ; thirdly , immunity is valid throughout all sessions , including while Members are travelling to and from the place of meeting of the European Parliament ; fourthly , the immunity of Members of the European Parliament is independent of national parliamentary procedures , even if the law of the State of origin is applied ; fifthly , the political aspect of the case , the possibility of fumus persecutionis , any political motives behind the request for waiver , the amount of time that has elapsed between the alleged facts and the request for waiver and the seriousness of the charge are always taken into consideration ; sixthly , sometimes the punishment for the alleged facts differs from State to State ; seventhly , the aim is certainly to ensure equal treatment for all Members of different nationalities .

On the basis of these principles , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market calls upon the House to adopt the Zimeray report .
However , Mr President , I must take this opportunity to stress two points , which , I repeat , it is the duty of Parliament and all its Members to consider fully .
The provisions of Articles 9 and 10 refer to the beginning of the European Community , when the Members of this Parliament were members of national parliaments , and , in that context , the reference to national immunities is clear .
However , we have to be aware that , nowadays , the European Parliament plays a major role in the balance between the institutions , and I feel that it is extremely important to make the European Parliament fully independent of the Member States .
Parliament must always be informed of any proceedings to be initiated against its Members , and if the judicial authority of the place where the alleged facts have taken place does not inform Parliament then it is the responsibility of the Members to do so directly , for it is Parliament which has to decide which provisions should apply , as , moreover , is the case in some European countries .
Mr President , I trust that I shall not have to apply for political asylum in a country which is not my own at any point in the future , but , above all , I feel that the statement delivered in the Chamber on the Member who has been arrested in Scotland should be deemed to be clear notification by a competent authority .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Safe loading and unloading of bulk carriers
The next item is the report A5 ­ 0037 / 2001 by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive establishing requirements and harmonised procedures for the safe loading and unloading of bulk carriers [ COM ( 2000 ) 179 - C5 ­ 0254 / 2000 - 2000 / 0121 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , the sinking of the oil tanker Erika off the French coast approximately one year ago has rightly exercised our minds a great deal .
Less in the public and the political spotlight is another form of sea transport , namely , the transport of bulk goods , in particular , ores and coal .
The consequences of the sinking of a ship in this category are actually less in terms of pollution , but the number of crew members who die as a result is considerably higher .
Let us take a closer look at accidents involving bulk carriers : 146 accidents in the last ten years , in which 780 seamen drowned .
Of the bulk carriers , 69 % were more than fifteen years old .
Two main reasons for these accidents are indicated .
Firstly , the lack of expertise of the crew and secondly , the physical condition of the ship .
In the majority of cases , a fault in the hull of bulk carriers is involved , caused by damage resulting from incorrect loading or unloading .
This problem is recognised at an international level .
The International Maritime Organisation , the IMO , issued the Bulk Loading and Unloading Code , the BLU Code .
This contains tasks both on ship and shore which are to be carried out before , during and after loading and unloading .
The IMO urges all participating countries to declare the BLU Code applicable to the terminals in their country .
With the proposed directive , the Commission , on behalf of the Member States , wants to respond to this call .
It intends to incorporate the BLU Code , with a few amendments , into Community legislation .
The main points are firstly , the appointment of a terminal representative , secondly , the drawing up of a loading and unloading plan and thirdly , the right of intervention by the competent authorities in the event of a disagreement between ship and shore .
Along with this , as an equivalent of the so-called " ISM Code " for ships - that is , a quality management system - the Commission also proposes to make a quality management system obligatory for the terminals .
The Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism thinks this proposal by the Commission is a step in the right direction .
It will not prevent all accidents , seeing that fatal damage often arises outside the European Union .
Nevertheless , it gives an impetus to the sector to proceed safely and cautiously and thus to prevent unnecessary damage .
Precisely because the problem , like the sector , is of a global nature , an international solution is of great importance .
We therefore support the incorporation of the BLU Code into Community legislation .
It is important that the text of the directive adheres as closely as possible to the BLU Code in order to prevent distortion of the competition between countries inside and outside the European Union .
In spite of our endorsement of the Commission 's proposal , a number of improvements need to be made to this proposal .
First of all , I should like to highlight the need to guarantee the safety of the crew , in view of the large number of casualties mentioned .
Emphasis on that point in a few places in the text is in order .
A second point : the captain bears many responsibilities .
It is also logical then that he is fully informed and that in the event of emergency repairs , his judgment forms the basis for the decision as to whether or not the ship should put to sea .
For the rest , it is also important that classification societies receive reports about damage to bulk carriers , seeing that these bureaux often have to form their opinion about the condition of a ship .
They can only do so if they have sufficient information at their disposal .
Thirdly , the role of the competent authority which is informed of or verifies irregularities during loading or unloading .
It must be obliged to interrupt the procedure in order to guarantee the safety of the ship and crew .
Fourthly : it is common knowledge that the capacity of the port State control , or PSC , in the Member States is inadequate .
In this directive , the PSC authorities are at risk of being given extra tasks .
For this reason , the Commission must see to it that these tasks are actually carried out .
Finally , a few more observations about Amendments Nos 14 , 13 and 16 .
We have already seen that we must adhere as closely as possible to the text of the BLU Code in order to counteract distortion of competition and obscurities .
Amendment No 14 does not tie in with this , however , and I therefore cannot support it .
The necessary disquiet has arisen over Amendment No 13 .
The voyage data recorder is an instrument for recording travel data .
Information about loading and unloading is not recorded on it .
Furthermore , in the IMO , agreements have already been reached about the obligatory use of a voyage data recorder in bulk carriers .
The effect of this can be found in the Erika II package .
Apart from this , if there is a voyage data recorder on board a ship , then it is the responsibility of the port State control to inspect it and not that of the terminal operator .
The latter does not have the knowledge for this .
In brief , you should understand that I cannot support Amendment No 13 either .
I hope that my fellow Members see the logic of this .
I am quite unable to support Amendment No 16 tabled by my fellow Members Mr Simpson and Mr Fava .
It imposes requirements on ships from outside the European Union , which have not been internationally agreed .
That is not legally possible .
Anyway , work is being done on this .
I hope that reassures those making the submission .
Mr President , if we accept this report , in a slightly amended form , I am of the opinion that we will have considerably improved the guarantees for the safety of bulk carriers and their crew .
Mr President , allow me to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr van Dam , on an excellent report and also expressing my gratitude to the Commission for having made a genuinely serious attempt to get to grips with this important issue .
In recent years , the Commission has tabled a number of proposals for increasing maritime safety in various ways , and this as a result of a number of accidents affecting both people and the environment .
The complaint may be made , as it has by myself in various connections , that the EU often reacts after the event instead of taking vigorous action beforehand , but it is good , nonetheless , that a real effort is now being made .
Erika I has been succeeded by Erika II , and there is presumably more to come .
During the next few months of the session , Parliament will have a number of reports on which to adopt positions in this area .
In this report , we are dealing with safety in connection with the loading and unloading of bulk carriers .
There is no doubt that bulk carriers in particular have been especially badly affected by accidents , at least during the last decade .
There are a great many reports and a good deal of statistical information to indicate this - a fact which the rapporteur in particular has pointed out .
A good half of the vessels that have foundered have done so as a result of accidents involving the hull .
Lack of maintenance is a cause of accidents of this type , but many accidents also occur in connection with loading and unloading .
Over the last decade , this has been observed by the UN ' s maritime body , the IMO .
A special report has called upon Member States , classification societies and shipping companies to be alert to errors in loading and unloading .
A number of interim measures have been proposed , for example .
It is important to take an overall view of this problem .
There is an explosive growth in the number of shipments .
More and more of the traffic comes from Eastern and Central Europe or from third countries .
This means that the way in which loads are secured is going to become one of the most important issues of all for us .
We are concerned here not only with bulk carriers but also with other forms of shipping and other forms of transport .
The fact that loads are not always adequately secured is now a growing problem for shipping and for road and rail transport .
The Commission ought therefore to come back with proposals as to how these problems might be solved .
Since this is not only , or even mainly , a problem for the EU but is a global issue , it is also important for the Commission to pursue issues of this kind further within the IMO or in other international contexts .
I should be grateful if the Commissioner could say something about the initiatives the Commission intends to go on taking on this important matter .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I should like to express our almost total approval both of the Commission 's choice of legislative instrument , a directive , and of the content of the proposal .
The issue under consideration has already been analysed by international organisations : principles and rules have already been set in place for incisive action , aimed at preventing the very frequent accidents and the casualties sadly recorded , as both the rapporteur and Mr Stenmarck said .
However , these provisions are not binding , as the Commission has reminded us , and this is the point .
This is why we must intervene at European level with legislation which is based on the provisions and makes them binding for all the Member States .
When drawing up European legislation to complement international legislation , the Commission rightly consults all the interested parties , particularly the authorities of the port State , and focuses duly on the prevention of accidents during the delicate operations of handling the cargoes and the issue of repairs .
The amendments adopted in Committee take the right approach , stressing certain points : firstly the obligation , rather than the capacity of the competent authorities , to block the loading and unloading operations whenever the safety of the ships is endangered .
Furthermore , in the event of damage which is serious enough to jeopardise the safety and seaworthiness of the ship , it is now clear that the decision on whether or not repair is necessary is to be taken by the port State control authorities .
However , with regard to the crew and , in particular , the huge problems arising from the low level of training of the crew even today , I propose , on behalf of my group , that the amendment tabled by Mr Simpson and Mr Fava should be altered to replace the word " qualification " with the word " experience " .

Lastly , it is important that this legislation enters into force as soon as possible and that the Member States make every endeavour to ensure that it is implemented effectively .
Indeed , even though there is European or international legislation in this area , the Member States fail to apply it properly .
We therefore support the Commission 's call for the Member States to apply these provisions as of 1 January 2003 .
Mr President , I would also like to thank my fellow Member , Mr van Dam for his report .
We support the proposal of the Commission .
International regulations do indeed exist , a kind of voluntary agreement , but they appear either not to be complied with or are incompletely complied with .
If we are considering safety in shipping , then we can see that a striking number of accidents occur involving bulk carriers . So we must do something about it .
We therefore support the report compiled by our fellow Member , Mr van Dam .
My group has two observations to make .
We will not support the proposal on the black box that is made in Amendment No 13 .
What is involved here is the loading and unloading of ships . It does not involve ships that are sailing .
The problem of the black box is therefore out of place here and belongs , rather , in the Erika II package , where it will be dealt with in the place where it should be dealt with .
Secondly , I have tabled an amendment in relation to Article 8 .
We have rightly changed the right to stop a loading or unloading operation into an obligation .
I think that is a good thing .
Also the Member State determines who is authorised to do this . I think that is also a good thing .
But when a port authority is authorised , it may be that a port authority also has a commercial interest in the loading and unloading of ships and then a conflict of interests may arise and we think that that is not a good thing .
That is why in a number of cases we feel that a Member State must also be able to assign control to the authorities that are in charge of port State control .
Apart from these two points , we are able to support the proposals in general .
Safety at sea is a very important issue . We must invest in it .
It struck me , Mr van Dam , that you said that people must be invested in too , both people who exercise control ashore , the port State control and other types of control , and the people on the ships who have to know their job , because I think that that is an important element in the promotion of safety at sea .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr van Dam , I think it is an excellent report . I think that the Commission has done its work well too .
Against the background of the type of accident that we know about from the Erika , but particularly against the background of the knowledge that we have now acquired that there are 8000 ships that do not comply with standards and are actually sailing on our seas in a manner and with a risk of accidents that are not favourable .
It has all been said before .
One hundred and forty-six ships have gone to the bottom in ten years .
That means 780 deaths .
That also means that in large areas of the sea , the environment may become polluted .
Of the 146 accidents - and it has all been said by a number of others before - one third can be traced back to problems with the hull and one third to navigation problems .
We do not need to explore the whole problem of navigation now .
We have already done that before , but the problems with the hull worry me in particular .
In the knowledge that a captain , together with the terminal operator , has to make a loading and unloading plan which must be put into effect and also monitored , we concur with the consideration not to include the so-called voyage data recorder in this amendment .
However , we really would like to give the Commission something to consider , because anyone who has ever been round those terminals , iron ore terminals and coal and steel terminals , in a number of ports in Europe will have seen what goes on there .
Not only are cargoes dumped in the terminals but mechanical shovels are used as well and mechanical shovels can cause damage .
In my opinion , this report provides a solution to this by specifying who must do what .
This does not quite solve the whole problem of training though .
However , what is not reported here is that part of the voyage comprises loading and unloading itself .
The information about loading and unloading , whether twisting or torsion occurs in a ship , is not reported .
In view of the fact that it is mainly ships of 15 years and over - just remember the discussion which we had about oil tankers and in which we ascertained that age is not always an indicator - that cause the majority of problems which result in these disasters , I should like to point out to the Commission that what goes on must be recorded in some way .
Finally , it can be said that we agree with the manner in which the other problems in the report have been resolved , matters concerning ISO quality management and , in particular , Community law too , into which a number of the BLU Code 's sections have now been incorporated .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr van Dam and the whole of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism for the work they have carried out on this directive .
As the rapporteur has pointed out , the directive is intended to incorporate into Community law the so-called BLU-code agreement , that is the code of practice for the safe loading and unloading of bulk carriers , which is already applied within the scope of the International Maritime Organisation , but which will not be mandatory until it is incorporated into Community law .
On that basis , I would like to point out that we can accept the majority of the amendments proposed , both by the rapporteur and by the different groups in general .
We accept Amendments Nos 2 , 5 , 8 , 10 and 15 in their entirety , and we accept Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 11 and 12 in principle , but we will have to revise the terms in which they are incorporated .
However , we cannot accept Amendments Nos 4 , 13 , 14 and 16 for reasons which I will explain .
Firstly , because , according to Amendment No 4 , the competent authority will have to have experience in the loading and unloading of bulk carriers .
We cannot accept this , if we take account of the principle of subsidiarity .
It is not appropriate to interfere in the responsibilities of the Member States , which must have sufficient room for manoeuvre to create the competent authority which they deem to be most suitable , in order to guarantee the correct application of the directive and in order to carry out the role of arbitrator between the master of the ship and the terminal representative in the event of disputes .
We reject Amendment No 13 because it intends to assign the representative of the terminal the task of checking that standards for the installation of the black box or voyage data recorder are complied with .
Ladies and gentlemen , the inclusion of this requirement in the directive is superfluous , since the same provision is included in two other , more general proposals for legislation in the field of marine safety .
I am referring specifically to the proposal for a directive on control of the port State , in the Erika I package , and the proposal for a directive on the Community system for monitoring , control and information on marine traffic which appears in the Erika II package .
Above all , by means of this latest proposal , we are going to guarantee the incorporation of black boxes in all Community ships .
This will happen in different stages , but it will eventually apply to all ships .
By way of clarification , the intention is that black boxes will be incorporated in new goods ships as from 1 July 2002 ; and that for existing goods ships , in the case of those of 20 000 tonnes gross or more , this will apply from 1 January 2007 and for those of between 3 000 and 20 000 tonnes , from 1 January 2008 .
Amendment No 14 , which refers to an element of one of the technical annexes , contravenes the BLU Code , the code of practice for the safety of loading and unloading of bulk carriers , and the principles of the directive with regard to the shared responsibility of the master of the ship and the terminal representative , in relation to certain aspects of safety in the interaction between the ship and the coast .
Lastly , we cannot accept Amendment No 16 which seeks to lay down qualifications for crews which are not included in the STCW Convention ( International Convention on Standards of Training , Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers ) , because it would discriminate against Community crews .
Ladies and gentlemen , I will end by once again thanking the rapporteur , Mr van Dam , and the whole of the committee , for their work .
This is another of the initiatives presented during last year by the Commission in order to step up the demands and requirements for marine safety , which will enable us , if not to prevent all marine disasters , because that would be difficult , since there is always the possibility of uncontrollable causes , at least to enormously restrict the risks .
As has been pointed out , over the last ten years more than 780 people have been lost in accidents involving bulk carriers within Community territory .
We believe that that is something that we cannot sit back and accept when measures can be adopted to guarantee the safety of crew members ' lives .
We are not talking here only about the problem of marine pollution , which we mentioned , for example , in relation to double hull oil tankers ; we are talking about something which goes much further , that is , the safety of the crews on Community ships and the ships which visit our shores .
Furthermore , ladies and gentlemen , we are once again combating unfair competition from ships that are sometimes sub-standard or which show little concern for checking and monitoring the whole issue of ship safety .
We also have to take account of the way in which bulk carriers are loaded and unloaded .
I believe that , with all these measures , the safety package is well focused within the Community sphere , and we can view 2000 , in a way , as having been the year of marine safety , from the point of view of the maritime sector .
The other day we presented in writing the measures on documentation in the coastal shipping sector and I hope that tomorrow the Commission will give the green light to the ports package .
Ladies and gentlemen , during 2001 we are going to continue working in the maritime sphere in order to give it all the impetus , dynamism and scope it needs to absorb some of the demand for transport and to be fully integrated into an intermodal transport system which is more rational and more respectful of the environment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Maritime safety and prevention of pollution from ships
Mr President , maritime safety and the prevention of pollution from ships are , unfortunately , highly topical issues .
A series of accidents has monopolised our attention recently , many lives have been lost and the environmental impact has been disastrous .
The European Union currently has numerous directives and regulations on related matters at its disposal .
At the same time , however , the European Union has to monitor and react to legislation introduced by international organisations and , more to the point , it has to do so instantly , so that the Member States do not appear to be shirking their international obligations .
Consequently , the European Union needs rationally organised and centralised powers for maritime safety policy .
That is why the European Commission has submitted this communication , which contains two proposals : one for a regulation and one for a directive .
The purpose of the proposal for a regulation is to replace all the existing committees dealing with safety at sea and the prevention of pollution from ships with a single Committee on Safe Seas .
All other existing committees dealing with related matters will be disbanded .
The purpose of this committee is to facilitate the implementation of amendments to the relevant international conventions by the Member States .
It is also important to note that the new Committee on Safe Seas will operate in accordance with the provisions of the regulatory procedure in Council Decision 1999 / 468 .
As you all know , this procedure makes provision for and safeguards the powers of both the European Parliament and the Member States .
At the same time , however , the European Commission has opted for a procedure which ensures that it has the right to decide whether an international amendment to the regulations raises or lowers maritime safety standards .
In summary , the procedure which it has opted for in order to achieve this basic objective is as follows : the Member States implement the most recent provisions of international conventions , except for those expressly referred to and incorporated in a Community act , which are dealt with directly by the European Commission , which either refers them for exclusion to the Committee on Safe Seas or does not refer them , in which case they apply automatically .
In other words , they are only referred to the Committee on Safe Seas if the Commission considers that incorporating an amendment to an international convention into a Community act would lower maritime safety standards in the European Union .
This is the substance of Article 4 , the basic article of the proposal for a regulation .
Finally , the purpose of the proposal for a directive is to amend existing directives in order to incorporate the Committee on Safe Seas . This obviously needs to be done .
The European Commission has presented the right proposal in an attempt at rational organisation and enhanced supervision of both Community and international law on maritime safety and the prevention of pollution .
The small number of amendments aim to clarify the text and hence to safeguard Parliament 's rights to take part in the regulatory procedure .
Finally , I should like to thank the members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism for their highly constructive comments and unanimous support for my draft report .
Mr President , the speeches made this evening certainly show the importance that we attach to combating these coffin ships and I believe that we are right to continue with our efforts .
Indeed , some time ago , in this House , I shared my regrets about the French Presidency ' s record on maritime safety .
I expected great things of this presidency , because it was genuinely extremely concerned . I was , however , deeply disappointed .
Furthermore , I hope - thanks to our efforts in Parliament , in conjunction with the European Commission - that we will not be lowering our guard , to use the Commissioner ' s expression , and that we will , in fact , ensure that maritime safety is improved .
Basically , the European Union lags behind considerably in the area of maritime safety , particularly compared to the United States , which has had strict regulation in force for a very long time .
Since such coffin ships are banned from American waters , they inevitably take the opportunity to come and pollute the coastlines of Europe instead .
If Parliament fails to take effective action , the danger of more shipwrecks close to our beaches will increase .
Unfortunately , it seems to be a monthly occurrence .
I therefore hope that we shall soon vote in favour of a genuine framework resolution which will bring together all the measures needed to protect our environment .
Mr Bakopoulos ' report is very good and aims to set up a Committee on Safe Seas , which is a step in the right direction .
This is a first stage in bringing together the various measures , as replacing the five existing committees with a single Committee on Safe Seas will enable the European Union to react rapidly to developments in international law .
I would like to thank the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism for having agreed to the amendments that I tabled .
Maritime safety affects a range of sectors and I believe that it is particularly important that the title of this committee includes terms which relate to prevention of pollution from ships .
In protecting ourselves against these coffin ships , we are also showing our concern for the protection of the marine environment as well as shipboard living and working conditions .
I do hope , therefore , that the European Parliament will heed this recommendation and give the Committee on Safe Seas and the Prevention of Pollution by Ships the opportunity to take account of the Community provisions which govern these two other areas .
We shall very soon - or so , at least , I hope - be making a statement on an amendment to the rules regarding shipwrecks , so that the polluter pays principle can be applied across the board .
We must monitor classification societies more closely in order to improve the quality of their inspections , and we should also pay attention to the responsibilities of ship owners , who all too often escape prosecution because of complicated financial and legal arrangements .
Commissioner , we are counting on you not to lower your guard .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to take this opportunity to thank you , Mrs de Palacio , and your team for the very constructive and energetic way you have cooperated with us .
A good example of this occurred during the last few days .
The final EU classification of ports and harbours as part of the trans-European networks attracted a great deal of attention in the case of the medium-sized ports , because European status gives these ports stimuli for growth and investment incentives which are vital for the regions involved .
The solution reached up to now through conciliation is acceptable , but I would ask you , when ports are being classified , to apply a measure of goodwill in some cases at least , as the dividing lines are essentially set in an arbitrary way .
The medium-sized ports will be grateful to you - and to us - if this is done .
In particular , everyone is now aware that the Commission and Parliament are not pausing for breath .
One after the other , we are discussing proposals to improve maritime safety .
Nor should we allow ourselves to let the pace slacken , given the situation at sea .
The accident off the Galapagos Islands is just the latest in a string of disasters with devastating effects on nature and on human populations .
The public is aware of these issues and the debates about safety flare up at regular intervals .
We must make it clear to the coast dwellers affected that the European Union may have been tardy in addressing these problems , but that the right approach has been adopted , after years of pressure on our part .
Europe is doing something about maritime safety and the prevention of pollution .
In this way we need to give a clear signal to the IMO and the world in general , both now and in future .
The Commission has brought forward its proposals in almost record time .
Last November we approved the Erika I package .
The Council reached agreement at the end of December so that the directive can come into force as from 2002 .
The Erika II package is now just around the corner , and I am delighted that the second package too will result in genuine progress in safety at sea .
I would also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the enormous amount of work done on the ground , that is to say by the classification societies ' inspectors and by the port States .
I saw this with my own eyes during a visit last week to the port of Antwerp together with Mr Piecyk .
Huge demands are made of the inspectors and we need to give them our support .
The report before us by Mr Bakopoulos makes a valuable contribution to achieving further progress on safety .
The fact that it was approved unanimously in committee is a testament to his convincing work .
I trust that Parliament will be equally convinced when it comes to vote .
I am not just speaking for myself , but for a large majority , when I specifically welcome the setting up of the Committee on Safe Seas that has already been mentioned .
I also particularly welcome the second part of the Commission document , because what is the point of having the committee if the relevant directives and regulations are not brought into line with the new structure ?
We do not want a dispute over powers , we need administrative clarity ; we do not need a dozen working parties or committees , what we need is a clear and dynamic structure , and I believe that will set Europe on the right path and make us a model for the rest of the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the rapporteur has said , this document examines two Commission proposals : the first concerns the establishment of the single committee , to be known as the Committee on Safe Seas , and the second concerns a directive which amends the existing directives in order to incorporate the committee .
The purpose of this - as Members have already pointed out - is to streamline the operation of bringing the Community legislation in force into line with the international provisions and conventions on maritime safety and the protection of the marine environment , and with technical progress .
We socialists support the streamlining effort contained in the proposals and we welcome the proposal to replace the current five committees with a single regulatory committee .
This committee will certainly contribute to greater certainty and coherence in the incorporation of international law into Community legislation .
However , we would wish both the title and the mandate of such a committee to encompass the two concepts of maritime safety and the prevention of pollution .
Lastly , I would like to focus particularly on a further consideration : Parliament 's role in these operations .
It is vital to guarantee that Parliament has the right to participate in the regulatory procedure .
We therefore call upon the Commission to ensure that Parliament is always in a position to monitor the activities of the committees , including the activities of the Committee on Safe Seas which is to be established .
We thus call for greater transparency and a substantial flow of information from the future committee on safe seas and the prevention of pollution as well .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bakopoulos for a very successful report .
Increased safety is very important for maritime traffic .
Our group supports the main ideas in the report .
The proposed regulation and directive will make it easier to take account of international amendments to Community acts on maritime safety .
The problem has always been one of delay , which is the result of the Community ' s slowness in drafting legislation .
The intention of the proposal is to remove the problems mentioned earlier .
Procedures must indeed be simplified .
Combining several committees that at present operate separately into one Committee on Safe Seas , responsible for matters of maritime safety , is the right way to help clarify how these matters should be dealt with .
Sea safety standards are an attempt to meet certain minimum conditions , and one advantage of the pre-inspection procedure contained in the regulation is that it will clarify the question of applicable law and increase legal certainty .
In future we must ensure that procedures followed in the Member States specifically to implement international agreements on maritime safety and Community legislation can be made simpler .
However , we must safeguard the opportunities for Member States to act within the context of the International Maritime Organisation ( IMO ) .
In future too it must be a matter of principle that the IMO should be in charge of international maritime safety by concluding international agreements , passing resolutions and agreeing conventions .
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly my group , the Group of the Greens , would like to congratulate Mr Bakopoulos on his report , which we agree with completely .
We also congratulate the Commission on its proposal and we are genuinely pleased with the creation of this committee on maritime safety which is going to unify in a very significant way and coordinate the application of 12 directives and 3 regulations .
Commissioner , you have been determined to unify sky , land and sea and in the end you are going to manage it .
I truly hope that you do manage it .
Our group will support you .
I believe the principle of caution and precaution must fundamentally prevail so that these directives , standards and international agreements are made more demanding , as this committee on maritime safety proposes .
We are going to make a series of recommendations .
We believe that the committee on maritime safety must not simply be a committee which does a reasonable job from an administrative point of view , but that it must incorporate the feelings of non-governmental organisations , of environmental protection organisations and of unions so that all these views may be represented .
We also recommend that the committee puts a special emphasis on the areas in a special geographical position , with special traffic conditions , with special environmental circumstances such as , for example , the Straits of Gibraltar or the English Channel , where we all know that the number of accidents and incidents is well above the average , and where the dumping of crude oil has a great environmental impact and a great economic impact on tourist areas .
We therefore hope that the committee places special emphasis on these areas with special conditions , and I would like to ask you two questions in this regard : how will the work of the committee on maritime safety and the European Maritime Safety Agency , which is going to be established soon , be coordinated ?
Is this committee also going to manage or work on the three legislative initiatives contained in the Erika II package ?
Mr President , setting up a Committee on Safe Seas , ostensibly in the aim of improving the implementation of legislation governing maritime safety , environmental protection and shipboard living and working conditions , will reinforce the reactionary nature of European Union policy in the shipping sector .
The Commission 's proposals contain reactionary arrangements which undermine the role of international organisations such as the International Maritime Organisation and the International Labour Organisation .
Basically , they institutionalise the EU Member States ' refusal to participate in initiatives to accept or apply amendments to international conventions or resolutions , their obligations as contracting parties to international law notwithstanding .
In acting as the guardian of the interests of European big business , the European Union is interfering in changes to the international law which has evolved since the war and , having graduated to global guardian , it is sacrificing safety , human life itself and environmental protection just so that the monopolies can increase their profits .
We are radically opposed both to the basic thrust of these policies and to the practice of taking fragmentary , inefficient action in order to allay the acute concerns and reactions of the public , the trades union and ecological organisations in the wake of the plethora of fatal and highly environmentally dangerous accidents at sea .
Moreover , the attempt being made by Europe as an economic , political and shipping centre , within the framework of the trade war with other shipping centres , such as the USA , Japan , Australia and others , to fashion its own mechanism for controlling maritime transport and imposing its own choices undermines the International Maritime Organisation .
This will lead to distinctions being made outside generally accepted principles and this in itself is fraught with dangerous consequences for the basic safety of shipping in practice .
The main issue as regards the safety of ships in general and tankers in particular is the unaccountability of big shipping business and the policy which supports it at national , regional and international level .
This unbridled unaccountability is not only being maintained ; it is being extended .
A typical example is the situation which prevails regarding ships under flags of convenience , which are directly connected with falling maritime safety standards and which are generally responsible for most accidents and for the most serious accidents .
We believe that a policy based on protecting the safety of ships , passengers , crews and the environment must , first and foremost , fight the unaccountability of shipowners , apply strict sanctions against those who violate the law , which is being flagrantly flouted time and time again , with impunity , within the framework of the ÉÌÏ and international conventions .
This policy needs to adjust operating factors to the enhanced requirements of ships , help improve shipboard living and working conditions and safeguard the rights of crews and trades union , including their right to intervene in safety issues .
Thank you very much , Mr Patakis .
The President wished to welcome you before your maiden speech to the House and to wish you success as a Member of this Parliament .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this comprehensive report .
As a Member of the European Parliament representing the east coast of Ireland , I am particularly angered by the extent of shipments of nuclear waste within the Irish Sea .
Only recently , there were two shipments from the Netherlands to the Sellafield and Thorp nuclear reprocessing plants operated by British Nuclear Fuels in Cumbria , and I have been informed that another 17 such shipments are due to take place from the Netherlands in the coming years .
Moreover , the German Government has stated that it is ready to restart shipments of spent nuclear fuel to Cumbria and that it will continue such operations until 1 July 2005 .
This will mean an intensification of such shipments .
Even though there has been widespread falsification of documents by BNFL over the last two years involving nuclear shipments to Japan , such shipments are now due to recommence .
This is not withstanding the fact that BNFL has been fined USD 60 million over this incident alone .
I am especially pleased that there is now growing international opposition to shipments of nuclear waste from Britain to Japan .
The Argentinian Navy is presently on alert to intercept a British ship carrying enough nuclear waste to give off twice the amount of radiation as the Chernobyl disaster .
The British Nuclear Fuel 's vessel named Pacific Swan is rapidly becoming the pariah of South America because the captain intends to negotiate the treacherous waters of Cape Horn with 90 tonnes of waste vitrified in 192 glass blocks .
I believe that the countries of the OSPAR Convention must now form broader international links with other countries along the main shipping routes of nuclear waste , which includes countries around the Panama Canal , South America , and the coast of Africa .
Within the European Union an environmental impact assessment must be carried out on the construction of new roads , water and sewage facilities and large infrastructure projects .
To date , the British Government has refused to conduct an international environmental impact assessment on the significant risks posed to the environment and people 's health along the transportation routes of nuclear waste .
I am now calling on the British Government to bring forward a full and comprehensive environmental impact assessment outlining the environmental risks of transporting of nuclear materials within the Irish Sea .
Such an assessment should also be evaluated by the European Commission .
In conclusion , I would like to see the reprocessing of nuclear products terminated at Sellafield .
However , in the interim , there needs to be an international agreement outlining the safety standards for such shipments .
I must commend the rapporteur , Mr Bakopoulos , on this report .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , I think that three minutes gives me plenty of time to state a position because this report , generally speaking at least , does not divide the House and any disagreement is the exception which proves the rule .
I think that it is only to be expected that the House should unite almost unanimously behind the report presented by Mr Bakopoulos , whom I should like to congratulate on his work , first , because the aim of the Commission 's proposal is to replace the five existing committees dealing with safety at sea with one committee , thereby cutting the red tape and , secondly because , in its legislative proposal , the Commission grasps the opportunity and safeguards the right to decide when an amendment to international regulations raises or lowers maritime safety standards .
Amendments to international conventions will either be dealt with by the Commission and / or referred for exclusion to the new Committee on Safety at Sea ; if they are not referred , they will apply automatically .
This will , I think , improve and simplify matters and create legal security .
That being the case , I imagine that Mr Bakopoulos preferred not to propose amendments merely in order to make Parliament 's importance and presence felt and , because he agreed with this extremely logical proposal , merely proposed a few amendments in order to highlight the importance of and safeguard Parliament 's presence during the regulatory procedure .
Having said which , Commissioner , I think that the presence of everyone here today proves not so much that we agree with Mr Bakopoulos 's report , which goes without saying , but that we are most concerned about the issue of safety at sea .
As you know , we have fast-tracked our reading of the first three reports on the so-called Erika I package on safety at sea and the safety of shipping , i.e. the withdrawal of single-hull tankers , the proposal on shipping registers and the third proposal on port controls .
We intend to push straight on to the Erika II package and its three individual legislative proposals . I think that the Commission 's initiatives in general are beginning to pressurise the International Maritime Organisation into acting more quickly and more decisively on this particular issue and encouraging it to adopt solutions at international level , which is always a good thing and something that we all prefer over regional solutions .
Once again , my congratulations to Mr Bakopoulos .
Mr President , Commissioner , across-the-board consensus such as we have on the subject at issue is not , of course , conducive to lively debate , but this sort of consensus , albeit with one or two exceptions , is proof positive that the action being debated is the right action , as in the case of this initiative by the European Commission to propose and promote a new committee to deal with safety at sea and , of course , the corresponding regulations , which must be amended .
Similarly , wanting to secure the right to select amendments made by supranational regulatory bodies , so that only those which help to improve safety standards are incorporated into Community legislation , is the right objective .
This double proposal clearly seeks to facilitate the implementation of amendments to conventions by the Member States of the Union and , of course , by having just one committee , to improve efficiency in the implementation of safety policy .
The rapporteur , who has done an excellent job , and the parliamentary committee have proposed a number of amendments to Parliament in line with the European Commission 's initial idea which highlight the need to include the prevention of pollution from ships and shipboard living conditions , which are , of course , closely bound up with safety at sea .
The report also makes provision for the proposal for a directive to include the role of the European Parliament which , given that it has been defined , must not be overlooked .
Generally speaking , this proposal is a further effort on the part of the Commission to organise the drafting and application of maritime safety policy and the prevention of pollution from ships more rationally .
The rapporteur and the parliamentary committee have , I think , supported this effort by tabling amendments which improve and supplement the proposal and which we hope Parliament will accept .
Mr President , Commissioner , questions of the safety of sea transport and the protection of the maritime environment have been very much to the fore for just over a year now in the wake of the Erika disaster .
Although the wreck of the Erika was a catastrophe for European shipping , the accident also had some very positive consequences .
The publicity surrounding the disaster and increased political pressure has resulted in more effective monitoring on the part of the Commission of legislation on shipping .
The Commission has also very promptly managed to submit a number of legislative proposals to make shipping safer for discussion by Parliament and the Council .
Like the fellow Members before me , I would also like to thank the Commissioner for this active involvement .
I also wish to thank you for having taken an initially positive view of the need to create a thematic network with regard to short route navigation , which is a very important initiative on the part of AMRIE .
Before Erika the Union already had , and has had most definitely since , acts in place that pretty much cover the whole area of vessel safety and the prevention of pollution from ships .
The truth is that the Erika accident would probably never have happened if all the regulations in force at the time had been properly complied with and if , furthermore , that compliance had been monitored correctly .
The Commission ' s proposal to replace the committees currently dealing with matters of maritime safety with one committee is to be supported .
At the same time , responsibility for maritime safety policy will fall more clearly to the new committee being set up .
The new committee must monitor and , if necessary , improve the way legislation is implemented and take an active role , on the Union ' s behalf , in the IMO and other international organisations .
In connection with the amendment to the regulation , the Commission is reserving the right to judge whether any international amendment to the regulations might be harmful to European maritime safety .
I also support the Commission ' s proposal regarding its proposed procedure in this connection .
It is very important , however , as the rapporteur quite rightly points out in his report , that Parliament ' s rights to take part in the regulatory procedure should be satisfactorily safeguarded .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like , firstly , to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Bakopoulos , for the splendid work he has carried out and for the speed and efficiency with which this matter has been addressed and resolved .
I should also like to thank everyone involved for their contributions and collaboration and , most especially , Mrs Grossetête , who has put forward the viewpoint of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
As for your congratulations to the Commission for the work done so far in the maritime sector , I shall pass these on to the staff of the Directorate-General for Energy and Transport following the magnificent work they have carried out throughout this long year , in which they have undoubtedly made a very considerable effort to respond to our citizens ' growing demands .
I am sure that you have been requesting such an effort for a while now , but the Erika disaster has acted as a kind of catalyst .
As has been pointed out , the purpose of this proposal is twofold . On the one hand , it is to replace all the current committees responsible for maritime safety with a single committee .
The proposal therefore constitutes an effort at simplification , clarification and coherence . On the other hand , the purpose is to help update Community maritime safety legislation in accordance with developments in the international Conventions .
I want to reiterate my gratitude for your work and your proposals and , specifically , for the amendments which are a reminder that the European Parliament performs what the Commission is pleased to say is a crucial role in the regulatory procedure .
The Commission is going to incorporate all these amendments once it has adjusted their wording in accordance with the standardised formulations on comitology agreed between the institutions .
We also wish to thank Parliament for having reminded us that the single Committee whose creation we are proposing is going to deal not only with maritime safety but also with the prevention of pollution from ships , something which will , in fact , have to be reflected in the Committee ' s name .
Despite the fact that we are prepared to incorporate the prevention of pollution from ships in the name , we are not , however , able to incorporate protection of the marine environment in a generic sense .
This is simply because protection of the marine environment in that sense might also refer to potential pollution of the sea by , for example , effluent from inland waters such as rivers or to potential pollution caused by types of waterside activity not connected with the problem of maritime safety .
That is why we are unable to accept this generic definition , which would mean incorporating other types of competence , which the Committee is not qualified to exercise . However , what we will , of course , be able to incorporate is the specific addition , ' prevention of pollution from ships ' .
We accept Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 , 9 and 10 in their entirety .
Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 7 and 11 simply require a number of modifications .
The only ones we are unable to accept are Nos 5 and 12 , and for the reasons I have just pointed out , namely that they refer to aspects of marine environmental protection not connected with maritime safety .
Before concluding , I should like to say that , as Mrs Grossetête has pointed out , we cannot lower our guard .
We have to go on extending our remit to cover the whole range of maritime traffic which , as I have said on previous occasions , has changed out of all recognition over the last hundred years , in terms of the number of vessels , the number of tonnes of materials being transported and the nature and quality of those materials .
Mr Fitzsimons referred to the problem of transporting nuclear waste , for example , and we have certainly included this issue in our discussion of the Erika II package .
Specifically , the directive concerning minimum requirements for vessels carrying dangerous or polluting goods takes account of the need to respect the Irradiated Nuclear Fuel Code concerning fuel containing radioactive material .
In reply to Mrs Langenhagen and Mr Hatzidakis , we can also see that , if there is a truly global sector , it is the maritime sector , a fact we have all known for a long time .
In recent times , the aviation sector has reached a similar scale , but the maritime sector has a longer tradition behind it .
We therefore have to try to ensure that the International Maritime Organisation incorporates as many of our requirements as possible .
In this respect , the countries of the European Union are acting as a spur or driving force for transmitting environmental awareness to the International Maritime Organisation , and for communicating the requirements for shielding the marine environment and making it safe and for protecting the lives and ensuring the safety of crews .
In reply to Mr Bautista Ojeda , I wish to say that the powers of the Maritime Safety Agency and those of the Regulatory Committee are quite distinct .
The latter ' s function is strictly laid out and defined in Community maritime safety legislation and is limited to approving Commission proposals for updating current directives and regulations .
The Regulatory Committee therefore has a legislative function , while the agency has absolutely no legislative function and does not in any way intervene in legislation , although it may make suggestions to us .
This is a body designed to provide technical assistance to the Member States and to the Commission , and is an advisory body whose function is to monitor the application of Community standards and to disseminate information , and therefore transparency throughout the sector .
It does not , however , have a legislative function .
There are therefore two distinct areas of operation .
I believe in fact that , as one of the honourable Members pointed out in another speech , the incorporation of ports into the trans-European networks is a key factor in promoting what we are all aiming for , namely the incorporation or integration of all transport systems into the intermodal system .
I want to conclude by thanking you for your contributions and for all your work .
A moment ago , Mrs Langenhagen said that port inspectors have a lot of work to do .
Well , I think that you and , of course , the Commission staff involved with the maritime sector have also been working hard recently .
Interoperability of the trans-European rail system
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0016 / 2001 ) by Mr Savary , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of the European Parliament and Council directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system [ C5-0564 / 2000 - 1999 / 0252 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for allowing me to speak on the second reading of a report that is extremely important for the future of Europe ' s railways and for building the European rail system .
The last months , under the leadership of Mrs de Palacio , the Commissioner , will certainly have been crucial for the future of rail transport in Europe .
Following the conciliation on the Swoboda and Jarzembowsky reports , the opening up , or liberalisation , call it what you will , of networks is now an accepted fact .
We still have to overcome the many instances of technical incompatibility and this is , of course , not the easiest thing to do , since these networks were built according to very distinctive technical and industrial characteristics in every individual country .
The aim of the draft directive is precisely to ensure the technical and procedural interoperability of cross-border travel between the various 15 European networks .
The current situation is extremely complicated .
There are about 15 signalling systems , five or six electrical voltage ratings , different loading gauges and different track gauges , different procedures , different railway cultures , and information systems that are not consistent from one rail company to another , thereby compromising efficient rail travel .
Although opening up of the roads was easy , because discontinuities could be eliminated instantly , the opening up of the railway is still coming up against a whole raft of technical obstacles .
In 1996 , an initial directive was adopted which was easier to implement because it concerned a new network of high-speed trains . This now shows us the way forward in terms of methodology .
The method adopted was to lay down " technical specifications for interoperability " for each rail subsystem in conjunction with rail companies , infrastructure managers and manufacturers .
Every subsystem is covered by a specification , which is then subdivided to cover the individual components which must also be verified as compatible .
We are facing a truly enormous task and we have chosen to adopt a procedure inspired by the high-speed rail project , i.e. a gradual procedure .
This task will take so much time that it is important in the short term to make what progress we can , with the minimum cost-benefit ratio .
The essence of the method involves selecting and evaluating the costs and the benefits of each step forward in terms of interoperability in order to assess its relative importance and either prioritise it or opt to implement it at a later date .
Of course , the areas we really must push forward in the first instance are sharing information , procedures , data communications and all procedures involved in cross-border travel . We shall find out at a later stage , through a gradual convergence process , how to deal on a gradual basis with the problem of making tracks , gauges and rolling stock compatible .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that it is up to me to thank all the Members of Parliament who were involved in this report , as considerable work was undertaken at first reading .
Parliament voted on a total of 46 amendments which had been tabled .
Of these 46 amendments , 33 were accepted as they stood - and at this point I must pay tribute to the Council and the mediation by the Commission - and we can say that this vote will , or should , mark the successful completion of a broadly consensual legislative process .
The Council and Commission have accepted many amendments and have enabled Parliament to make a significant shift of emphasis in order to consult rail users and staff , to involve the candidate countries in this work from the very outset and also allowed a certain leeway in terms of exemptions , given that some countries had justifiable concerns on this subject .
The Council also made considerable contributions to ensure that the new rolling stock provided both safety and access for passengers with reduced mobility .
In short , I feel we have today a sufficiently sound text to be implemented fairly quickly , informed by our experience with the high-speed train project and benefiting from the excellent collaboration between the various parliamentary groups within the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism - and I would like to praise all my fellow committee members , from all the groups - as well as collaboration between the Commission , the Council and Parliament . Personally speaking , I am delighted that we have created such an ambitious document so quickly which today really gets the European rail system underway .
Commissioner , there are two other crucial issues which will need to be addressed . The first relates to charging , which today remains the major issue in the turnaround from road to rail , and the second relates to funding of infrastructures , such as intermodal flat wagons , which is needed so that we can really make swift progress in this area .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at the Brussels part-session two weeks ago we voted on the ' railways package ' and agreed that this was a great achievement for Parliament and for rail freight in the European Community .
Tomorrow we will be voting on the Savary report at second reading on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system .
Approximation of technical standards is an essential and important step if we are to facilitate safe cross-border rail freight .
At first reading , all sides put a lot of hard work and effort into this very technical Commission proposal , and I would sincerely like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Savary , today .

All that effort has paid off , as , with just a few exceptions , the Council has accepted all Parliament 's amendments .
The Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats is pleased to see its views largely reflected in the amendments accepted by the Council , which also explains why we are not tabling any further amendments now , at second reading .
I did , in fact , table one amendment in committee that was adopted by Parliament at first reading but not subsequently accepted by the Council .
It was three votes short of being adopted .
This was the stipulation that maintenance and approval of warning systems should be carried out by external and independent certification bodies .
Apart from quite understandable economic interests in many Member States , this amendment has to be seen against the background of the many serious rail incidents which may have been caused by inadequate checks .
These approvals and checks were in the past and to some extent continue to be carried out by the rail operators themselves , rather than by independent third parties .
When this was discussed in committee all sides , including the Commission , showed great understanding on this point .
The wording that has now been adopted for Article 18 and Annex VII to some extent takes account of our concerns , but we are not completely happy with this as things stand .
The Commission 's undertaking to include proper independent approval and maintenance of rail systems in the railways package is sufficient for us to speed this otherwise excellent compromise on its way without tabling any further amendments in the plenary session .
Nevertheless , when we examine future rail dossiers we will be watching very carefully to see if the Commission has honoured its promises .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would of course like to thank Mr Savary for his excellent report .
He has done such a good job that we can adopt it without further ado and we have not even needed the excitement of the conciliation procedure , which I was so looking forward to .
However , I am very pleased , as has already been said , that we were recently able to approve the railways package which Mr Jarzembowski and I put so much work into , and that we have achieved a well-rounded package to which Mrs de Palacio also made such an important contribution .
This is not just a half-hearted compromise , but a really good package .
My second point is this : can we rest on our laurels now ?
Have we done everything that needs to be done as regards railways ?
Mr Savary has already indicated that there are still some problems to resolve .
The Commissioner has already announced that work is to be done in some areas on market opening in freight and passenger transport , and has already started the relevant work , and I regard this as being very important as regards working conditions and the regulation of working hours .
The big problem is competition between road and rail .
The work we have now done and will be voting on tomorrow means that we will be making rail transport more competitive .
I would remind all those people who are always talking about competition that competition means , or ought to mean , that the initial opportunities , the competition conditions , should be reasonably equal , and that certainly cannot be said when it comes to road and rail .
During the Swedish Presidency we have been discussing sustainable development and giving greater priority to environmental matters , and in the specific context of a motion on the energy dependence of the European Union , we are have been talking about reducing that level of dependence . That ought to mean that when it comes to transport policy we should be taking greater account of the potential of railways .
I am deliberately not talking about giving priority to rail , but it would already be a great step forward if we could create a level playing field between road and rail .
I have already touched on the issue of regulating working hours , and I will not go into the incredible cost-cutting tactics adopted - even on the roads - by means of artificial self-employed status in the road haulage industry , nor into the " Willi Betz syndrome " and associated regulations , which have also been mentioned several times , nor into issues relating to tariff classification , also including , of course , the issue of external costs .
However , all these issues are very important in the context of enlargement .
When we consider how widely the situation of railways in the various candidate countries varies , and how poor and even appalling their infrastructure is in some cases , then we must do everything we can to solve these problems not just at EU level , but also at candidate country level .
I say that because it is no use having the best , the most modern and integrated railway system in the western part of Europe if we cannot , at the same time , achieve better conditions on the railways in eastern and southern Europe , and this is an area where the European Union needs to make a major contribution .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to congratulate Mr Savary on his determined efforts and very successful report on this important but problematic subject .
This report , together with those reports aimed at liberalising the railways that were adopted last week , is a breakthrough in the development of the European railways .
The idea got under way during the Finnish Presidential term , and was continued with successfully by France .
Improved competitiveness in the railways is vital to relieve road and air congestion .
The development of rail transport is also a step towards more environmentally sustainable transport systems .
Improved interoperability of the railway system is a necessary requirement for the whole rail package to succeed .
There have been far too many long delays with regard to this matter , but now Mr Savary has managed to untie this difficult knot .
There is still much to be done but now the work is off to a good start .
Our group supports Mr Savary ' s proposal to adopt the Council common position as it stands .
It has taken account of Parliament ' s important amendments and thus the proposal should be swiftly advanced .
At the same time we must remember that the interoperability of the rail networks is a long-term project .
For that reason , it is important that a timetable is put in place to carry out the work and that we determine just which networks should be given priority .
I would further like to thank Mr Savary for also having understood the special needs of Finland .
The compromise achieved regarding the use of Russian railway carriages and wagons between Finland and Russia will not put the aims of the report in jeopardy , but will ensure that transport on the Union ' s eastern border will continue undisturbed .
I believe that the importance this decision will have for the whole of the Union will be clearly evident when the time comes that north-western Russia ' s massive wealth of natural resources starts to be exploited seriously .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Savary , firstly we should do this without a debate , but it is good to have a debate so as to spend some time highlighting all that has gone well .
There was proper consultation .
You requested proper consultation with the social partners , the railway sector , but you have also set an example yourselves by consulting everyone properly , with the consequence that we have a product with which we can do something .
What we are speaking about here is really a so-called railway package .
Part one was the liberalisation , the deregulation of international transport which we spoke about last time .
Part two is interoperability , in other words , that transport can take place between countries with different systems .
Part three is still to come .
I already brought this matter up last time .
As far as part three is concerned , we are of the opinion that the emissions standards and also the use of energy as regards the railway package need to be improved . We understand that this is not just the responsibility of this Commission and also that Commissioner Wallström is going to work hard at it in the near future .
Everyone knows that the standards for trucks and lorries have been raised , in other words , the relative advantage for the railway is declining , and that also means that , assuming that this type of transport is better than others , you have to work at the emission standards .
I should just like to bring up a few other small points , small in a certain sense .
What we are now going to see is that gigantic investments are necessary here .
Gigantic investments - they have already been mentioned in recital nine - which are to be borne by both the government and the sector .
The government , which means that at the same time we are dealing with another package , as has just been mentioned , of external costs .
There will have to be a specific form of assistance to keep this sector at such a level that it is competitive on the one hand , but is supported on the other hand .
That sounds like saying the same thing twice over but we should pay attention to it in our debates on the White paper .
The second thing I ask myself is whether there has been societal consideration and whether the Commission has studied the qualifications of people in the railway sector who are particularly needed in order to facilitate this interoperability .
I am unaware as to whether this study has been released yet and what it has produced and what it is going to mean for the future .
A specified language must be spoken .
Which language are we going to speak ?
English , as in international shipping or aviation ?
So , will English also be the language of rail transport ?
If that is the case , I immediately propose that from that moment onwards , we only speak English in Parliament as well .
That will make all communication very easy .
Mr President , in the run-up to the Parliamentary debate of 16 May last year , Mr Savary showed that modernisation , expansion and internationalisation of the railways is different from simply following a trend from the end of the last century .
The trend emanated from a retiring government which is making itself redundant as a result of liberalisation and privatisation .
The rapporteur has made it clear that a modernisation policy need not conflict with the continued existence of state-owned or of justifiable exemption positions for areas which are separated from the rest of Europe by the sea .
Much of what we resolved then has now been adopted by the Council .
I congratulate the rapporteur on that outcome .
Unlike Mr Jarzembowski 's proposals , my group endorses the result .
I shall leave the technical details of the proposal to one side now and call attention to persistent problems .
It is necessary to remain vigilant at all times for developments which continue to threaten the cohesion of the European rail network .
In the nineteenth century , different railway gauges and different types of rails prevented the railways from being able to operate as a European whole .
In those days it was not just the individual countries but also the railway companies competing with each other that were to blame .
Within the European Union , the Pyrenees still form a national border where the railway gauge has to be changed .
In the twentieth century , it was electrification and the associated safety systems which broke up the rail network once again .
Where the steam locomotive could still travel over the border , as a consequence of a change in mains voltage henceforth the locomotive had to be changed .
The threats of the twenty-first century reside in a combination of technical development and competition .
Until recently , it seemed that in Germany magnetic levitation technology would bring about divisions in the rail network once again .
Only recently in the Netherlands such a line from Amsterdam-Lelystad-Groningen was still being considered , even now that it is no longer possible for it to continue via Bremen and Hamburg to Berlin .
However interesting a number of aspects of the technology may be , in the short term it primarily means a system separated from the rest of the network .
The interests of private companies which want to make their latest technology profitable should not be the deciding factor here .
In spite of European integration , we still see continuing disintegration of the railways .
International railway regulations are becoming increasingly hard to obtain .
Train tickets to distant destinations often have to be purchased outside the country of departure .
Not so very long ago , you could take a passenger train straight from Cologne to Athens , from Paris to Lisbon or from Amsterdam to Copenhagen .
Not any longer .
Four months ago the direct night train from Stockholm to Berlin disappeared .
Apart from implementing technical measures , which is what this report is about , it is vital that an end is also put to the fragmentation of rail traffic .
An end must also be put to the current situation in which the railways relegate passengers to aeroplanes and freight transport to lorries over long distances .
Mr President , in an ever-widening internal market , differences between systems are becoming more and more of a problem .
Within the railway sector , the EU ' s 15 Member States have 4 different electrical systems and 15 different signalling systems .
Within 10 years , there may be 25 or 27 Member States . The differences between systems will presumably be still greater then .
This is not a problem we shall solve just by finding ourselves new and , to all appearances , modern solutions .
Given that , last summer , we inaugurated Europe ' s longest combined bridge and tunnel in order to link Sweden and Denmark , it might well be imagined that the problem of non-interoperability had also been solved , but the reverse is true .
There is one signalling system in Denmark and a quite different system in Sweden .
Just to add to the complications , trains are driven on the left in Sweden but on the right in Denmark .
There are various reasons why there are , in actual fact , such major differences between European countries , and these all have to do with history .
One reason is that European countries have each electrified their railway systems at different times .
Another is quite deliberate - never to make it easy just to go ahead and drive a train straight into another country .
In today ' s Europe , in which we now talk about the four freedoms and in which people , goods , capital and services must be able to move with complete freedom across all borders , every obstacle remains a problem . However , we need to remove such obstacles of various kinds .
We need to harmonise and to become , as the saying goes , interoperable in different areas .
It is therefore an important step for the Commission now to take initiatives whereby , step by step , we obtain the same railway system .
The trans-European railway systems , in particular , constitute an obvious first step .
It is important for this work to be characterised by two realisations .
Firstly , the work will , in fact , have to take a certain amount of time , for it is going to cost significant sums of money , especially if we , in time , extend the trans-European networks to include other networks .
It should also be pointed out that we need to combine with the Central and Eastern European countries to conduct the same operation there in the long term .
The other realisation is that , in the short term at least , it is a question of finding solutions without having the same system in every country .
The fact that trains can now already be driven across European borders does , in any case , show that this is possible , and it works partly because new technology can be built into locomotives .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report is a fine example of how this Parliament manages , on an issue as important as the interoperability of the Union ' s railways , to take decisions quickly and to avoid a Conciliation Committee and a third reading .
I therefore wish to congratulate Mr Savary on his openness to dialogue , on his competence and on his demonstration of how crucial the action of the European Parliament is to improving standards as important as those with a social aspect , improving the position of rail users and eastwards enlargement .
This is a warning to anyone who wishes to reduce our Parliament ' s ability to act for the sake of more rapid decision making .
This directive , which supplements those that we adopted in the last Brussels mini-session will , I hope , enable Europe to move beyond good intentions and give rail transport a greater role than it currently enjoys .
For a country such as Portugal , located at the south-western edge of Europe , the interoperability of rail transport is crucial .
Any country situated at the end or at the beginning of a railway line is always dependent on other countries if it is to enjoy a high level of cross-border traffic .
Connecting ports to railway lines that are interoperational is a decisive step towards improving the service that is provided , towards reducing transport costs and towards making European rail companies profitable .
Mr President , Commissioner de Palacio , ladies and gentlemen , although my sympathies lie very much with the rubber tyre , I am delighted that we have achieved a good result , not least as a consequence of Mr Savary ' s hard work .
It is clear that competitiveness on the railways has to be improved , and this is particularly important in congested Central Europe .
Europe needs a long-term railways policy , built on a common objective .
Rail transport must be subjected to an honest appraisal that weighs benefits alongside costs .
Then both industry and environmental organisations will be able to achieve consensus .
That is a miracle which is still realisable .
Improved competitiveness on the railways must first and foremost come about by reducing the costs rail transport incurs and raising standards of service .
At present , rail transport still , unfortunately , costs the taxpayer too much money , whether he or she takes trains or not .
It is time the inefficient state dinosaurs were made extinct to make way for a new , efficient , service-minded transport business .
The railway companies are still very much a relic of the past , and their standards of service are poor and inflexible when it comes to freight transport .
As for passenger traffic , that is an entirely separate matter : the most important factor with regard to service in this area is keeping strictly to the timetable .
The proposed directive being discussed is a rational one on the whole .
The standardisation of technical features will result in improved competitiveness on the railways without there being any negative effects on the status of other forms of transport .
Prioritising action by means of cost-benefit analyses will also be an important factor in determining how the most urgent measures should be implemented first , without wasting money .
This directive , if anything , is an example of the sort of added value cooperation at EU level can offer .
In this connection I would still like to remind people about something that is important for Finland .
Finland shares a border with Russia that is more than one thousand kilometres long .
Russian traffic accounts for a full 40 % of freight services handled by the state railways .
Because Russia has the same rail gauge as us , one that differs from that in the rest of the EU countries , there are also a lot of Russian carriages and wagons that run in Finland that are built in accordance with the GOST standards .
Finland has been accused , sometimes with good reason and sometimes not , of Finlandisation .
But the use of Russian carriages and wagons in rail services that ply between our two countries is due to the fact that when we send our own carriages and wagons across the border we are often looking at their tail lights for the last time .
For practical reasons we must be able to use Russian carriages and wagons in the future .
Mr Savary , the rapporteur , has done his best to take account of this , and I wish to thank him for it .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have come on a long way since the days of ' Stephenson ' s Rocket ' in the area of rail transport .
In spite of that , there is still a long way to go before we reach the terminus .
As , ultimately , my words will hardly prove immortal , I will curtail my speaking time by forty-five seconds .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all the important points have already been made , so I can only emphasise them once more , but I am glad to do so .
I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Savary , on his report and for succeeding in getting the directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system through the various hoops of the parliamentary system .
This was a matter of urgency , because interoperability is a fundamental prerequisite for liberalising international freight traffic , and this is something that we have together got on track , as it were , through the railways package .
The problem with conventional rail systems , as compared with high-speed trains , is that the various national systems in Europe are largely incompatible , yet they have involved enormous investment and can only be converted in stages through rebuilding and modification , and this needs to be done whilst still providing a rail service and in the face of continuing competition from other modes of transport .
Nevertheless , the convergence process needs to be stepped up for the sake of the railways themselves .
The directive , therefore , needs to be implemented as soon as possible .
This is also to be welcomed if an internal market is to be created for the supply industry .
I hope that rapid progress will be made with the bodies and procedures envisaged for establishing technical specifications and that they will initially concentrate on what can be achieved most quickly , that is to say on train control , safety and signalling equipment .
The rapporteur and this House have secured the inclusion of social provisions as well as technical specifications in the directive , and also strategic consideration of the candidate countries when drafting the TSIs .
That is positive .
As regards safety , I would , of course , have welcomed a more clear-cut vote in favour of independent third-party certification bodies , given that there is still a monopoly situation in some countries and that there are , therefore , conflicts of interest when it comes to certification or rather self-certification .
It seems to me that referring to subsidiarity in this context is too simplistic .
I am happy to support Mrs Jeggle in this area and I am now pinning my hopes on the railways safety package .
Mr President , I would firstly like to say that the Commission is pleased to see that the European Parliament has given priority to this report , to this initiative .
Specifically , the common position adopted by the Council on 10 November 2000 was received by the European Parliament at the end of November and the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism was able to debate a first draft report on 4 December 2000 .
I would also like to express my satisfaction and gratitude to the rapporteur , Mr Savary , and to the whole committee , but especially Mr Savary .
Thanks to his capacity for negotiation and for work on the whole of this issue , which is furthermore very complex , we have been able to make rapid progress .
In the end , the whole of the railways package , which we approved in the course of 2000 and this year , the beginning of 2001 , is decidedly French in nature , due to the important targets which have been adopted , no doubt with some Finnish touches , since the Finnish Presidency also played an important role .
Ladies and gentlemen , this directive is an essential provision of a technical nature , which also has great political importance , because it is the key element for the implementation of what we indicated when we approved the railways package , that is , to open up the transport of international goods to competition .
What we are doing through this latest interoperability measure is building a European railway .
This goes much further than opening up a sector or modifying some specific technical requirements .
This is a truly important moment in the short history of European integration . It is the construction of a European railway .
In this respect , we are also providing something very important for the European technology sector : the European railways industry , which includes some of the world ' s most technologically advanced industries , is being given the possibility of operating within a massive internal market of great dimensions which will lead to a lowering of costs and greater profits , which will therefore optimise all production and greater competitiveness at international and world level , beyond our European borders .
As you know , the European Parliament has just reached an agreement with the Council in relation to the whole of this proposed package and the year 2008 has been set as the final date for the complete opening up of the railway goods network .
Both Mr Swoboda and Mr Jarzembowski , who were rapporteurs for this package , played a decisive role .
I believe that these measures will clearly not be effective unless , at the same time , we enable Mr Savary ' s suggestions to be implemented , that is to say , that we go ahead with the removal of technical incompatibility .
And that is exactly what this measure does .
I must say that some of the major users and some operators who intend to use and benefit from the possibilities offered by this trans-European rail network have recently indicated to the services of the Commission a large number of technical or operative obstacles which hinder the organisation of international goods services .
It is in this context that this directive acquires even more importance and the interoperability of the conventional trans-European rail system will enable us to overcome some of these obstacles which we are facing by trying still to reserve certain national markets .
In this respect , I would like to congratulate you all once again on the achievement of having this directive approved on second reading .
Its adoption will guarantee a European dimension , create a competitive market for interoperable rail products . It will lead to the development of significant economies of scale which will benefit companies and the removal of technical barriers caused by the excessive fragmentation of the sector , which are often the result of collusion between monopolistic operators and their national suppliers within a captive market .
The Commission will devote itself heart and soul to implementing this directive , never losing sight of the fact that its success depends on the ability of all the rail agents involved - managers of infrastructures , rail companies and related industries - to employ their experience creatively and find effective and economic technical solutions , preventing the overlapping of solutions , which is unfortunately taking place in some cases .
Mr Bouwman asked me some questions and I would like to reply to them .
Specifically , before the adoption of the technical requirements on interoperability , consultations will be held to ascertain the opinions of the various users and parties involved , including infrastructure managers , operators , rail companies etc. and also the transport and user organisations and others .
This is one of the issues that I wanted to highlight .
With regard to the economic impact of interoperability , on the question of whether or not it makes sense to guarantee a single system in the future , an issue which in a sense Mr Vatanen also raised , I must say that , before proposing any decision on harmonised technical requirements , we must carry out a cost-benefit analysis which will justify the economic effort which will be required .
Therefore , as has been pointed out , what we are proposing is a two-stage process of harmonisation .
Some measures will be implemented rapidly , as the rapporteur , Mr Savary , has pointed out .
These will include administrative-type measures such as driving licences for train drivers , so that they may travel beyond national borders , a national licence , which will be a European licence , issues such as the documentation of the goods and signalling , which should be quicker to implement .
There are others , however , which are much more complicated to implement , such as , for example , harmonising the size of tunnels so that they may all have the same standard measurements .
That will take somewhat longer .
I would like to assure Mr Swoboda , as I have said repeatedly , that before the end of the year we hope to propose the pending measures , such as the directive on safety in rail transport , the issue of the opening up of goods transport to competition and the issue of passenger transport .
Of course , the whole issue of the enlargement of the European Union is a key factor for the rail sector , because rail transport is a key element in the development and the balanced growth of the new countries .
Thank you very much , Mr President , and thank you very much Mr Savary and the whole of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Recovery of cod stocks in the Irish Sea
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0042 / 2001 ) by Mr Nicholson , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing measures to be applicable in 2001 for the recovery of the stock of cod in the Irish Sea ( ICES Division VIIa ) [ COM ( 2000 ) 745 - C5-0683 / 2000 - 2000 / 0292 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , I would like to point out that the rapporteur is not present .
I would therefore like to read out a short piece of text .
I have not been authorised to do this , but I am the coordinator of the PPE Group .
I believe that this text , which emanates from my group , at least provides us with a satisfactory introduction .
It is very short .
I would then like to propose that we work our way through the list of speakers to the extent that the Members are actually present .
As I see that you are evidently all in agreement , I would like to read out the English text , which I have taken from EPP Highlights , on the subject of cod stocks in the Irish Sea .
The PPE-DE rapporteur , Jim Nicholson , will report tonight on the Commission proposal for emergency measures to control cod fishing in the Irish Sea .
With cod supplies at an all-time low Mr Nicholson is calling for restrictions to stop trawlers from catching juvenile cod .
He also calls for financial packages to be made available to those fishermen who decommission their vessels and for those who stay in port for the duration of the stock replenishment period .
Mr President , I am sorry that Mr Nicholson cannot be here himself today .
Now that I have read out that text , I would like to move on to my own comments .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are today debating the report by the honourable Member Mr Nicholson , whom I would like to thank for his swift and accurate work .
He was working under great time pressure .
Nevertheless , we have not let ourselves be influenced by the urgency of the Council 's timetable , and we are very pleased that we are able to give this subject rather more attention today .
Cod stocks and their condition have long since overtaken negotiations on the TAC and quotas and our hard work in that area , but unfortunately in a purely negative way .
That should give us politicians , and indeed everyone involved , food for thought .
Although the price of cod and other fish will rise , at the same time fishermen will have problems making a living and providing for their families in the long term .
The future of an important and historical sector of the economy in our coastal regions is increasingly at risk .
The fishing bans do not now only apply to the specific area covered by the report but have also been extended to large areas of the North Sea .
Stocks have suffered a further drastic fall in all areas .
On a positive note I would like to say that under your leadership , Commissioner , the Commission has reacted swiftly and consistently without waiting for regulations or proposals .
It is now our job to oversee these measures and to jointly learn lessons from this for our future policy .
The Member States are , of course , particularly prominent on the list of those responsible .
But we keep coming back to the same question : why did things have to get to this stage ?
Must it always take such horrendous news to stir us into action ?
When will we finally incorporate sustainability into our fisheries policy ?
The storm warnings for the Irish Sea were not just issued yesterday , nor did they apply to the Irish Sea alone .
Our present predicament demands that we should work together in the interests of consumers , fishermen and fish stocks .
Are we , despite all the Commission 's efforts , giving the fishermen affected enough opportunities to put forward their own ideas about resource management and market stabilisation ?
Are we working together closely enough at all levels to ensure that the most recent economic developments are promptly reflected in our policy ?
If we do not at long last collaborate closely , the next crisis could be fatal for us .
For example , the renewed debate on dioxins is deeply worrying .
At the end of the day , we need to be proactive instead of reactive .
When will we learn that lesson ?
How many sectors of the economy still have to give credence to this because of our catatonic state ? I particularly have in mind the chaotic BSE situation .
It is even more important than ever - and this applies across the board - for us to anticipate predictable developments and have the courage to take the wind out of our critics ' sails . And that means using not just words , but also deeds .
The proposal before us is a step in the right direction .
In particular , I welcome the flexible approach towards establishing a closed area and the pragmatic use of derogations .
This approach demonstrates that attention really is being paid to the interests of fishermen , by not actually imposing a total fishing ban but instead , where possible , by allowing other fishing to continue , with appropriate monitoring of course .
But at the same time I wish to stress that this is only one step in the right direction .
Similar problems await us in other waters , and even if they have not manifested themselves so clearly to date , the Irish Sea should be a warning for us all .
There is still a great deal to do .
I call on the Council and the Commission , as a matter of urgency , to develop further measures under the fisheries policy , not least so that our actions will really have an impact in future .
Mr President , I thank the rapporteur in his absence and Mrs Langenhagen for her speech .
Mrs Langenhagen has painted a very bleak picture of the state of cod in the Irish Sea .
The Irish Sea , as Mrs Langenhagen has said , is an example to us all of how a stock , if not managed correctly , can be decimated .
In just six years the amount of cod caught in the Irish Sea has halved .
In 1993 , 11 000 tonnes of cod was caught and in 1999 , 5 500 tonnes were caught .
This regulation for 2001 is necessary , however painful , if there is to be a cod fisheries at all in the Irish Sea .
It is an example to other areas as well .
A similar situation has arisen in the North Sea .
The cod stocks have declined so much that there has been a reduction of half in the total allowable catch and a new cod recovery programme introduced .
Vast stretches of the North Sea have been protected whilst the spawning season gets under way .
However , another consequence of the ban in cod fisheries over the next few months has been that the other areas where there is no ban are beginning to worry .
For example , in the Western Isles fishermen are concerned that because of the cod ban in the North Sea - and to some extent in the Irish Sea - cod stocks off the Butt of Lewis and south of Barra will be adversely effected .
After years of sustainable fisheries in these waters people fear that the adverse effect of these protective measures will be a decimation of their own stocks .
These fears can only be compounded when just last week in Mallaig , with the opening of the scallop beds , a dramatic increase in boats could be witnessed , which would otherwise have been fishing for the banned species .
We have to think about the adverse effects on other fisheries when protective measures are introduced .
It is somewhat ironic that in protecting fish stocks in one area we are inadvertently destroying stocks in another area .
In conclusion , the reform of the common fisheries policy and the launch of the Green Paper in March are critical to stock preservation and to the fishing industry .
We have to get the balance right between sustainability and a successful industry on the other hand .
The reform of the common fisheries policy , I believe , is an opportunity .
We must make sure that we get the reforms right .
I thank the rapporteur in his absence .
Mr President , in his report on the Irish Sea fishery Mr Nicholson recognises that this area has the dubious honour of pioneering the use of emergency measures to arrest the decline in cod stocks .
But in the North Sea , too , we are subject to emergency measures this year , necessary measures aimed at maximum protection of cod during the spawning period between now and the end of April .
Why is it then that , after so many years of a common fisheries policy whose principal intention is to conserve stocks , we have to resort to emergency measures in the Irish and North Sea cod areas ?
While accepting the need for these short-term measures , we must also learn from past mistakes and prepare sensible long-term management proposals to try to deal with these situations .
The technical measures which have been pioneered in areas like Scotland must be built on and improved and extended to all areas of fishery .
Appropriate action must be taken to prevent the displacement of effort leading to damage in other areas and to other stocks .
The impact of industrial fishery must be properly assessed , in terms both of its allowable white fish by-catch , and of its effect on the whole marine food chain .
Clearly a significant downturn in fishing activity can be expected in the next few years , and clearly with that significant downturn in activity will come a significant downturn in the income of many families and many communities in our fishing areas , both in the catching sector and in processing .
Just as the economic and social effects of the lack of a new agreement with Morocco have been felt in very particular areas , so the effects of these emergency measures in the long-term cod recovery plans will have an effect in very particular areas .
There is a case for looking at similar financial compensation measures for these areas .
The CFP review provides a challenge and an opportunity .
I hope that the solution we come up with will be one that actually works .
The best means of doing that is to make sure that the new fisheries policy includes significant and adequate involvement of stakeholders - of fishermen , processors , scientists and conservationists from particular areas such as the North Sea , so that we can work together to recommend proposals for management which are tailored to and targeted towards the needs of these particular areas .
Mr President , the majority of the earth 's surface consists of sea .
People cannot live there but we make ever more intensive use of it .
Not just to travel from one continent to another , but also to drill for oil , to extract other minerals , to dump waste and to generate electricity using tidal power stations .
Mercury , lead and radioactive waste are reducing sea-life and making fish ever less fit for human consumption .
Shallow coastal regions , river mouths and other transitions between fresh and salt water , where fish used to have their spawning grounds , have been greatly altered as a result of human interference .
The sea has long been regarded as the source of an inexhaustible food supply .
It is being fished with ever larger vessels and with ever more refined technology to clear out the sea .
This is being done in the seas bordering Europe , but to an increasing extent further away as well , by European ships along the African coast .
I have previously taken a stance by rejecting agreements which the European Union enters into with countries in the developing world in order to be able to go and fish the sea there until it , too , is exhausted .
In the short term , it is true , this will provide a solution to the European food requirement and in exchange we will also pay something to poor countries for it .
In the long term , however , it is definitely not a win-win situation from which we all stand to gain .
The demand for fish continues to grow while the supply continues to decline as a result of overfishing and pollution .
There are still fishermen who believe that the sea remains inexhaustible .
Last week I heard a fisherman who was being interviewed on Dutch television say , " The fish will always be there , that has always been the case and it says so in the Bible as well " .
These sorts of certainties , which appeared to be true for centuries , will increasingly vanish in the future .
That is why it is good that times and areas are designated in which the fish stock has to reach a certain level and when and where fishing is prohibited as a result .
For the same reason , the fishing quotas must be restricted .
The rapporteur recognises that the supply of cod in the fishing ports on the east coast of the Irish and North Sea has declined dramatically in the last ten years .
The quantity currently permitted is less than a fifth of that at the beginning of the nineties .
The actual catches , which are smaller than those permitted , fell to a quarter .
That is how exhausted the sea is .
In spite of this , the rapporteur wants to extend the exclusion period in which the catch is less restricted , by six weeks between 22 February and 30 April and he criticises the large area of sea to be closed off to fishing during the spawning season .
Groups of fishermen protest if they get the impression that governmental measures are unilaterally to the disadvantage of their country while their colleagues from other countries are allowed to carry on clearing out the sea .
Then pressure arises to mitigate measures and to permit more exclusions .
In this way , attention is at risk of being diverted from the necessity of fishing quotas .
Owing to the short-term disadvantages , everyone expresses outrage and opposition to fishing quotas .
But we would be better advised to close more areas completely for a prolonged period than to let the fish die out completely as a result of inadequate measures .
This is currently under discussion with regard to the North Sea as well .
Mr President , the survival of cod is seriously endangered in various European waters .
The Commission is rightly introducing measures which should protect this species of fish from extinction .
But like the emergency measure which the Commission has announced for the North Sea , its measure for the Irish Sea is also half-hearted .
The Commission 's measures are chiefly based on political feasibility and lack the necessary scientific basis .
In the case of the emergency measure for the North Sea , a measure which particularly affects the Dutch fishing fleet was opted for .
Politically it is feasible , the fact is that things are going well for the Dutch fleet and other Member States and fleets appear to hate this .
That is why the Dutch protest and the alternatives put forward do not win approval anywhere .
Closure of an area does not have a sufficient effect on the recovery of the cod .
Neither in the North Sea nor in the Irish Sea .
The fact is that fishing will move to open areas where spawning may be taking place and young cod may be present .
If fishing moves to areas where concentrations of young fish are present , then the measure itself will hamper the recovery of the cod .
In addition , it is striking that the North Sea emergency measure does not prohibit targeted fishing of cod with stationary nets , in which precisely those fish ready for spawning are caught , within the twelve-mile zone and within the plaice box .
As a result of greater fishing pressure in open areas , stocks of other species of fish and seabed ecosystems will also be damaged .
The alternative measure that has been put forward by the Dutch State Secretary for Fisheries , on the other hand , offers cod a much better chance of survival .
This plan , a suspension of all cod-related fleets for a substantial number of weeks per year , can still save the cod .
And at least as important , this plan is supported both by maritime biologists and the maritime sector .
However , the Commission does not consider the policy to be feasible .
Its emergency measure may result in our only finding cod in one kind of European water soon , that is to say in formalin .
Unfortunately , Mr Nicholson is adopting the half-hearted stance of the Commission in his report .
Of course , the blow to the fishing industry is great , but the blow will be much greater if there are no more cod left soon .
The Commission must examine how it can accommodate the fishermen financially , undoubtedly the fishermen will have to make sacrifices .
In order to provide for the future , Dutch fishermen are willing to do so and I am convinced that the Northern Irish fishermen possess the same willingness .
That just leaves the Commission .
Mr President , can I first of all apologise to you , your predecessor and the House for my late arrival .
My problems began this morning at a very early point when my flight from Belfast to London was cancelled .
Thanks to British Midland International and the good work of their staff , I got here rather late , but still I am here .
I apologise , as I did not intend to be discourteous to the House .
I listened with tremendous interest to Mr van Dam talking about half-baked approaches by the Commission and how well the Dutch fishermen were responding .
Mr van Dam should go back and read my report because I neither criticised the Commission nor the fishermen .
This is not an easy problem . It is a very serious problem .
To some extent the fishermen in my region faced this problem last year .
For them , this is the second year of closure .
I should tell Mr van Dam and the Scottish fishermen , who are now facing the first year of closure and are creating a lot of waves , that the fishermen from my region not only took this in their stride but actually responded in a very positive way .
They cooperated with the Commission in the technical measures and were prepared to look very sincerely at them .
It is not easy for fishermen to take on board a closure of their area for such an extensive period .
It is even more difficult when there are no support mechanisms to help the industry find a way forward .
This is what I want to concentrate on .
When I raise the problem of the Commission coming forward with concrete proposals - be it set-aside or support mechanisms - the Commission says : " let the national authorities come forward with ideas and we will take them on board in a very positive way . "
But the problem is that the national authorities will not come forward with any sincere proposals to help the fishermen in the region .
Certainly not the United Kingdom authorities - and it does not really matter whether it is a Conservative or Labour Government .
Neither of them would ever come forward with any positive support to help the fishermen .
I have one amendment to my report and I ask the Commissioner to take it on board .
It is to allow the fishermen , under the supervision already agreed at the early part of the closure , to continue right through that closure .
If at any time the discards exceed part of that closure , then the fishermen will quite readily accept .
At this moment , the Commission has set its face against accepting this amendment .
This is unfortunate because the cooperation that is being given by the fishermen to the Commission is a shining example to other parts of the European Union .
As Mr van Dam said , there is a tremendous problem , there is tremendous concern and we have to ensure the future of cod for the future of fishermen .
I hope the Commission will be able to take on board the very positive aspect that I have put forward in my amendment .
Mr President , Mr Nicholson 's report underlines the serious crisis now affecting fish stocks in the waters around Britain and Ireland .
The very fact that the Commission has found it necessary to implement emergency measures in four separate areas to save exhausted fish stocks , serves to illustrate the total failure of the common fisheries policy .
As of today , 12 February 2001 , more that 40 000 square miles of the North Sea will be closed for 12 weeks to all white fish trawling .
In addition , there will be emergency closures covering the West of Scotland , the Irish Sea , as we have heard , and North Atlantic hake and all of this comes on top of the savage cuts in total allowable catches and quotas announced by the Council last December .
The common fisheries policy in its current form has been operating for 18 years .
The system of tax and quotas has led to massive quantities of healthy fish being dumped dead back into the sea .
Over two million tonnes of fish a year , 25 % of the total fish catch in the EU , are discarded in this manner .
The system of MAGPs has also been a disaster .
Member States who attempt to observe these rules are punished while other Member States ignore the MAGPs entirely .
So , the CFP has failed in its core objectives .
It has failed to sustain fish stocks and it has failed to secure a future for our fishermen .
This latest round of cuts and emergency measures will again drive hundreds more out of the industry .
The cod recovery measures in the Irish Sea last year cost the Irish Sea fleet a devastating drop in income of 42 % during the closed season .
Despite this appalling crisis , despite the fact that there are too many fishermen chasing too few fish around the North Sea and the Irish Sea , this House voted overwhelmingly at its last part-session in January to do away with 6 and 12-mile limits around our shores , to open equal access to the North Sea and to break into the Shetland and Irish boxes .
These decisions will be regarded by many fishermen in the UK and Ireland as the last straw .
Sixty-five per cent of the entire fishing resources of the EU are to be found in the waters surrounding the British Isles , that is the UK and Ireland .
Why should we sit back and allow our fish to be plundered and allow our fishermen to be impoverished ?
It was extremely foolish and short-sighted of this House to vote the way it did on the reports last month .
It may well prove to be the last straw that breaks the camel 's back and may drive the UK out of the common fisheries policy .
Mr President , the situation of the stocks of different species and the measures for their recovery is always a very controversial issue .
The Socialist Group supports the conclusions of Mr Nicholson , in his report , in relation to the Commission proposal for the recovery of cod stocks in the Irish Sea .
We understand very well that the over-fishing of a species for one year is paid for over the following years and that the recovery of stocks is very costly and slow .
However , we also understand that the inactivity of a section of a fleet over a long period means the loss of jobs and markets and many difficulties for the future of that fleet .
I therefore agree with Mr Nicholson that this is an issue which requires a great deal of balance and consideration .
The sector often complains - with good reason - that it is ignored when proposals are adopted by the Commission , since these are almost exclusively based on scientific reports which do not take account of the experience and everyday lives of the fishermen .
I would ask the Commission to combine this everyday reality experienced by the fishermen with the work of the scientists and , when formulating proposals , to take greater account of the socio-economic situation of the regions which depend on fishing .
All of this should be done with the greatest transparency , clearly explaining to the sector the reasons for which particular measures are adopted .
I do not believe that the common fisheries policy is a failure .
In this respect I completely disagree with the Member who spoke before me .
I believe that , in the same way that the reform of the common agricultural policy is only possible through a redefinition of the rural world , the reform of the CFP also has to be very ambitious and develop in parallel with the reform of the fishing world , of those regions which depend on fishing , which will surely have to face the future by bringing other approaches into play , which are different to those which they have been employing up till now and which depend exclusively on an extractive model .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Nicholson for his report , and for the speed with which he researched and did the work .
I appreciate his very open and honest attitude to this .
He has not gone back and told fishermen around the Irish Sea that the European Commission is trying to persecute them or to do them an injustice .
He has put the problem to the public at home the way he has put it here .
A problem exists .
Our colleague over in the far corner of the House spoke earlier and quoted the Bible .
The Bible , someone said , tells us that there will always be fish in the sea .
Well , I want to quote a more up-to-date document about the codfish .
I am quoting the author Mark Kurlansky in his book ' Cod : A Biography of the Fish that changed the World ' .
According to Kurlansky , the Encyclopaedia of Commerce and Navigation printed in New York in 1858 said that the codfish was a species so well-known that there was no need to explain anything about it , that it was extraordinarily prolific and that someone had counted the eggs of a middling-sized codfish and found that there were 9 835 000 eggs .
The encyclopaedia came to the conclusion that mankind could never exterminate this species .
We have proven both the Bible and this nineteenth-century encyclopaedia wrong .
Mr Stevenson is too young to remember the cod wars which were fought around the coast of Iceland in my lifetime - in fact , at a time when I was already in politics .
The British - with due respect to all States in the Union - sent warships to Icelandic waters to ensure that their fishermen were protected when going there to fish the stocks in Icelandic waters .
It is good that opinion in Britain is changing in favour of the right of coastal fishermen , which I always accepted , to exploit their own resources .
With all due respect to Mr Stevenson , who is a good representative of his people and very enthusiastic , I do not accept that the common fisheries policy is a failure .
I do not accept that British fishermen have been wronged , because if you look at the figures the British fishing industry is getting its natural share of European fish .
The only country that has been ' wronged ' are the Irish fishermen who have been denied their natural share and who were never allowed to exploit the seas .
In the sixteenth century the British went to war with the Hanseatic League over Icelandic cod and they only withdrew from that war after some casualties because they discovered a new source of cod off the coast of America .
This is an old story .
But do not go back and tell the fishermen of Europe that it is the European Commission which is to be blamed .
It is trying to solve a difficult problem .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to make it clear that in the course of this Strasbourg part-session , during which the Green Paper on the reform of fisheries policy will be on the table , we will have ample opportunity to discuss fisheries policy in general .
For that reason , at this point I only wish to comment on the report actually before us now .
I think no one would deny that it is an incontrovertible fact that cod stocks are at an all-time low in the Irish Sea .
Another incontrovertible fact is that if we wish to protect the stock of cod , there is only one thing to do : we must leave the stock alone during the spawning season .
That is why it is very important to close the spawning grounds in good time before the start of the spawning season , even if that is very painful , and even if that inevitably creates problems for fishermen .
And time is short , because the spawning season starts in the middle of this month .
I know that everyone involved up to now , and I would particularly like to thank the Committee on Fisheries and the rapporteur , has gone to great pains to ensure that we meet the deadline we have set ourselves .
You will be voting on the report tomorrow , and that just leaves enough time for us to make a decision in Council so that the regulation can come into force on 15 February .
The Commission is totally in agreement with the report before us and I would like to thank you once again for your support .
I shall now turn to the amendment that has been tabled .
Unfortunately , I have to reject this amendment .
Why ?
Last year we carried out a number of trial catches with semi-pelagic trawls , precisely during the second half of the closure period .
These trials clearly showed that the risk to cod is very high during this period and that there is a significant by-catch of cod .
However , the Commission is willing to allow semi-pelagic trawls to be used during the first half of the closure period , subject to the conditions mentioned by Mr Nicholson , namely that there should be a specific observation system in accordance with Article 3 and that these activities will cease if the by-catch of cod becomes excessive .
We are also aware that the second condition I mentioned involves a certain risk , but because of the observation system , if there should be a further closure next year we will be in a position to say whether or not this exception can also be made during the first part of next year 's closure period .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Fischler .
And thank you for being so brief .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.30 p.m. )
Madam President , I would like to take advantage of the Commission President ' s attendance to ask him about a serious matter .
Every year , the European Movement in France organises a very important event , " Europe Day " , on 9 May .
This year we wish to organise a day dedicated to the euro .
Since last September , this movement has been asking you to fund this day . It is not possible to organise the day without your support .
Yet , to date , we have received no assurance that the Commission ' s contribution will be paid .
If we have no such assurance by the end of the week , the European Movement in France will have to abandon the idea of organising this year ' s " Europe Day " .
I believe this would be extremely harmful to the common cause to which we dedicate all our strength .
Mr Prodi , do you wish to give Mrs Berès such assurance now or later in the course of your speech ?
Mrs Berès , I am not familiar with the details of the question you have raised , but I will investigate the matter immediately and give you a response today .
Thank you , Mr President .
Vote on a request for urgent procedure
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has decided to apply the procedure without report to that proposal .
I shall give the floor immediately to Mr Watson , who is Chairman of that committee , to give us its opinion .
Watson ( ELDR ) , Chairman of the Committee on Citizen 's Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
Madam President , the committee which I have the honour to chair is very much aware of the importance of this matter and the urgency of its adoption before 25 March 2001 , to allow the Nordic Union to be fully involved .
We would have preferred to have been informed of this earlier by the Council .
They have brought it to us at the very last moment .
Nonetheless , in the circumstances it is our view that we would not wish to delay the vote on this , and we consider it best to treat this as a matter without report ; we would therefore suggest that it be put straight to the vote in this part-session .
There being no Member who wishes to speak against this urgent procedure , we shall put the matter to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request for urgent procedure )
Commission work programme for 2001 / Nice
The next item is the joint debate on the presentation of the Commission 's programme for 2001 and the oral question to the Commission tabled by Mr van Velzen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats , on the follow-up to the Nice European Council ( B5-0006 / 2001 ) .
I now give the floor to Mr Prodi , President of the Commission .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is only right that we should hold a general debate on the state of the Union once a year .
I would like today 's debate to be another step forward along the road we are to travel in 2001 .
It is a road which will clearly be marked by a number of events and priorities , which I shall mention shortly , but , most importantly , it will be taking us already - and I am tempted to say at last - in the direction of the Europe of tomorrow .
The Commission of which I have the honour of being President has always asked to be judged by what it does . That is why it is extremely important for me that cooperation between the Commission and Parliament , and the Commission 's fruitful relationship with the Member States in the Council , lead to substantial , practical results .
This is why I hope that this annual debate will become a valuable forum for free , open , common debate in which we can discuss our successes and problems in a constructive atmosphere , with a view to accomplishing the projects which are of real concern to the citizens of Europe .
I know that , on these occasions , the tradition is for the Commission President to present a detailed review of the policies implemented , but I am sure that nobody will object if I depart somewhat from that tradition and confine today 's discussion to our main priorities for 2001 and to the longer-term question of Europe 's future .
I will not dwell on the last 12 months .
When I stood before this House , a year ago , I announced the four strategic objectives that my Commission had set itself : one , to promote new forms of governance on a European scale ; two , to stabilise Europe and consolidate our influence in the world ; three , to set new economic and social priorities ; and four , to improve the quality of life for all .
With a view to improving the quality of life of the European citizens , we published our White Paper on Food Safety and a proposal for a regulation laying down requirements and basic principles in the area of food safety .
We also proposed to set up a European Food Agency , which will come into operation next year .
In addition to this , we proposed to set up a European Air Safety Authority and prepared new , tough legislation on maritime safety following the Erika disaster .
To promote a new social and economic agenda for Europe , we put forward detailed , ambitious proposals to the Lisbon European Council . As a result , the EU now has an integrated strategy that will allow it to become the most dynamic , competitive knowledge-based economy in the world .
The key to stabilising our continent is our strategy for enlarging the European Union .
Throughout 2000 , the Commission resolutely pursued accession negotiations with the candidate countries , and we also launched the public debate on a genuine migration policy .
Finally , to promote new forms of European governance , we set to work on a White Paper which is scheduled to be published before the end of the summer .
Essentially , ladies and gentlemen , my Commission delivered on its commitments during 2000 , seeking clear , simple solutions .
Today , before this House , I want to say how proud I am of my staff , for whom 2000 was a year of far-reaching internal reforms .
My fellow Commissioners and I are aware that we have made considerable demands of our colleagues , not only in terms of workload , but especially because they have had to adapt to changes in working methods and to taking greater individual responsibility for their action .
Internal reform , while clearly not a political objective in itself , is nevertheless one of the Commission 's ongoing tasks for 2001 .
Indeed , every organisation of every kind has to adapt continuously to a changing world .
That is what we are trying to do right now .
However , no administration can be expected to cope with so much stress for very long , however genuinely necessary the changes are .
I am therefore determined to bring the internal reforms to a swift conclusion , in a climate of consultation and transparency , while fully complying with all our undertakings .
The Commission 's political decisions are set out in the work programme for 2001 which was adopted at the end of January and immediately forwarded to Parliament .
The key elements of this programme are structured around a number of major events .
These are not a random collection of disparate items . They are linked by the constant guiding principle that our action must meet the practical needs of Europe 's citizens and protect their interests .
The debate on the future of the Union , which I shall be saying more about shortly , is also based on that principle .
But first , let me describe the Commission 's major initiatives for this year in greater detail .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , all our work since the Lisbon Summit and in preparing for Stockholm has had one constant aim : to create and preserve the conditions in which we can leave to our children a dynamic , just and prosperous Europe whose citizens have the latest skills , good jobs and an active role within our Community .
On the basis of the Commission 's input , the Lisbon Summit last year produced a strategy for achieving this goal .
Next month , at Stockholm , on the basis of the Commission 's reports , the European Council will review progress to date - the areas where we have forged ahead , but also the areas where we are lagging behind .
One of the key goals of our strategy is to restore the right conditions for full employment .
We are already seeing some encouraging progress : last year , 2.5 million jobs were created , more than two thirds of which taken up by women .
This is a truly high figure , although it will clearly have to be repeated over a number of years to resolve the issue of unemployment .
However , in some sectors , as our Stockholm report makes clear , progress has been far too slow .
European leaders therefore need greater political will and to be aware of the urgent requirement to fulfil the promises made in Lisbon on , for example , the Community patent , the Galileo programme and the liberalisation of gas and electricity , programmes which are vital for our future .
Nor , as yet , do we have a coherent strategy on lifelong learning .
What we need now , therefore , is fresh energy to accelerate action in some key areas .
We identify 10 key areas in our report for Stockholm , in particular - although I will not list them all - frontier technologies , integrated financial markets , and the new skills and mobility provided by the new European labour markets .
At Stockholm , I will urge the Heads of State and Government to seize the opportunity and not to rest on their laurels : we need to push ahead resolutely with the reforms already agreed upon in Lisbon .
To give you an idea of our report , here are three important recommendations it contains .
Firstly , to eliminate barriers that discourage people from entering the work force or restrict the mobility of workers .
To do this , we need more efficient tax systems , more investment in education and lifelong learning and , lastly , specific measures to address the skills gap .
We also need action to guarantee the portability of professional qualifications and pensions between different sectors and countries .
Secondly , also by way of example , we need to accelerate economic reforms .
Services represent three quarters of our gross domestic product but there is still no genuine internal market in this sector .
Thirdly , Europe must be at the forefront of innovation if we are to be able to create a European Research Area .
I do not need to say any more about this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there has to be a stable balance between our policies to ensure that all Europe 's vital assets , our economic assets but also our social capital and our environment , are preserved for future generations .
If we are to get that long-term balance right , we need a strategy for sustainable development .
The Commission is working on just such a strategy , which will be discussed at the culmination of the current presidency , the Gothenburg European Council .
We are aiming to translate the rather abstract concept of sustainable development into practical , comprehensible terms and concrete , visible action which will affect the citizens ' working and everyday lives .
It will therefore be a strategy for innovation and increased investment in that area , which will also exploit the opportunities provided by frontier technology : a strategy fixing prices at a level which better reflects the costs of environmental degradation .
A long-term political project of this kind clearly requires effective prior consultation .
In order to promote this discussion , Madam President , I have already written to you , proposing a major debate in the European Parliament on these issues .
The views expressed by this House will , indeed , be valuable to the Commission in developing its strategic proposal for the Gothenburg Summit , a proposal which , I repeat , must be practical , or it will be a weak summit .
We intend , moreover , to stimulate lively discussion not only within the European institutions but , more generally , with our citizens , by issuing a consultative document .
Our aim is to achieve an all-encompassing , coherent , long-term orientation for the management of European affairs .
Turning now to the Union 's relations with the rest of the world : we are receiving clearer signals from our citizens every day , telling us that if we really want to harness the potential of globalisation for the good of us all , we must be willing to take decisions in this area as well .
In the short term , this means including a new round of trade negotiations in our priorities for 2001 , although that is not wholly up to us .
Indeed , a new round would be the best way of strengthening the multilateral system with further trade liberalisation and new rules that meet the demands of civil society .
We must also negotiate in crucial areas such as competition and investment , and focus more sharply on the interests of developing countries .
Indeed , the developing countries are the key element in the whole process .
Trade policy cannot just be concerned with the interests of the business world : we have to ensure that it benefits the world 's poorest peoples .
We therefore call upon Parliament and the Council to accept , this month , our proposal to allow the 48 poorest countries in the world to export everything but arms to the European Union quota free , tariff free across the board .
( Applause ) Yesterday , I received a telephone call from the United Nations Secretary-General , who has just returned from the Middle East . At the end of the conversation , he specifically asked me to call upon you and upon the Council to proceed with this project , advocated by Commissioner Lamy , the entire Commission and the presidency , which , despite all the problems it will bring us and our countries , does represent a change .
We are also ready to cooperate with the new US Administration and Congress on trade issues .
Naturally , President Bush has his regional priorities , but I know that he and his colleagues understand the importance of the multilateral system .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , another major milestone on the road ahead is , of course , the introduction of euro notes and coins at the end of the year .
As soon as it takes the form of coins jangling in our pockets , the euro will become a tangible everyday reality for the citizens .
Over the next ten and a half months , the Commission will be working hard together with the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies to complete the preparations for this extremely important event : a historical event which will have a permanent effect on the lives of Europeans .
This will require a huge and - in particular - unprecedented organisational structure .
However , not everyone welcomes the idea of giving up an old , familiar currency for a new and unfamiliar one , and there are bound to be some teething problems .
We must therefore make every endeavour to make the public understand the advantages the euro will bring us all and that it will be the symbol of a vigorous , modern economy .
In any case , it is already the symbol of a typically European project , carried through on time , as planned , by Europe for Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to conclude by returning to the issue I raised earlier : the debate on the future of Europe after Nice .
Despite all the limitations of the Treaty of Nice that we have already discussed , it does , to my mind , have two merits : firstly , its very existence , which is no small achievement .
As far as we are concerned , there are now no further obstacles to enlargement .
Secondly , it opens up the broader , post-Nice debate on the future of the European Union .
As I said to you in January , and in line with the declaration annexed to the Treaty , the first stage of the process will be one of " open reflection " .
This will enable the December European Council to initiate a second stage , which I have termed " structured reflection " , leading ultimately to a brief , decisive Intergovernmental Conference .
I am convinced that this is the right approach and there seems to be widespread agreement on it .
What I want to talk about chiefly today in this Chamber is the first stage , because it relates to 2001 .
The open reflection stage , which we have already entered , is , in my opinion , crucial for three reasons : firstly because of the paradox that the words and actions of the European citizens are making more obvious every day , that Europe is increasingly necessary but also seen as increasingly remote .
We therefore need a debate which will involve everybody and all levels of society if we are to relaunch and complete the great project of establishing a European Union .
Secondly , the disappointing outcome of the Nice Conference .
What was missing at Nice was , above all , an in-depth discussion in the preparatory stages about what we want from Europe and for Europe .
The talks went on and on , but they never touched on the fundamental issues . This debate can be postponed no longer .
Thirdly and finally , there is an increasingly widespread impression , which I share , that the method common in the past of constructive ambiguities , of leaving things unsaid , is no longer appropriate .
We have now entered a new stage in which the basic issues are staring us in the face and cannot be ignored .
Since 1981 , first the Community and then the Union have been going through a continual process of adjustment , restructuring , enlargement and adaptation .
For almost a whole generation , a constant earth tremor has been shaking our institutions , and it has swept away the landmarks familiar to the public in our countries and sown doubt over the wisdom of our decisions and of the direction in which we are headed .
We have taken decisions of historic dimension which will unite the continent .
It would be both absurd and dangerous to build this unity around a vague agreement , around fuzzy undertakings and conflicting hidden agendas .
So what public debate are we talking about ?
It has to be a constitutional debate on the fundamental nature of the Union .
I trust the judgment of our citizens and their elected representatives provided the debate is pitched at the right level : this is not about the curvature of cucumbers or Euromyths and distortions but about genuine issues , issues of concern to the citizens , most of whom want Europe to do more , not less .
The questions the European citizens ask are not about cucumbers , but we have to admit that they are not chiefly about the institutional debate in which we have been engaged since Maastricht and which is now - we cannot deny it , especially after Nice - going round in circles .
I think the real problem is that , somewhere along the way , we lost the thread of the agreement between our Member States on which direction we should be taking .
Our disagreements are less and less easily hidden behind the hair-splitting protocols and the complex formulas . These disagreements arise partly , I feel , because the debate has been poorly conducted in recent years .
Too often it has been an argument purely about power . We must get to the heart of the issues .
There is bound to be some disagreement on the ultimate purpose of the Union for , thankfully , we are all different , but I find some consolation in the thought that we can at least agree on the essentials .
This brings us to the heart of the matter , to the fundamental questions I want publicly discussed .
For example : are we all clear that we want to build something that can aspire to be a world power ? In other words , not just a trading bloc but a political entity ?
Are we all aware of the vital issues at stake here and upon which the future of our communities depends ? Do we realise that our nation States , taken individually , would find it far more difficult to assert their existence and their identity on the world stage ?
Another question : how much social and economic solidarity are we prepared to show one another ?
Not just to prevent monetary shocks or to prevent the internal market breaking up but because we believe that our peoples should help one another , taking part in a joint enterprise .
And again : are we prepared to show the same solidarity when it comes to internal and external security ?
Then : what sort of environment shall we leave to future generations ?
Finally : what are the most effective ways of enabling the European peoples to protect and uphold the values of democracy , solidarity and justice ?
To my mind , these are the sorts of questions we should ask in this year 's debate .
They are specifically political , not institutional , and it is in answering them that we will decide the level at which we wish to live and work together .
By opening this great debate on these subjects , I am not asking you or the citizens to embark upon a discussion with no fixed parameters . It is not a case of ' back to the drawing board ' .
We are talking about a Europe that has achieved many great , useful things during the 50 years since the Community and Union were founded , a Europe that has achieved peace and prosperity and , most recently , established the single currency .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , these are the questions that you , together with the members of our national parliaments , and our governments , must start to ask and answer .
Let me be clear on this : I am not confusing the public debate , which must be completely open to civil society , with democratic representation .
European and national parliaments have the legitimacy of being elected .
When the time comes for a structured debate leading to concrete results , the method we follow must take account of that .
We shall then be entering the second stage , following Laeken .
No one now imagines that this stage can proceed without European and national parliaments being closely involved , firstly because Europe is not just a matter of cooperation between States - it is also about relations between peoples and has long been so - but also because the deadlock between nationalistic positions will not produce the vision and imagination needed for a fundamental rethink of Europe .
After Laeken , once suitable preparations have been made , the structured debate will have to be based on a formula which unites all the key players - the European Parliament , the national parliaments , the governments and the Commission - a formula which will be increasingly refined by Laeken itself and the subsequent European Councils in 2002 .
It is from this ongoing dialogue between the European Council and the convention , or conference or assembly or forum , whatever we choose to call it ( let us not get into the dangerous territory of terminology ) that the right questions would be able to emerge . Finally , all the institutional implications could be drawn from it .
Clearly , then , there can be no question of limiting the scope of this exercise to the four topics listed at Nice .
I fully endorse what Mr Michel Barnier said to your Committee on Constitutional Affairs , namely that what must emerge from the post-Nice debate is a coherent , durable design for our enlarged Union . The Commission will , of course , contribute its share of the work and take a number of initiatives .
It has already done so by proposing , in particular , the reorganisation of the Treaties , which is already on the table . It will do so again by helping Parliament and the successive Presidencies to organise the " deeper and wider debate " called for in the Nice declaration .
It will also do so through the White Paper on governance .
Do not expect the White Paper to deliver a ready-made definition of the competences of the Union and the States .
It will not take up positions on constitutional questions . What it will do is help by proposing ways of genuinely decentralising the administration of the Union and ways of applying our common policies at the most appropriate level , that is , as closely as possible to the citizens .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is sometimes said - and I tend to agree - that European integration was the most important event in the second half of the twentieth century .
And with dependable regularity , at every stage of European integration , certain critics have decried the project as an impossible , or even laughable , utopian dream .
When the European currency was first conceived , comments were made which I cannot bring myself to repeat . Instead , at the end of 2001 , we shall see coins and bank notes being issued .
We have got to where we are , and we should be proud of it .
( Loud , sustained applause )
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome this debate on the Commission work programme for 2001 , even though we feel that it is overdue ; because of Nice , there was perhaps no alternative but to hold this debate now , in February 2001 .
But we trust that , in coming years , this debate will be held in the autumn of each year preceding the year to which the programme being debated relates , as agreed .
I must , however , address a few words of severe criticism to the Council : ladies and gentlemen , I think it is scandalous for the Council of Ministers and the presidency not to be represented here during the Commission 's presentation of its programme of work .
It is absolutely unacceptable .
But it shows where the shortcomings lie .
The Foreign Ministers are off trotting the globe , which I have nothing against , after all it is their job ; but , at the same time , they are also responsible for European affairs .
Clearly , European policy is no longer foreign policy and making Foreign Ministers responsible for European policy - and their absence is proof of this - is no longer in keeping with the times and we need to change these arrangements .
We need people in government dealing solely with Europe .
( Applause from the right )
Which is why I call for a Council of Ministers for Europe who will always be free to attend Parliament .
It takes more to shape Europe than a few high-flying speeches by Foreign Ministers ; it means working day in day out on Europe as our project for the future .
Which is why we want structural changes in the Council of Ministers .
( Applause from the right )
We were delighted to hear that the President of France , Jacques Chirac , has followed Commission President Prodi in calling for a public debate on the post-Nice process .
We want a broad , public debate on the future of our continent and , Mr President of the Commission , we as a group - I cannot speak for the whole of Parliament - are on your side , we are your allies , when it comes to the future of Europe .
We want to strengthen you as a Community institution , because the Council appears at present to be unable to muster up the strength to act as a Community institution and representative of the common interest .
You referred to the European Parliament 's involvement in this process .
We should like to be more specific .
Our family of parties , the European People 's Party , passed a resolution at its congress in January of this year recommending a reform conference modelled on the convention , i.e. involving the European Parliament , the national parliaments , the government , the Commission and the Council .
We want Stockholm , then Gothenburg , and finally Laeken under the Belgian Presidency to send out signals in this direction , so that this sort of conference can start work in 2002 .
This conference should form the cornerstone of broad public debate in Europe , which should be given a structured start at this sort of conference .
My second comment concerns asylum and immigration policy .
Mr President of the Commission , we call on the Commission to make a common asylum and immigration policy a focal point , because national policies are obviously not getting us anywhere .
Only a common policy can resolve these difficult issues .
The Head of State of an important country - I refer to the chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany - said that , if we agree on an asylum and immigration policy in principle , we will be able to switch over quickly to qualified majority voting .
I call on the Commission to push ahead , so that , once we have reached agreement in principle , we can switch to qualified majority voting on asylum and immigration policy as quickly as possible .
But we also call on the Commission to take account of the consequences in its initiatives .
We get the impression , for example when it comes to reuniting families , that your concept of the family is somewhat ill defined .
We call on you to restrict reunification to the core family , otherwise the repercussions will get out of hand .
Asylum and immigration policy as a whole must be a priority .
My third comment concerns Europe as a financial centre .
As you all know , we shall have a common European currency in our pockets as of 1 January 2002 . This historic event - as the President of the Commission rightly pointed out - will change Europe .
But we must also improve Europe 's competitiveness by enabling small and medium-sized enterprises to invest , because that is where the jobs are created .
I think we need to step up our efforts here .
As far as the enlargement of the European Union is concerned , we are committed to welcoming the first wave of members to the European Union by 2004 .
Mr President of the Commission , I call on you to conduct a public information campaign , so that we can convince our voters back home that the European Union needs to enlarge and that it is in the historic interest of Europe to do so .
My last comment is this : we want a strong , democratic Europe which has the ability to act .
Mr President of the Commission , let us work on that together .
We shall support you in strengthening the Community institutions .
We call on the Council not to be stand-offish and to make its contribution to Europe as our project for the future .
If we work together , it will succeed .
But the Council needs to play its part , now that the Commission and Parliament have moved ahead .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , as the Union expands eastward to the countries of Central Europe and the Baltic , within just a few years ' time our relations with our eastern neighbours remaining outside the Union will become more and more important .
The biggest potential for the Union to cement a state of peace in our immediate surroundings and to acquire new economic partnerships lies with Russia and the Ukraine .
Unfortunately , this is not yet visible in the work of the Union .
We like to find excuses for it , saying that these countries themselves still do not have the right economic conditions or political will to find suitable forms of cooperation .
But we have already invested a considerable amount of money and resources in cooperation with the southern Mediterranean region , and we are still waiting for the results to materialise there .
We also need a long-term approach to the East .
I did not notice any mention in the President ' s general report of our relations with the East , which perhaps was not possible within the framework of a broad overview .
In recent years , the Union ' s investment in Russia in terms of finance has been one tenth of what is being spent in the Mediterranean region .
Just half of what has been spent on cooperation in the Mediterranean has gone to all countries of the former Soviet Union .
This is out of all proportion with the relative importance of these two neighbouring regions .
Forms of economic cooperation in particular must be concrete and feasible .
Waste water from St. Petersburg and the surrounding area , with its population of some nine million , is flowing either untreated or via waterworks that function badly into the shallow , relatively salt-free and ecologically vulnerable Gulf of Finland .
This has already resulted in harmful and lasting changes to the balance of nature , and the situation is continuing to deteriorate .
President Prodi called for environmentally sustainable development .
A sewage works for the Leningrad region would be one tangible and excellent example of a Nordic area of cooperation , and one which should now be got under way .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , on behalf of my group , I wish to welcome the Commission ' s work programme for 2001 .
This complements the legislative programme which , on my group ' s initiative , Parliament requested as a condition for approving the Commission ' s appointment .
The programme has not been short on proposals : there are 485 , 155 of which date from last year and which have been carried over .
It must be pointed out that last year 50 % of the programme was successfully concluded .
You do not need to make many proposals ; instead , you should try to bring those that you do propose to a successful conclusion .
I should also like to point out , once again , that an agreement was in place , establishing that the programme would be presented in January , following consultations with Parliament ' s committees .
It is to be hoped that next year you will be more successful in meeting the deadlines .
I repeat that the crucial question raised in this programme is undoubtedly the involvement of Europe ' s citizens in the European project , which is the mark and the essential prerequisite of its success .
This means that together we must address the issues concerning our citizens , such as the economic and social agenda , which we shall be discussing in March , food safety , the introduction of the euro as the cash currency , and the fight against organised crime , not forgetting the Millennium Round .
I wish to state that my group firmly supports the Commission ' s everything but arms initiative , which will enable the 48 poorest countries in the world to export a limitless range of products .
These are the key aspects of the programme .
We have , nevertheless , been the target of criticism , which we must accept and address .
One criticism that has been made concerns the way in which the bureaucrats in Brussels have dealt with the mad cow issue .
I think that here too we must defend the Commission and Parliament and say that for several years we have done our duty , we predicted this crisis and we must continue to insist not only on the investigation into those responsible , but on the need to respond to the concerns of our fellow citizens .
Creating a single market is not just a matter of deregulating and of eliminating rules that protect citizens , in a quest for limitless profits .
Creating a single market is also about endeavouring to guarantee essential services and also , in a context of greater competition and freedom , to do so in a civilised way .
This point is worth remembering , because it appears that at the moment , the only aspect being discussed is the virtue of deregulation and not the virtues which must also feature in a civilised society .
With regard to governance , Mr President , what is required more than a reflection , which is currently very fashionable and rather ethereal when it comes to new forms , is to take up the tried and tested democratic practices which enable us to understand the messages of Pericles , 2500 years ago , for example .
I would ask you , instead of speaking to us in very general terms , to put forward a specific proposal in this context of reflection on the debate , in which the Commission , on the basis of the work by the University Institute of Florence , proposes treaties that are simplified , simple and comprehensible . We need proposals that will save President Havel from having a suitcase full of treaties , protocols and annexes in his office .
This is what we need .
We also need a Commission proposal on the distribution of competences and on how the Charter can be incorporated .
This means talking about everything , in other words , putting forward a very wide-ranging proposal .
Mr President , I would like you to make fewer generalised appeals to civil society and to speak more with us , its elected representatives , both in the European Parliament and in the parliaments of the Member States .
I think that what is crucial this year is not to stage a cosy , round-table discussion , or some kind of chat show ; what we need to do when we reflect is to see what procedure and what method we should be using .
Here , Madam President , I feel I need to make an observation .
We regret the fact that no Member of the Council is present .
Nevertheless , we do not feel that it is good parliamentary practice to allocate five minutes extra to the European People ' s Party in the person of Mr Poettering , because he will have to thank those Members that voted for there being a question to the Commission this month rather than to the Council , as we ourselves had proposed and as it seems will be done in March .
This is a fair parliamentary debate and we are seeing a situation in which the terms of the debate are being falsified and the allocation of speaking time between the groups and Members rendered meaningless .
We therefore believe that the Council more than anyone should be represented here , as we proposed , in order to explain under what terms it drafted the Annex IV Conference , so that it is neither playing to the gallery nor launching some kind of spontaneous or Soviet-style trial with no legal basis .
We therefore feel that it is extremely important , with regard to the structural reflection mentioned by President Prodi , to call for his last proposal to be enacted .
In other words , there must be a forum , a conference or a convention with the participation of the Members of the European Parliament , the Commission , the Council , governments and also members of the various Member State parliaments .
We need such a conference , not only to discuss the issues , but also to make proposals that can finally be decided on and resolved .
I shall end , Madam President , because I have run out of time , by saying to the Commission , which is equipped with the necessary machinery to make proposals , to do so . We will then be able to strengthen an alliance that we consider to be absolutely essential to taking the debate firmly forwards and to providing solutions for the future of European integration .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , ' empty chair ' of the Council , colleagues , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Prodi and his colleagues in the Commission on the considerable progress that has been made in the past year , in particular the work that has been done on reform , which is not one of the high political priorities of the Union but is , nonetheless , one of the inescapable institutional requirements .
On behalf of my group I salute the progress which has been made there .
We note with particular concern the Commission 's report of last week - the pre-Stockholm report - about the Lisbon process .
Although we have set the very high aspiration that within a decade we should become the most dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , we are moving towards it at a lesser pace than ought to be the case .
I do not exclude Parliament from this , I am not a sore loser but I was part of the minority which lost in the postal services liberalisation proposal .
We are all in this together .
I am reminded of a story which is told in the United States about the famous Mayor Richard Daley , who was mayor of several Chicago administrations .
In launching one of them he gave a speech and wanted to talk about new plateaux of achievement .
But he made a mistake , as we are wont to do when we read our speeches quickly in politics .
He committed his new administration to achieving ever-higher " platitudes " of achievement !
It seems to me that we must ensure that is not the commitment we bring to Lisbon , rather that we really drive forward .
There is a message for Stockholm that our commitment is real and deep and must be prioritised to deliver .
Progress on giving real credibility to food and consumer policy has been substantial in the past twelve months .
Much remains to be done , but very substantial progress has been made .
On trade and development : my group supports the everything but arms proposition .
I hope that as the Commission itself contemplates the sensitivities in agriculture relating to the World Trade Organisation and to the agricultural reform debate , the sequencing of those debates will not be allowed to get in the way of the trade-related initiative .
It is an important European initiative and I hope the College will go for it , notwithstanding some of the sequencing difficulties to do with other negotiations which may arise .
The ELDR believes that we need to focus more urgent attention on asylum and immigration .
I congratulate Mr Vitorino on the work that has been brought forward , but Tampere set an agenda and I wonder why , so long after Tampere , we are still struggling to define what that agenda should be .
Regarding enlargement : my group is deeply committed to that process but I would say to the Commission - and I say it also to this House and to Mr Solana - that we really need to focus quality time and attention on Cyprus .
It is not simply the acquis communautaire - they are doing very well on that .
It is not simply their ability to implement the acquis - they can deliver on that .
Yet surrounding it are grave and serious political issues that are not getting the quality time and attention that we believe they need if this is to be a success .
On the legislative programme : as regards its form I am glad it is going to the committees within the House .
I am glad we get a chance to reflect on it and to look at the priorities .
Mr Prodi has said that it is not simply an assembly of disparate ideas and indeed he has offered some priorities here .
But I have looked at it .
It is 49 pages of high-density non-communication .
It is 49 pages covering 593 different initiatives .
It is very difficult to find in this methodology which are the real priorities , where there is political passion and focus , and which are merely the issues that we have to deal with because they are part of due process .
We have to move away from this .
We have to change the way we do our business .
I would hope that next September we will have something where each initiative , in methodological terms , is justified .
I do not mean that everything here is not justified - but tell us the story .
Maybe we asked for some initiatives but , on reflection , we would say that they are not such a priority after all .
How much of this came from the European Council inviting the Commission to take initiatives ?
We do not find the answers in here .
I would like to see them .
It is not a question of interfering with the Commission 's right of initiative in relation to the treaties , but a question of quality control .
If I could say one last thing , it seems to me it would be very useful if we did this next September and completed the debate by December and that you , Madam President , as President of this institution , and Mr Prodi , as President of the European Commission , could go to the European Council and tell them ex ante : this is our priority for Europe .
Is it yours ?
That is how we need to do our business , to put a drive , a focus and an energy behind it .
Finally on Nice - on après-Nice - just to make a point .
We in the European Parliament should be involved in encouraging a wide and open debate as a prelude to a full institutional participation après-Laeken .
My group would insist in the post-Laeken period on some convention-style method with deep involvement for the European Parliament and the national parliaments to include the active engagement of Council .
( Applause )
Madam President , my group too warmly supports the approach whereby the main priorities are actually set forth in this discussion , and just for a moment we can ignore the ' business as usual ' attitude that we do tend to encounter in our everyday work here .
Right at the start I wish to say that the fact that the Union lacks the tools to work in such a way that it is actually able to answer the challenges of increasing globalisation , for example , and the tools to enable it to protect its citizens from the chaotic effects of this globalisation , is becoming a major problem .
I am now referring to the fact that at the Nice Summit it proved utterly impossible to take the decision that , in future , matters to do with taxation might be decided upon by means of a qualified majority .
This means that we shall be leaving this area of taxation to market forces .
We are to allow market forces to shape our tax system , and this will obviously be a major obstacle to our being able to build what we here call the European social model , in which we want to steer the development of society by means of taxation .
Population growth was mentioned here .
It is absolutely clear that we must combat growing racism , as we will not otherwise be in any way able to deal with immigrants and asylum seekers .
In this we all have a great public responsibility .
Madam President , very often strong words are uttered in this House on the subject of our citizens .
Here today , too , it has been said many times over that the public must be included in the decision-making process , although , unfortunately , this very often gets forgotten in practice .
I will take one very topical example of this .
The institutions are at this very moment trying to put together a regulation on transparency , which would safeguard the right of the public to acquire information on decision making in the Union .
I would like to warn my colleagues and all those present that now it appears that this regulation on transparency is turning into more of a regulation to shield the confidentiality of the work of the institutions , or , in other words , it has precisely the opposite objective .
We cannot accept this sort of thing , and we also need more public debate on this issue .
Neither can this matter be discussed entirely in camera , as is happening at the moment .
Madam President , sustainable development was mentioned by President Prodi in his opening address , and this is a major objective as far as my group is concerned .
If we do not succeed at Gothenburg in achieving a real programme of sustainable development we will have wasted an opportunity that perhaps will not return again .
It is here , if anywhere , that the Commission must demonstrate leadership and set forth its views .
But it would seem that there are always problems with this in practice .
Today the Commission will publish its White Paper on policy on chemicals , but I have reason to suppose that the Commission ' s approach to this too will be to protect the short-sighted financial interests of industry rather than guarantee that we would actually be rid of hazardous chemicals .
This is something we cannot possibly accept as we are speaking about sustainable development .
Environmental competitiveness is something that should be taken seriously , and the Commission would be better off listening to companies and financial players that have realised that sustainable development can also be good business .
Major reform in agriculture is at present under discussion , and we want to encourage it , and we insist that the Commission take a comprehensive view and not just content itself with taking small steps forward . In this we can look forward to a real change in the paradigm .
To conclude , Madam President , if you will allow , Annex IV of the Treaty of Nice is certainly the best thing about this agreement .
It states the enormous obligation of Parliament , the Commission and the Council also , and the Swedish Presidency , to take seriously our re-evaluation of the process that underlies the structure of the European Union .
My group fully supports your initiative regarding our obligation to include civil society in this debate over the next six months prior to the Laeken Summit , as well , obviously , as the national parliaments and indeed those of candidate countries .
It saddens me when I hear that my colleague , Mr Barón Crespo , wants to point out here that we must be mainly satisfied to listen to national parliaments .
No , civil society is very much a reality .
We will have to take it seriously finally and we should no longer have to witness any Intergovernmental Conference in which just the national interests are safeguarded , with all this happening behind closed doors .
Madam President , Commission President , in my view , the Commission ' s work programme for 2001 is open to question in several respects , beginning with the role of the European Union in Europe and throughout the world .
Negotiations with the candidate countries will proceed following the " road map " proposed by the Commission , in the words of the Commission document , which mentions , I quote , " 18 additional chapters " which can be " brought to a close " this year .
How , on the basis of such abstract and indeed bureaucratic utterances is it possible to get any grip on the problems to be solved , the contradictions to be overcome and hence the political decisions which must be taken ?
Moreover , I consider the idea of " policy towards neighbouring countries " to be a great oversimplification . This term is used to describe EU strategy in the Balkans , its relations with Russia and the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership , all of which is covered in just seven lines of text .
Some policies undertaken by the European Union in these areas have indeed been criticised , as we saw only last week on the part of the second Euro-Mediterranean Forum .
What conclusions do you draw from such assessments ?
What indeed remains of the EU ' s development policy ?
For the very poorest countries , aside from the trade measure you have just mentioned , you have created the Europe Aid Cooperation Office , on the model of US Aid , and have , for the most part , replaced development with aid .
For the other countries , you have traded in the Lomé-style philosophy for a WTO-style logic .
What has become of Europe ' s ambition for the South of Europe ?
The second major priority I wish to ask you about is the new economic and social agenda .
The Commission must prepare the ground for the decisions to be taken in this context on the basis of a range of criteria dubbed " structural indicators " .
In these indicators , what allowance is made for social concerns and all that the United Nations Development Programme most sensibly terms " indicators of human development " ?
You do not , for example , propose even the slightest social consideration in the Commission ' s approval of merger plans between major groups .
Why not ?
What do you plan to do in future to prevent a proliferation of cases like the Michelin , Danone , Alstom , Valeo , Aventis and other scandals , where redundancy plans are announced alongside excellent financial results ?
Why are you postponing the revision of the directive on a European works council , etc . , until next year ?
That is the context in which you announce a White Paper on governance incorporating a form of partnership with civil society .
Returning from the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre , I should wholeheartedly approve this , yet I must refrain , for its almost libertarian-looking political approach is a front for all sorts of economic tendencies that are traditionally liberal in essence .
In order , however , to overcome the present crisis of confidence felt by the citizens of Europe with regard to the European Union , we must , I believe , play fair right down the line with the citizens themselves , their elected representatives , their trade unions and their associations , in other words , before taking decisions we should agree to expose the options to the light of day , enable transparent pluralist assessment of the effects of these decisions once implemented and we should dare , if necessary , to change our heading if , perchance , society ' s priorities happen to upset the agenda of the Community ' s elected officials .
What steps , Mr Prodi , would you be willing to take along this road in 2001 ?
Madam President , the agreement reached at Nice will now pave the way for the enlargement of the Union .
This was the central objective that needed to be achieved during these treaty negotiations and I now believe that the way ahead is clear for candidate countries to join the Union in the near future .
The most immediate objective for the 15 existing Members of the European Union is to ensure that the Treaty of Nice is ratified across the Union as soon as possible .
The provisions of the Treaty of Nice cannot come into effect until the ratification process has been concluded within the 15 Member States of the Union .
I note with interest that the agenda for this debate which we are having today is headed " follow-up to Nice " .
I would caution all interested parties against discussing broader developments within the Union before the ratification process has been comprehensively concluded within the European Union .
This is really the central dichotomy that exists within the Union at this time .
Those who talk about broader political integration within the Union take for granted that the ratification of the Treaty of Nice is a done deal .
It is not a done deal .
It is a deal that has to be sold to the 370 million citizens of the Union in a manner that is easily understood and in a manner which commands the public support and good will of all our citizens .
This is a criticism I would level against those in particular who propose putting into effect complete federal structures within the European Union .
There is at times an attitude in some European quarters to the effect that ' we know best ; we will bring about the appropriate changes and the people will thank us for them later ' .
That is not how political persuasion operates .
We put forward proposals .
We then persuade the people of Europe to support them , whether within our respective parliament structures or by referendum .
It is up to us , who support enlargement of the Union and who recognise the absolute right of candidate countries to join the Union , to convince our voting citizens of the importance of the provisions of the Treaty of Nice and of its broader political implications .
What the European Union should not do is to carry out any further debate on new political developments within the Union before the Treaty of Nice has been ratified within any of our respective Member States .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened with some amazement to the speech of the leader of the European People ' s Party , which stressed the absence of the Council and the institutional detachment which , to some degree , has been observed in this Chamber , and which also strongly criticised the sectorial policy of the Foreign Ministers of the Member States .

I believe that this is symptomatic , with regard to what President Prodi has just shown , of the programme : a programme which , in a way , closely resembles a catalogue of dreams but which - and herein lies the difference - is characterised by the search for a debate , as President Prodi has illustrated in his report .
There has been talk of market liberalisation , of privatisation and , more recently , of sustainable development and environmental damage , and one can see the clear contradiction when we talk of liberalisation on the one hand , and sustainable development on the other : contradictions which are revealed by a Commission and a Europe which , for too long , have been associated with the lobby whose only concern may well not be to create the Europe we were talking about but increasingly a Europe for businessmen , which I do not want and , nor , I believe , do many of us .

The problem is therefore fundamental , one which is increasingly forming the subject of debate on modern Europe , one which some - using an American term I do not like - call the welfare state and which we Europeans have always called the social state .
The basic problem is and remains : social State or liberal State ?
More State and less market or more market and less State ?
There has been talk of two and a half million jobs created last year and we have heard President Prodi say that two thirds of these went to women : I believe that what President Prodi has shown us is an excellent result , which should however also be evaluated on the level , dear President , of territorial distribution within Europe .
Of these two and a half million jobs , for example , I do not know how many went to Italy and , in particular , to southern Italy , where unemployment is extremely serious and where , if we wished it , we could maybe - this is my suggestion , but it is worth careful consideration - combine the problems of sustainable development and those associated with resolving the question of employment : I refer to the possibility of providing incentives to promote the access of young people to the world of work in the form of a minimum starting salary , with the aim , for example , of achieving hydro-geological redevelopment of the region .
There are a great number of people who are idle and Europe could find a solution of this kind to solve two problems simultaneously .
I am also thinking about your words , Mr President , on the internal reform of the Commission .
I know that you are working on this with conviction , and this conviction with which the Commission is working is having an influence on , for example , the internal job situation , on the employees of the Commission , who are worried by job cuts and a reorganisation which could have repercussions for the job situation of Parliament employees .
It is a widespread concern in this regard : I therefore call upon you to initiate a final debate , no longer on roles so much as on the political content of Parliament and the Commission ' s initiative : definite , clear-cut choices which describe a Europe in which the memory of the cucumbers - to which President Prodi referred - is increasingly faint and remote .
Mr President , some Eurosceptics are in favour of the Treaty of Nice because federalists protest against it .
Some federalists are in favour of it because Eurosceptics are opposed to it . However , both groups may well have good reasons for opposing it .
Eurosceptics are necessarily opposed to shifting power from the national parliaments to Brussels .
Federalists are necessarily opposed to decision making ' s being taken from voters and elected representatives and put into the hands of EU officials and ministers .
In short , Nice means less democracy .
We all have a common interest in securing a democratic debate prior to the next treaty .
There must be an end to treaties behind closed doors . The next treaty must be negotiated openly by elected representatives , and it must be discussed not only openly but also with the direct involvement of citizens and , in the end , be approved in referenda in those countries where referenda are allowed .
Against this background , federalists and ' Euroroyalists ' will be able to discuss the way in which the future Europe is to be organised .
What is to be discussed in Brussels , what is to be decided in Strasbourg and what is to be decided in the national parliaments ?
The Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities is campaigning for open , slimmer and freer European cooperation .
We want to see the majority of all decisions taken in the Member States and in local areas .
The wealth of Europe lies in its diversity , and we cannot , for example , see any compelling need for the EU ' s being able to alter a decision taken by Århus city council about the organisation of local bus services .
That is a matter we are well able to decide for ourselves .
Finally , I hope that the information tools that the Commission is now going to be using will be used in a pluralistic way to promote discussion between all those holding different points of view about European integration .
Mr President , today ' s debate on the oral question on the follow-up to the Nice European Council , even though the draft Treaty has not yet been signed and the next IGC is not due to be convened until 2004 , is clear indication of just how impatient some parties are to launch another round of negotiation .
For these people , particularly for the Commission - as the Commission President has just stated - this is supposed to be , at long last , the great European constitutional process that the Nice Council denied itself , a process which should be set in motion forthwith by means of a European convention inspired by that which , last year , drew up the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Such unseemly haste , such over-excitement , must not , however , be seen as a substitute for due consideration .
The concept of a European Constitution makes reference to the concept of a European State , which is something that the nations of Europe do not wish to see .
Moreover , the Nice Council , please note , refrained from including this idea in the objectives for the future IGC .
What the Europe of the future actually needs is not the status of a future European State with its own constitution but a network of nations that is respectful of the national democracies and is enshrined in a fundamental treaty .
In the short term , we must consider the method of the future debate .
Let us be honest , the convention which framed the Charter of Fundamental Rights was a failure because it continually muddled areas of jurisdiction and confused areas of responsibility , and came up in the end with a text which , although it might have been music to the ears of those advocating the European superstate , was not acceptable to the members of the Union as a whole .
It is true that in future we shall have to have a different procedure for preparing for IGCs , but it will certainly not be through bodies such as the convention existing in a state of perfect weightlessness .
That would only force us into new deadlocks . In the first instance , debate with regard to the forthcoming IGC , must be organised in and around the national parliaments and on their responsibility .
In the second place , the forthcoming IGC should negotiate only credible proposals , i.e. those supported by at least one in four of the national parliaments within the European Union following votes in their parliaments .
In this way we would be sure of not wandering off track and we would remain firmly anchored to the national democracies .
President Prodi , we understand how difficult it is to summarise in a short document the complexity of the issues dealt with by the European Commission .
I shall therefore limit myself to only two , and I should be grateful if these could be looked at again .
We can see what is going on in the agricultural sector : we , as the European People ' s Party , feel that there is an absolute necessity to review the terms of the common agricultural policy and , above all , to understand the scope of future strategies .
Consider the financial burden the agricultural policy places on our budget . However , we must also consider the political cards which will be played on agriculture , and the issue of globalisation .
You yourself recalled the Lamy proposal , an extremely important proposal but one which will have major implications for agriculture .
Let us also think about what will happen on the food production front in terms of safety , what will happen in the fields of typical productions and biotechnology .
If we then add the issues of enlargement and the relaunch of agriculture in some areas such as the Mediterranean basin , we shall want to know what Model of European Agriculture the Commission intends to create and , above all , we shall certainly want assurance that this agricultural model will not be placed on the foreign policy table and regarded as a bargaining counter in situations arising out of international requirements .
The second issue concerns the Mediterranean , whose importance was shown by a forum in which we took part last week .
Well , as regards the Mediterranean , substantial problems still remain unresolved .
On this issue , we want a policy to be agreed which guarantees the same privileges for the South as those granted to other areas of the European Union .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission . You have said a great deal today about programming aspects .
I should like to refer to your closing words , in which you spoke about Parliament and the excellent role played by parliamentarians .
Fine words , Mr President , but too vague .
I therefore call on you to make some sort of concrete statement .
The fact of the matter is this : we want a strong Commission , because we believe that intergovernmental cooperation is no basis for a Europe of tomorrow - at least not primarily .
We therefore expect you too to bear in mind that we need to strengthen parliamentarianism and parliamentary debate .
As a general precept , I am sure you agree with that .
It is just , Mr President , that when your Vice-President , Mr Barnier , states during a recent discussion in committee that we should propose a sort of forum for the post-Nice process in which everyone is involved - members of parliament , civil society - then I say no , not if this forum is in lieu of a convention .
Mr President , we want a convention , a convention of Members of the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
That is what we want and it is here that we ask for your clear , unequivocal support .
I know , Mr President , that the Commission is critical - both directly and indirectly - of Parliament 's weaknesses .
Parliament does have its weaknesses , it is true .
But the weaknesses of this Parliament and of parliamentarianism at European level need to be overcome by strengthening this Parliament , not weakening it still further .
That brings me to my next point : you proposed again today - and I admit you are right , something must be done - to publish a White Paper on the question of good governance .
The concept of good governance is somewhat of a problem in itself .
I would rather refer to democratic governance .
The democratic decision-making procedure needs to be strengthened , I agree with you there .
It must also be broadened .
Democracy also includes dialogue with civil society .
I admit that one hundred per cent .
And this is where we , as parliamentarians , must do more .
But , here again , the sixty thousand dollar question is : is civil society being involved at the expense of stronger parliamentary democracy ?
Is civil society the guardian , so to speak , of parliamentary debate and the decision-making process ?
Here too you must make a clear , unequivocal statement in support of Parliament .
( Applause )
That brings me to the question of self-regulation , another new buzz word .
Self-regulation is sometimes euphemistically referred to as a " cooperative decision-making model " .
No , Mr President . Parliament must take decisions , the Council must take decisions , the parliamentary committees must take decisions .
Of course , we must ensure that this decision-making process is transparent and public and not , as is the case at present , opaque and private - that applies in particular to the Commission and lobby groups .
We must engage in dialogue and debate with these interest groups , we must accept their advice and take account of their arguments , that we must .
But we can hardly expect the fox to guard the chickens .
Are those whom we perhaps want to control to be allowed to set their own rules in the future ?
I take a different view .
That is like saying that the feedingstuffs industry and agricultural lobby should decide on the organisation of the agricultural markets .
It is out of the question and that is not our position .
Another brief comment in this context : there is a growing trend towards so-called interpretive Commission communications .
In other words , Council and Parliament decisions are subsequently interpreted by the Commission , where possible , in the way which the various interest groups perhaps want them interpreted .
That too is a slippery slope .
The Commission submits proposals .
It has the right of initiative .
I admit that .
But it is the parliamentary committees which must take the decisions and there should be no ex-post corrections in later communications .
If there are , then the matter should be referred to the European Court of Justice .
Finally , President Prodi , we expect to be inundated with Commission proposals .
But we also expect the Commission to respect parliamentarianism , just as we respect the Commission .
We expect you to be as keen to strengthen Parliament as we are to strengthen the Commission .
( Applause )
Mr President , the Commission President has told us that the institutions must be responsible , transparent and efficient and he has promised to bring forward a White Paper on governance .
If we need to improve the quality of governance of the Union , we might make a start with the Commission 's work programme itself .
We should be focusing policy-making on areas where EU-wide action is indispensable .
We should be ensuring that the principle of subsidiarity is fully respected .
Is this really the case with the Commission 's recommendation on a common European format for curriculum vitaes : No 379 on their list of measures to implement this year ?
Each new legislative proposal should include a justification of why action at Union level is necessary and we might help , as my colleague Mr Clegg has suggested , by establishing a standing scrutiny committee in this House to ensure that measures proposed meet the criteria for subsidiarity and proportionality .
Your state of the Union speech , Mr Prodi , should be accompanied by a detailed list of proposals individually justified and explained , not hidden away in annexes to the document .
The proposal should be the outcome of serious debate in the College of Commissioners , not passed on the nod as A points .
Our committee should cross-examine individual Commissioners on the proposals in their area of responsibility .
Finally , the annual work programme should come to a vote here in Parliament .
Nice showed the failures of intergovernmental Europe .
It is up to us to make a more persuasive case for a federal Europe .
Mr President , President Prodi , I endorse the call for specific answers .
The political unity of Europe made no headway whatsoever in Nice .
On the contrary , Nice was a renationalisation-fest .
What came unstuck there , President Prodi - and I think it is important that we recognise this - was Council 's presumption that it is Europe 's legislator .
That is by definition what parliaments are for .
President Prodi , the Commission 's attitude is unclear and extremely vague , especially on the question of the post-Nice process .
You have criticised the Treaty , but I hear that the Commission is starting a huge run of newspaper advertisements hailing the Treaty of Nice as an historic breakthrough and success .
You find reason to criticise , but your Commissioner Barnier is outlining a mere forum for debate , rather than a constitutional process and a convention .
Mr President of the Commission , I call on you to give a straight answer to a straight question : are you on Parliament 's side when it comes to demanding a constitutional process and a convention and for decisive democratic principles , such as the division of power , checks and balances , public legislating and so forth , to be added to the list of Nice leftovers ?
Mr President , integration policy took a step backwards in Nice - not a trace of stronger democracy , more transparency or a greater ability to act and take decisions .
Which is why I believe that we need to use the post-Nice process to save the Union from Nice .
I want to raise four points which I feel are important in the brief time available .
First , I call on the Council to correct the number of seats in the European Parliament for the Czech Republic and Hungary immediately ; there must be no discrimination against these two countries .
Secondly , we need a clear , jointly agreed starting point for the debate on the future of the Union - re-founding should not mean renationalising .
Thirdly , we need to convene a reform conference modelled on the convention , which has the credentials and authority to propose reforms and , fourthly , if an Intergovernmental Conference is preferred , it should not , in my view , be held in 2004 , when the terms of office of the Commission and Parliament expire and they are unable to participate fully .
Mr President , for years , priorities have been increasing in number , either because objectives are not completely achieved or because the frantic acceleration of the political , technological and economic processes are bringing to our attention urgent needs which are always new and increasingly difficult to tackle .
The problem of employment and the dignity of working conditions and of standards of living is still unresolved ; as for enlargement , our capacities to tackle this adequately with regard to our own peoples and the peoples of the candidate countries , the necessary structures , the economic adjustments and the political and social relationships require further development and greater consistency .
It is not a question of speeding up enlargement or slowing it down ; it is a question of achieving it in a manner which is appropriate to the situation and according to timeframes which are compatible with the time needed to ensure that a morally correct choice is not turned into a disaster .
The fight against illegal immigration , organised crime , the exploitation of women and children , drugs and the trafficking of weapons and human organs must be constantly at the centre of our focus , but we have to say that documents which are flawless in form are not being matched by meaningful progress on the ground .
We are awaiting European regulations on the use of the Internet .
In fact , without rules , there is no freedom , only infringement of national and international laws .
The reinvigoration of the Mediterranean policy , as decided by the European Parliament in the last part-session , must be implemented - and quickly - as must the initiatives for peace in the Middle East .
But of all the urgent situations there are , one is currently an absolutely top priority : food safety and security for the citizens .
In the name of false progress and the illegal profits of some , we are irreversibly destroying both the present and future health of the consumer and entire farming and food production sectors .
The consequences will be disastrous if we cannot give a firm , frank , timely response .
Already , there have been too many delays in governments ' interventions after the first reports , many years ago , of mad cow disease , gelatine-coated beef , and dioxins in chickens , in short , in respect of all the food frauds which have been shown to be not only commercial swindles but environmental and health time-bombs .
We ask you , President Prodi , to urge the Council to set up a control and verification committee immediately , but , in the meantime , we would like to see an increase in monitoring by your presidency .
Mr President , we have a multitude of outstanding questions post-Nice to which we require specific answers .
They concern the dividing line between national and European powers , simplification of the Treaty , the legal status of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the role of national parliaments in the architecture of the European Union .
Why should the final responsibility continue to rest with the Member States ?
This question relates closely to the definition of the purpose of the European Union .
We should be clear on one point : remits need to be clearly defined if we expect people to accept legislative and political decisions at European level .
Our top priority must therefore be to ensure that national parliaments are more involved in the run-up to the planned Intergovernmental Conference .
First , in order to get the discussion process in the Member States started as early as possible and , secondly , in order to clarify in advance any problems which might arise during subsequent ratification .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we are now starting a discussion process in which the situation is as follows : the Amsterdam leftovers , which we now refer to as the Nice shortcomings , must be resolved in the post-Nice process , and for that we need a clear-cut process .
It is not enough to depict this year as a full-blown discussion forum involving the civil society , which Mr Swoboda rightly criticised in his analysis .
The question which needs to be asked here is : what clearly defined method is there for involving the European Parliament and the national parliaments ? And this then begs the question : will it or will it not be a convention and what role will the convention play in formulating the documents adopted post-Nice ?
The question is : will it just be a folkloristic declaration adopted in a convention and will the 15 again behave in exactly the same way on the night ?
I think we need to clarify where we are heading , as regards both the methods and the objectives .
This should not be kept under wraps .
For the rest , we need to consider , now that nearly all the Heads of Government have said that the decision-making structures decided at Nice are poor structures , what we can do to put things right , perhaps even before the post-Nice process starts - for example in connection with enlargement agreements , which always clarified this in the past .
In any event , this is the way forward if we are to avoid delaying enlargement .
Enlargement is the second major issue on the agenda and we must carry out our historic duty here .
That brings me to the third point .
We must ensure that transatlantic relations are not smothered by new security policy debates , with the Americans failing to understand us and our security and defence policy initiative , and with our failing to understand the Americans and their rocket defence system .
The first thing we can say , I think , is that enlargement is our own major security policy achievement .
Secondly , if we develop our own capabilities , they will form part of the Atlantic Alliance , which will continue to be responsible for collective security in Europe .
I think that , thirdly , this will enable us to create the right conditions for a transatlantic market place .
The American president 's current negotiator , Robert Zoellick , wrote the 1990 transatlantic declaration .
I hope that we can re-establish this tradition and reduce the Atlantic Ocean to a pond once again .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , I have three brief comments to make .
First , the initial stage should involve both public debate - I agree with the comments made on this by Mr Swoboda and Mr Brok - and it should involve the planned Laeken declaration .
I have a very straightforward question to put to you : are you - the Commission - ready and will we manage this year , in 2001 , to present a common Commission and Parliament proposal for Laeken on the subsequent structure of the post-Nice process ?
That is my first question , which concerns the method .
As regards my second point , I was delighted to hear you say that we must set up a committee to involve governments , the Commission , the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
We want a convention to move the post-Nice process forward , a convention which is the centre of gravity for public debate , i.e. which sends and receives proposals and , at the same time , presents a clear proposal for the Intergovernmental Conference and for the issues which will need to be negotiated in 2004 .
My third point relates to the subjects .
Four subjects are planned , which is both fine and feasible ; but we all know that it is not just these subjects which need to be clarified and that much more is and must be at stake for 2004 .
I would advise each and everyone of us to get away from this strange ' post-Nice ' concept .
Post-Nice is not what it is about .
Nice is not only the end of a method , Nice is also the end of an era , the era of the European unification process of the 1950s , the 1960s , the 1970s and the 1980s .
Now what we have to do is to prepare the ground for a new European Union , a European Union of the twenty-first century .
It is not about the post-Nice process , it is about standing on the verge of a renewed European unification process and we must make this clear .
If we want to convince public opinion , public debate , the people and the citizens of the merits of our objective of European unification , then starting a post-Nice process is not enough ; on the contrary , we must ensure that the people understand that we are talking about a new European Union in a new Europe , a Europe which has changed since 1990 .
Mr President , allow me to begin by expressing my great disappointment at the fact that no minister from the presidency is present at this important debate .
President of the Commission , as the mist clears following the Nice Summit , it is clear that the last-minute compromise behind closed doors has its obvious limitations .
Now , sobriety has returned , and a broad civic debate has been promised on Europe ' s goals , future and responsibilities .
That is the way it should be .
The promise is binding .
But how is that to be arranged ?
If the citizens of Europe really are to take part in the discussion about the future of the common European project , they are also going to be able to exercise influence .
Is the Commission prepared to take proposals and ideas on board and also put them into effect ?
In that case , the EU will be transformed , opened up and simplified .
We know that many citizens want to see a clear constitution .
When are they to obtain one ?
We also know that issues concerning the environment , asylum and cross-border crime are important issues in connection with which our citizens want the EU to be strong , vigorous and willing to act .
Are the Commission and the Council prepared to give the EU these tools ?
The outcome of the Nice Summit puts people off , unfortunately .
We know that there is a general feeling of irritation about the fact that the EU meddles in all too many questions of detail .
Is the Commission prepared to give the celebrated subsidiarity principle real substance and to find a method of limiting the eagerness for regulating detail which characterises all of us in Brussels and Strasbourg ?
Citizens of the EU and of the candidate countries , as well as national parliaments and , of course , this Parliament , must be given real influence over the agenda for , the decisions about , and the method for shaping the EU ' s future .
But how ?
This is the major unresolved issue discussed by all my colleagues .
After what happened in 2000 , it is becoming difficult to agree with you , President Prodi , when you say that your programme relates to Europe and to 2001 . Judging by your programme , we might believe that the extremely serious and crucial problem of mad cow disease does not exist .
Your proposals speak in idealistic terms of the new economy and of millions of new jobs without considering the need to create them as a matter of priority in the least developed regions .
These regions suffer from the highest rates of unemployment and from the emigration of their most highly qualified technical specialists . Your proposals do not consider the economic and budgetary problems inherent in the necessary enlargement to include new states or the terrible situation of immigration from the developing world .
They ignore the crisis caused by ultraliberal globalisation which has been challenged , specifically in Porto Alegre , and say nothing about the huge disappointment that was Nice . No mention is made in this context of the fact that the States can , historically , no longer prevent our citizens taking direct democratic decisions about the Union , and no mention is made of the emergence of stateless nations and of bodies with political and legislative personality .
President Prodi , the Commission should not turn a blind eye to the fact that a process that must be concluded by the adoption of a European constitution is taking shape in European society .
It would be good to see the Council , which is not represented here today , the Commission and Parliament adopting together the initiative that Europe ' s citizens are calling for .
Mr President of the Commission , the Eurosceptics have today changed sides and have become the majority in this House , and they paint a bleak picture of everything to do with Nice . They find it difficult to conceal their own failure , which is in direct proportion to the political arrogance that they showed and which they have unfortunately rushed to assume once again , having learnt nothing from their past mistakes .
It is exactly the opposite that an enlarged European Union requires if it is not simply to move from the leftovers from Amsterdam to the leftovers from Nice and then , in 2004 , to new frustrations .
Europe requires a different strategy , a different idea .
The majority must be prepared to understand the reality of the situation without preconceived ideas .
Their failure in Nice is quite enough . What is important now is that they understand the test of truth that occurred there : the clash of whimsical abstraction with the reality faced by the people of Europe .
There is the question of what direction to take , but there is also the question of pace .
Trying to impose a state-led political superstructure when there is no such thing as a single European people or even a single European public can only lead to further disasters .
What is required is more centralism and less democracy .
Of course the people of Europe will resist .
No one wants to give up the democratic essence of their own country , their own language and culture , where they are close to the power that they have elected , that they understand and that they control .
Unless we understand this , unless we are prepared to listen more instead of speaking so much , unless we try to open up the way for leadership by the national parliaments and unless we stop discussing Europe in such dramatic terms , casting aside certain obsessions that serve no real purpose , the post-Nice debate will fail , just as the pre-Nice debate failed , and this would be a shame .
It will be a shame if the federalists continue to prefer their ivory tower to the real situation faced by the people of Europe , if they persist in repeating the frustrating experience of Nice and to weaken Europe .
The path that has been prepared cannot succeed . What is happening now is not underpinned by any doctrine .
We need a completely different strategy for Europe , a strategy in which nations are led by their citizens , not another strategy which sets citizens against nations .
Furthermore , what we need more than a European debate is 15 national debates on enlargement and 27 national debates on Europe , free from euphemisms and ambiguity , with the issues laid clearly on the table .
Mr President , to make the debate on the future of the European Union - which is beginning at long last - truly effective , we need a sound institutional triangle .
If you do , furthermore , take on board the proposal from our fellow Member , Klaus Hänsch , the proposals you presented this morning should enable us to re-establish the natural complicity which there should be between both our institutions in order to have successful dialogue within the institutional triangle .
If we wish to pursue this route , however , it is not useful to condemn the behaviour of the Council in this or that instance .
We need a strong Council ; we need a Council that participates fully in the institutional triangle .
There are reforms which could be undertaken without revising the Treaty .
Let us support any such initiatives within the Council rather than resorting to procedural arguments to deplore the non-attendance of the Council , as Mr Poettering did earlier .
The second point I would like to discuss , Mr President , is the White Paper on governance .
This is something we are impatiently awaiting .
We suppose that this will foreshadow the debate to be held on one of the items in Annex IV , on the distribution of competences . I should however at this early stage like to draw your attention to one point .
This morning you stated your wish to see a Europe that was closer to its citizens .
We feel that there is indeed room for improvement in this respect , if we wish to make progress .
We hear all too often in our constituencies and in our own countries of the problems that people have in getting their projects validated by the Commission .
The unwieldiness of the procedures and the concentration of projects do not make a useful contribution in this respect .
My third point relates to the debate on the future of the European Union .
I feel that , this morning , you have introduced the elements which make it possible for us to approach dialogue under acceptable conditions .
We must indeed raise questions as to content ; institutional matters will come after .
The issue of the political clout of the European Union in the world and the issue of solidarity , or what I prefer to call the issue of the social model , are indeed critical matters on which we must again find the resolve to live together within the European Union .
In terms of method , we welcome the fact that you have taken on board the idea that , in the structured dialogue phase , the four partners participating in the convention will have to again find their capacity to work together .
We need to distinguish between bodies that are dedicated to debate and bodies that are dedicated to deliberation .
The convention should remain a forum for deliberation because experiences in Amsterdam and Nice have proved that the representatives of the European Parliament are not allocated enough of a place at the IGC and because we prefer the convention model and we are convinced that all proposals may be drawn up in this context .
There is no divide between issues relating to human rights which might lie within the jurisdiction of political bodies and issues relating to institutional aspects which would lie within the sole jurisdiction of diplomatic bodies .
Nice showed that the convention model makes it possible to advance more quickly , in a more structured manner , and enhancing much more our collective mode of operation .
Mr President , enlargement is the most important European project of our time .
I would thank the Commission for its determined efforts .
Now comes the difficult part , however .
Now , it is a question of keeping the impetus going .
The first wave of enlargement must be completed in one and a half year ' s time in Copenhagen in December 2002 .
That is the Commission ' s objective , and we shall hold them to it .
I would call upon the next countries to hold the presidency to maintain very close contact with the candidate countries and to help by removing obstacles from the path in time .
However , it is not only , of course , the candidate countries which must adapt to us . We too have to adapt .
An EU of 27 Member States must learn to concentrate its forces upon the major and cross-border tasks .
That is not , of course , what we are doing at present .
A year ago here in Parliament , you said yourself , Mr President of the Commission , that the European Union should be freed from all the , and I quote , " things that are absolutely ridiculous " which the Council of Ministers and Parliament have got you administering .
You repeated those words several times , and you are right .
Now is the time to do something about it .
Let us have a slimmer , but at the same time stronger , EU .
Let us stop trying to keep far too many balls in the air .
I propose that you appoint a bold Commissioner to the task of combating trivial extra tasks and petty regulations , and I propose that the Conference of Community and European Affairs Committees of the Parliaments of the European Union , COSAC , be given the ability to stop legislation that violates the subsidiarity principle .
In return , the Commission must be strong so that the European Union is energetic in the other areas .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a spirit is abroad in Europe .
It is the spirit of intergovernmentalism .
It is creeping intergovernmentalism - encouraged by the Council - which led Europe into the Nice impasse and on this , President Prodi , we are the Commission 's natural allies .
The Commission and Parliament must work together closely on this issue .
If , President Prodi , Parliament occasionally criticises the Commission 's administrative behaviour , it is not meant in a spirit of enmity towards the Commission , but as an expression of our democratic duty of scrutiny .
In cases of doubt it brings us closer together rather than rending us asunder .
The issue of national parliaments has been addressed .
I am very keen on having a convention rather than a forum to prepare the next stage , because the negotiators at a convention , such as the Council representatives , the Commission , parliament and the European Parliament , have democratic credentials .
We should not espouse the arbitrariness of so-called socially relevant groups .
This understanding should also be clearly formulated at the Commission .
For the rest , we must consider the role of the national parliaments in the European process .
At the end of the day , it is the national parliaments which control the Council .
That is their job .
They have no authority over Community institutions , such as the Commission or even Parliament .
So when we talk about involving national parliaments , we need to put them on the Council 's side in the legislative process .
They cannot restrict the role of the European Parliament .
It is extremely important to us that this be clarified .
One of the focal points of the Commission 's work will be asylum and immigration .
We do not want to elaborate a European asylum and immigration code , we want - as Mr Vitorino rightly said - individual directives .
But we need a common concept .
It is this which is still lacking and which the Commission has yet to formulate .
Mr President , there are , not unnaturally , different assessments in this Parliament regarding the Treaty of Nice , but even those who are highly critical of the Treaty - and there are many - will agree in this debate on the future of Europe that the best way forward is to use the post-Nice procedures and to make the most of them to improve our Union , to rectify the shortcomings of Nice and to have a proper debate on the future of the Union .
The way that this should be done - and my views are very close to those of the Commission - is to have a first-year wide-open debate - let a thousand flowers bloom - then move to a broad , deliberative body that will draft the changes that are necessary .
This could be composed in the same way as the convention that produced and composed the Charter of Rights with representatives of the European Parliament and national parliaments and governments .
Finally , there would be a short , sharp IGC to approve the results at the end .
Obviously , we will be dealing with the four issues that were mentioned by the European Council including one issue which overlaps very much with the Commission 's White Paper on governance .
I would be interested to hear the Commission 's views on how these two processes are going to tie in to each other , because there is a degree of overlap there .
There will also be other issues that should be addressed .
The future of the High Representative , the question of extending the codecision powers of Parliament to all legislative procedures , taking in those few that are now by anomaly left out .
We must also look at the issue of codification of the Treaties .
I would plead for a special procedure .
This year , why not set up a committee of experts from the Member States and the institutions to complete the task that was started in Florence of codifying and simplifying the Treaties so that the political work next year can start on the basis of a text that is already simplified and codified ?
The technical work would thus be out of the way before we move on to the political work .
I would advocate that way forward .
Mr President , the post-Nice agenda of the Heads of Government is motivated by political cowardice and not by the need to prepare Europe for enlargement .
The topics are intended to allay the people ' s fear of an intangible shift of power towards Brussels at the expense of national jurisdiction , but all they will do is increase the sense of alienation .
It is impossible for there to be a definitive distribution of competences between the European and national levels .
The cooperation process is dynamic not static .
Things that are taboo at first , such as the euro , may appeal later on .
This is determined by social need , which cannot be predicted .
It would , of course , be marvellous to have a broad forum on the future of Europe , but the outcome is a foregone conclusion .
There are fundamental differences of opinion on this matter amongst the countries , across the political divide , and even within the political parties themselves .
If we want to restore the confidence of the people then we must introduce a culture of greater openness and decisiveness in Europe .
So what we need is a political unit which does not stand for re-nationalisation of policy , but which strengthens the political European institutions .
That is what we need to see on the agenda , and that is what would testify to courage .
Mr President , I start with the Commission 's work programme for 2001 .
The case for the EU to do less and do it better has never been clearer or more pressing .
The European Parliament should say so in the coming weeks as the committees look into this programme .
With some 600 initiatives , of which almost 200 are legislative measures , there is a lot of work to be done on scrutiny and on setting our own priorities , which we look forward to doing .
Turning now to the question of the post-Nice process , I would rather see it as our European future .
We look back into the history of the European Union over the last generation and the continent of Europe over the last century .
I should like to recall some words by Milan Kundera in his book The Book of Laughter and Forgetting where he says : " People are always shouting that they want to create a better future .
It is not true .
The future is an apathetic void of no interest to anyone .
The past is full of life , eager to irritate us , provoke and insult us , tempt us to destroy or repaint it .
The only reason people want to be masters of the future is to change the past . "
Well , we have changed the past and Europe is a different place from what it was in the post-war era .
The four Nice leftovers are not small or casual affairs .
Our view on the core issues is clear .
We want to see a bigger role for national parliaments , on a systematic and constructive basis .
We would welcome a clearer delineation of competences , as the Berlin Declaration by the European Democrat Union last month favoured , provided that it is not an excuse to strengthen the centre .
Likewise , simplifying the Treaties would serve the public interest , but this must not be the pretext for introducing a fully-fledged European constitution , especially if the latter were the founding document of a federal state whose preamble was a legally-binding charter of rights .
All of these issues need and deserve the widest possible public debate .
But despite lip service to open consultation in the past , the Nice IGC process , like Amsterdam and Maastricht before it , was ultimately the preserve of national civil servants negotiating behind closed doors .
The next consultation must be different .
It needs to involve real and wide consultation throughout civil society , reflecting the open culture and open politics which we claim to favour .
Mr Corbett quoted Chairman Mao .
I would rather quote George Bush Senior : society is " a thousand points of light " , not " a thousand flowers blooming " .
Our debate on the EU 's institutional future must draw on all of society , harnessing not just the resources of a closed Brussels policy world but the democratic potential of the Internet and - yes - of opinion polls .
The EU must sustain a truly open society .
The people must have their say , including those in the candidate countries .
We must also reschedule the next IGC .
In 2004 we will see a lame-duck Commission on its last legs and the European election cutting across the IGC .
Better to schedule the conference for 2003 , with the 2004 European Parliament elections allowing a popular verdict on some of the key choices being made by governments with enlargement under way .
There are important questions .
In Britain , as in other countries facing general elections in the next couple of years , one of the central issues will be : in whose hands is the future of Europe safe ?
With the Council of Ministers and the Commission firmly in socialist hands , Europe today is going down the wrong track .
In Britain the choice could not be clearer in our coming election : to guarantee a decentralised Europe that works , only the Conservatives offer an agenda which can get the post-Nice process right .
To secure our European future , like the British , most people in Europe want to be in Europe but not run by Europe .
( Laughter and applause )
Mr President , unlike the previous speaker , who quoted George Bush senior , I would rather quote Berthold Brecht .
George Bush talked about " points of light " , but Berthold Brecht said : " die im Dunkeln sieht man nicht " ( you cannot see those in the dark ) , which brings me straight to the heart of my short speech .
The fact of the matter is that one in five people in this world do not have access to clean drinking water , primary health care or primary education .
Europe , which is not only a trading bloc , but also one of values and standards , is an area that could make a huge impact on that level .
Last year , we sealed an agreement with each other , on the other side of that table , on which occasion the Commission , the Council and Parliament put their signatures to Budget 2001 .
In this budget , they doubled the appropriations in all regional programmes for external aid , both for primary health care and primary education , not over and above but within the scope of the budget .
Targets were set and extra staff were made available .
It is of the utmost importance to our Socialist Group for the Commission to actually take steps now in its work programme for this year in order to instruct the EU delegations in the regions , and our counterparts , with whom we jointly do business , as well as our own service . We also want the Commission to make additional staff available for the purpose of acquiring expertise in health care and education , so that we can actually make rapid progress in this respect too .
If the Commission takes this line , it will lead to a more results-orientated style of working , with less emphasis on the open-ended hoarding of budgets .
It will mean that more effort will be made to achieve direct results in fields that are also extremely fundamental to development .
It could be a fantastic signal for Europe to give out , i.e. that we are not just concerned about the fabric of society within our own borders , but also about what is happening overseas .
I hope the Commission will deliver some sound results on that score this year .
Mr President , most people now realise that Nice was a flop , apart perhaps from those who think that Europe should tread water .
So it comes as no great surprise to learn that a broad post-Nice discussion is now underway .
It seems to me to be absolutely crucial for the Commission to keep the upper hand in this discussion , particularly as it will now culminate in a number of procedures to be established at the Laeken Summit .
Parliament has now taken the initiative to produce an interim report by the summer and a definitive report by the end of the year , i.e. shortly before the Laeken Summit .
Despite this preparation , it would be useful to set down a few markers now .
Our group would also like to do the same in this debate .
First and foremost , we must establish what the most serious shortcomings of the Treaty of Nice are , so that the post-Nice agenda has the right content .
We believe we should be chiefly concerned with improving the democratic quality of the Union .
The mistake made in Nice , i.e. the go-ahead that was given to start deciding on certain issues by qualified majority voting but without affording Parliament codecision rights , is indefensible , because it puts the national parliaments , as well as the European Parliament out of the picture .
This will have to be rectified .
In addition , the highly complex decision-making processes will have to be reformed .
The new rules can no longer be explained to the people , which surely cannot have been the intention .
In this debate , I do not find the discussion about producing a clear demarcation of the areas that form part of the policy of Member States and those that fall within the Union ' s remit , to be threatening . On the contrary , I feel it is step in the right direction .
It would be better still if such a clear division of labour could be linked with the European constitution .
Finally , we must put a stop to the endless series of IGCs , which largely consist of officials .
It would be far preferable to adopt the convention model , as used for drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is my fervent hope that the Commission will withdraw its idea to set up a forum , because a broad body of this kind is not suitable for reaching sound decisions .
Moreover , a convention has the advantage that the national parliaments can take part as well .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , I have no intention of saying anything about Nice , now that no one is listening anyway .
The President of the PPE-DE Group complained bitterly earlier on that no one was listening to him .
I intend to focus on the Commission 's plans for foreign and security policy .
There are two sides to this policy , the geographical aspect and the content .
I agree for the most part with the Commission 's list of countries , except on one point : there is no mention of the Middle East .
We were the biggest provider of aid and support to Palestine and the region as a whole in the past and will hopefully continue to be so in the future .
I am not satisfied with funding a process while others decide on its political content .
We need a different role , a stronger role in the Middle East negotiations .
We expect this to be understood not just as the job of the Council and the High Representative of the CFSP ; we also expect an important , creative initiative on the part of the Commission .
As far as the content is concerned , we need the Commission 's presence to be felt in the common European security and defence policy .
Our Parliament welcomed the development in this area in Mrs Lalumière 's report but - and here I should like to pick up on Mr Nassauer 's Marxist digression - a spirit is abroad in Europe , especially in this area : the spirit of intergovernmentalism .
Parliament wants a common , not an intergovernmental European security and defence policy .
The Commission is duty bound , Mr President , to reinforce the Community dimension of this policy .
You want to do it by making a contribution to crisis management and conflict prevention and I think that is a good thing .
Ladies and gentlemen , may I ask you not to engage in conversation with the President of the Commission during the debate because then he cannot listen and I am sure he would very much like to do so .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the President of the Commission on his speech today and on his report on the year 2000 .
I would also like to highlight the important role which this report attributes to the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights , on which I would like to congratulate Commissioner Vitorino for his great contribution .
The Fundamental Rights of the European Union , Mr President - and now we will have to see how we can include this Charter in the Treaty - also have another side .
To defend fundamental rights means to attack those who violate them within the European Union .
And I therefore believe that all initiatives relating to the third pillar are of paramount importance to this Parliament .
This has been said today by Mr Poettering and many other speakers .
For us , the communitisation phase of the issues , which , in Maastricht , were in the third pillar , is paramount .
And I believe there is an initiative , Mr President , which the Commission has highlighted in its six-monthly scoreboards , to which we attach great importance : I am referring to the European arrest order .
I believe that there can be no place in the European Union for terrorists , for those terrorists who yesterday placed another bomb in Madrid and who have tried to end the lives of people , of European citizens .
I therefore believe that if we do things for real , if they can be done , if they can be made tangible , if they can be seen , such as that idea of putting the alleged terrorist before that judge who has issued an arrest order in European territory , European citizens will understand that this is what integrating Europe is about and that this is something useful . This is how we will make a real contribution to bringing Europe closer to the citizens .
Mr President , I am sure that this initiative , which is one of the Commission 's priorities , will soon be a reality .
I would therefore like to encourage you to continue along these lines .
Mr President , unfortunately I am forced to reiterate the observation I made last year to the effect that the European Union has no clear plan for the future .
I do not say this as a rebuke to President Prodi or the Commission , because the Commission is most certainly working or , should I say , making itself busy .
Indeed it is almost making itself busy with too many matters .
No one could possibly keep up with all the Green Papers , White Papers , communications and reports that the Commission and the Commissioners keep presenting , and it is impossible , more particularly , to find in all this a main theme , or a clear plan for the future .
Hence , my first conclusion is that we should do less and we should do it better .
As President Prodi quite rightly said this morning , we should not be expending our energy on measuring the size of cucumbers and gherkins .
As a matter of urgency , we should be defining who is responsible for doing what within the European Union , in other words defining the principle of subsidiarity .
And the Commission , even with good legal reasons to do so , cannot obstruct the decision of a national parliament to have a motorway built , a regional parliament decision to have a new railway built or a town council decision to build a golf course : that is what subsidiarity is .
The Commission President appreciated as much this morning , he asked good questions , but his role is not to ask questions .
The Commission has the right of initiative and must present proposals .
I do not have time to go into matters in greater detail , but I have to say that if we wish to build the new House of Europe , then we do not just need joiners and plumbers , what we need as well , and more importantly , is an architect .
My hope , Mr Prodi , is that , as President of the Commission , you will be this architect .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , I should like to thank you because your speech today has triggered a fundamental debate which answers the question , or which aspires to answer the question of where we , as Europe , want to go .
I think that it would be right , if we are reading the signals correctly , to want to move towards a more collective , more democratic Europe ; to want to move towards a more peaceful Europe , which seeks to resolve differences peacefully ; to want to move towards a more ecological Europe , which respects and cherishes the environment ; to want to move towards a more secure Europe ; to want to move towards a Europe with a more highly-developed social conscience ; to want to move towards a more efficient Europe , especially in the face of the challenges of the twenty-first century .
Within this debate , I think that the role of the European Parliament , which is where all the currents and all the trends in Europe officially exist side by side , must be an important one .
And because today 's debate , apart from anything else , has been full of poetry , drama and references to the axioms of older civilisations , allow me to close by referring to a political figure in Europe who is familiar to you all .
I refer to Antonio Gramsci who , in his letters from prison , outlined the objectives which men and nations need to pursue in order to safeguard a better tomorrow .
Mr President , following Lisbon and Nice , I had hoped to see a better balance in the Commission 's work programme between employment , economic and social policies , but I do not see much evidence of that .
We need balanced progress in the internal market , in competition policy and in social policy , but again I do not see much evidence of that in the Commission 's work programme .
I would like to see , for example , a recognition of the interdependence between these areas of policy .
In competition policy and internal market rules we need an amendment to the merger regulation to include considerations related to employment and social rights and the inclusion , for example , of social clauses in the public procurement framework .
I would have liked a recognition of these inter-relationships , but I do not see it .
I see far faster movement in the economic and internal market sphere than in the social sphere and there are real dangers of a growing imbalance in that respect .
Furthermore I do not see much evidence in the Commission 's work programme of the social agenda agreed at Nice last December .
We will see further progress in areas of open coordination , in employment - well established now - and the first steps in relation to social protection .
I should mention the fundamental problem that key Commission documents are not made available to Parliament and its rapporteurs in good time .
We need to have respect for parliamentary procedures in relation to these new forms of open coordination .
Finally , on a specific issue , the Commission 's work programme misses the point by a great distance when it promises a Green Paper on a corporate sense of social responsibility in the middle of this year .
A Green Paper on such a code is a sick joke to the many thousands of workers who have been affected by restructuring in recent weeks .
We need a complete overhaul of the legislation framework in this area and I hope the Commission will move quickly in that respect .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , we are all in favour of your action and initiatives to move the Union towards a union of security and of your action in connection with asylum and immigration .
However , I should like to call for a few basics ; we expect the consequences to be evaluated and we expect you to think your initiatives over carefully so that they do not contradict any aspects of previous initiatives .
This care - and I have an example to illustrate this - is sometimes missing , as for example in the draft which the President referred to on so-called family reunion currently being discussed in the context of immigration policy .
If , when we talk about family reunion , we mean the core family , i.e. spouses and dependent underage children , then it is an excellent measure , which is in the interests of integration policy and it has our full support .
But if you then extend the circle of people which qualify as family far beyond those who would normally receive the right to move to the Union a year later , then not only have you clearly failed to consider the consequences , you are also contradicting your communications on future immigration policy .
If you go ahead and extend the definition of family to unmarried partners , grandparents on both sides or students ' live-in partners , give them the right to move here a year later , classify them as asylum seekers and also give them the right to work , then the immigration system will become unmanageable and uncontrollable and , in certain circumstances , all cases of immigration will come under your so-called family reunion system .
Plus , you are depriving the Member States of the right to decide which and how many workers can move to the Union and you risk negating all the good points as a result .
Mr President of the Commission , we want to continue to give you our support , but we can only do so if your initiatives do not contradict each other and if the initiatives solve the problems rather than create new problems .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , we agree that after Lisbon we need a knowledge-based economy .
I am glad that Mr Prodi emphasised the overriding importance of sustainable development , which has implications well beyond the natural environment .
We welcome the acceleration of the energy market , though there is a risk of that aim clashing with the aim of sustainable development .
I hope you will pursue rigorously a policy of encouraging renewable energy sources and rational use of energy .
As far as trade is concerned , we agree that a new WTO round is desirable , again subject to the constraints of sustainable development .
I wish to convey to Mr Prodi our very great disappointment at the lack of involvement by the European Parliament in trade matters , which could have been rectified at Nice , but which was not .
I strongly urge you to work on an Interinstitutional Agreement which involves the European Parliament in trade matters .
We believe in reform and democratisation of the WTO .
We believe the everything but arms move is a good step , although some of us regret the delayed timetable which sends a message of less than complete commitment to the least developed countries in the world .
As far as innovation and research are concerned , we look forward to a detailed Sixth Framework Programme .
If you present us with very vague proposals , that will certainly delay implementation and lead to concern and disappointment throughout the EU .
The European research area is of course important .
We look forward to wide publicity for the benchmarking exercises , particularly in the areas of enterprise and innovation .
To my astonishment , the next speaker is Mr Ferber for two minutes .
Ferber ( PPE-DE ) .
( DE ) Mr President , it is your job to chair the debate , not proclaim your astonishment .
Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has presented us with a tough programme of work for 2001 , leaving us in no doubt as to the fact that it is hard-working and that it wants to be hard-working .
But just seeing what else has to be done this year , merely in order to clear the backlog from 2000 , i.e. from last year 's programme of work , and I am already worrying that we will have carry-overs at the end and hardly any time left for new initiatives .
In other words , you should have anticipated the need to focus on the fundamental issues to be worked out in the post-Nice process , namely the division of powers , and seen if you as the Commission , as the institution with the right of initiative in the European Union , could set a good example here .
That way you would not need to carry so many subjects over to the following year , or even the year after that , and the people would realise just what important decisions are taken in Europe as a whole .
I really would urge you - and I have read everything that you have proposed very carefully - to check if any of the subjects within the framework of a sensible division of powers are perhaps not absolutely necessary .
There is a second point that I should like to touch on because I am a dyed-in-the-wool supporter of representative democracy .
I am a little concerned about your approach to new governance .
What I should like to know is what role an elected parliament , which must answer for itself , including to its citizens at home , has in relation to associations which have no such responsibility .
It is here at European level that endless representatives of associations keep popping up and beating a path to our offices and one sometimes wonders exactly who has accredited them back home , whom exactly they are representing here in Europe .
Surely the purpose of this new approach cannot be to give those with no credentials a say and to undermine those with credentials , namely us here in the European Parliament , in the process .
President .
My dear sir , I think you misunderstood me earlier .
The cause of my astonishment was merely your speaking time , not you personally .
Mr President , I fully endorse what Mr Ferber has said .
I do not intend to say anything about the plethora of proposals presented in my area , i.e. on environmental policy and consumer protection .
I do not intend to say anything about them because I assume that half of them will not be implemented and the other half will be carried over to next year .
A German reference would read : tries hard .
But you would not want to use it to apply for another job , because you would not get it .
When you talk of good governance , Mr Prodi , good governance also means self-assessment , evaluating your Commission and deciding what you have the time and staff to achieve .
And while we are on the subject of good governance : what does good governance mean ?
What exactly is good governance ?
Is it transparency ?
Fine , Mr Prodi .
We are all very keen on transparency , but is more involvement by interest groups selected by you and with which you alone negotiate more transparency ?
Not in my book .
And what about cutting red tape , Mr Prodi .
Yes , I am all for cutting red tape , including red tape between Commission services .
I am also all for cutting red tape in Parliament - she says self-critically - but are voluntary undertakings towards industry the solution ?
Are they any faster ?
And who controls them ?
Who imposes sanctions when they do not function ?
Is that more democracy , I ask you ?
You , Mr Prodi , were selected by the Heads of Government and your appointment was confirmed by us .
But we here in the European Parliament were elected - directly elected - by the citizens of the European Union .
This European Parliament has , by definition , a central role in civil society , as you so nicely put it , and I trust that you too can see that from your understanding of democracy .
I warn all of you in the Commission not to tinker with the crucial role of the European Parliament , Mr Prodi .
At the moment , good governance appears in the Commission 's book to mean , first and foremost , governance on its own or governance alone and I urgently advise you not to pursue that course and call on you to confirm that it is the European Parliament which takes the decisions and also controls you .
Mr President , last week the bodies of twelve people who were trying to reach the European Union appeared on the beaches of my country .
Last year there were 500 .
Mr Prodi talks about bringing the European Union and its institutions closer to the citizens .
I believe that the issues which relate to the creation of a European area of justice , freedom and security are , without doubt , very sensitive issues for the citizens of the Union .
With regard to this issue we are in a very strange situation .
The Commission 's legislative programme is good ; Mr Vitorino 's proposals are good , they are clearly structured in the scoreboard , a timetable has been laid down for their application and we can talk about them and debate them .
There is good communication on immigration - and I hope that Mr Poettering realises this - underpinned by a consensus on moving forward with a common policy .
This also applies to asylum and judicial cooperation , for example , as the honourable Member said , in relation to combating terrorism .
However , since Tampere and until last week in Stockholm , the Council has insisted that we have to make progress , has insisted on putting the emphasis on what was decided at that European Council in Tampere .
In my view , however , it is acting in an incomprehensible way .
There has been no agreement on any of the proposals that are on the table , not on family reunification nor on any other proposal .
We are making very gradual progress but at the same time we are seeing a proliferation of individual State initiatives , which disturb the balance of the legislative programme . We are also seeing bilateral or multilateral initiatives and agreements which will lead us goodness knows where , in relation , for example , to the issue of Schengen in the Treaty .
We do not know what is going to happen , nor how the work will be done .
Schengen has been hijacked by the Member States for the moment .
Mr Prodi , you told this House that there are going to be delays in implementing these policies .
You said this before Nice and you added that they were not going to be the fault of the Commission .
I would like to ask you : whose fault will this be ?
What is your Commission going to do to defend this part of the legislative programme which , I repeat , I believe to be a good programme ?
Thank you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the space of a few minutes I should like , not to answer all the relevant speeches , but to make a few observations on just some of them to reiterate our general approach .
Above all , the speeches of all the Members who spoke after Mr Cox illustrated the problem of always working with priorities , taking them all together rather than one by one .
It is clear that , if taken out of context , the huge number of 495 points in our detailed programme might seem an absurd proposition , but sometimes we have to break things down in order to show that we are being practical and then , as this morning , we need to outline practical priorities in order to present the right idea of what we are actually doing .
I also believe that a government needs at times to be pedantic , at times tedious : we try to be both as little as possible but it is part of the job .
Today and in recent sittings we have presented a strategic scheduling programme .
I am sure that Parliament will appreciate that I have pointed out the strict priorities , but these strict priorities will then have to be followed by detailed documents which will be extraordinarily tedious .
But this is politics : first comes the vision , then the practicalities .
Secondly , everyone - including Mr Hänsch and many other Members - said that the Commission / Parliament report should be a question of working together .
Mr Hänsch even talked of producing a single document .
I do not know if this would be useful ; of course , we will have to work together exceptionally well if we are to reach a common will , a single decision .
Moreover , it does not matter whether the standpoints from which these decisions are taken are different or whether they can coexist in a single document ; the truth of the matter is that we - in our committees and in our daily work - constantly perform a task of convergence , study and analysis , of laborious recording of the issues , something we are doing now .
For the moment , this must be carried out within a full agenda .
This is the third problem which emerged this morning , as was pointed out by Mr McMillan-Scott , Mrs Maij-Weggen and many others .
We do indeed have a complicated calendar : we all speak of 2004 , but 2004 will be a year of radical change for Parliament and the Commission .
If we really want this process to go ahead in an integrated , organised manner , it is clear that it will need to be completed by the end of 2003 .
I am only bringing this up as a problem we must think about but , clearly , in the spring of 2004 the electoral campaign will begin , in June the elections will be held , and then there will be the installation of the new Commission , which will not assume power until January 2005 .
It is therefore a year of change , and I believe that Parliament will want to play a full part in this major political change in Europe .
I am bringing this problem up , therefore , because I feel that it is now inescapable .
I also feel that such a change cannot be carried out over two parliaments or at a time of transition or a time when the Commission has no power or , at least , is having its powers drained or gradually exhausted .
I am raising the issue as a problem which does not yet have a solution , but I think that it is only right to discuss it , because a date has been set - 2004 - which must be taken into consideration ; it will lead to inconsistencies and problems which must be taken into account if we are to come any closer to finding a solution .


Mr Swoboda , Mr Hänsch , Mr Voggenhuber and Mr Corbett have pointed out another major problem area , upon which I would like to avoid any misunderstanding , regarding the structuring of the vigorous debate on Europe .
We are all basically in agreement regarding Laeken ; it remains to be seen whether we shall manage to make a success of it and to genuinely involve civil society in the debate as we have promised .
In any case , we agree that Parliament and Commission must work together to guide this debate .
As regards Laeken , I would really like to avoid any misunderstanding : in my view , the time has come to establish the full structure of the debate on the future of Europe .
I reiterate what I have said and I would like to specify that we must create an interinstitutional body with a similar structure to that of the Convention which worked on the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I repeat : it must be similar in structure but otherwise different , probably smaller and more practical .
I am speaking now only of the model .
But we must go further than that previous model .
I go along with the suggestion made by Michel Barnier and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
This body will have to make proposals which do not necessarily require unanimity because there will come a time when we will have to make such far-reaching proposals that it will be difficult to achieve unanimity .
We must therefore envisage a different body having the same objectives .
There are - and we must work on this - some points that are essential .
Let me repeat them : that the European Parliament is involved and that the national parliaments , the governments and the Commission are involved as well .
This is the essence and the strength of Europe .
Of course , I agree with the objections I have heard - that it cannot be a very large body - and , given that there are four administrative structures to be represented , it will therefore be difficult to keep the numbers involved in this institutional structure , this decision-making body down .
However , I believe that this is the great task we must take on : broad representation of all four administrative structures but a sufficiently manageable size to be able to take decisions ; moreover , working on a majority basis and not unanimity , or we shall be paralysed .
In this direction , I believe that we shall be able to work together and produce more definitive proposals .
I would like to make one more observation .
We have undertaken to achieve two things : to associate the candidate countries - although even the meaning of the word ' associate ' has not been defined , but it will probably not include voting rights ; we do not yet know .
This we must do , and we must accordingly think about the procedures necessary for achieving it .
In short , we agree that we have to go beyond the four Nice points .
Let us therefore first sort out the nature of the task in hand , and then we can find a name : I would be very happy to call it an assembly , a council or a committee , I do not mind .
In any case , I believe we must be guided by the nature of the task ahead of us .
Another set of concerns has emerged concerning the issue of subsidiarity and proportionality .
I can assure you that this is a firm commitment of the Commission and it is not incompatible with the fact that , sometimes , we also have to make more specific recommendations .
An interesting example has been given . For goodness ' sake , we do not have to standardise curriculum vitae forms , which differ from country to country , but it is a help which we very often need to give our young workers for their careers .
This does not have to be compulsory but it is undoubtedly a tool which helps them to move from country to country more easily .
So there we are : it is having the good sense to see that some of the things we regulate may even appear absurd , but they are done in support of the decisions we take .
Then there are others , many others , which are completely pointless .
Finally , the emphasis was placed - by Mr Fiori and Mr Sakellariou - and this gives me great pleasure - on the Mediterranean .
We have not discussed this topic much this year , which is understandable because we have been fully occupied with enlargement and the Balkans - and rightly so .
However , there is a very specific programme for the Mediterranean : last year I went to Israel and Palestine ; this last month to Algeria , Morocco and Tunisia ; last week to Jordan , Syria and the Lebanon .
I can assure you that there is a desire , a need , a call for Europe , not only to solve economic problems but also with a certain gratitude for the support we have been giving these peoples .
However , there are two new important points which are being requested by everyone : the first is the change from a bilateral approach to something more , a multilateral approach ; this will help regional cooperation , although it cannot be extended to the whole area but will have to operate in groupings , the Maghreb on one side , the Mashraq on the other .
What is coming through is a strong desire for a Europe which is seen , by its very nature - precisely because it is Europe - to have relinquished all traces of a colonial past and any legacy which could cause tension , and which is seen as a new proposal and , above all , a model of cooperation they can follow .
The second point : a desire for Europe to be involved in their peace negotiations .
Clearly , international issues will dictate whether there can be an answer to this question .
I place it before Parliament , because it has affected me greatly : the request was clear , explicit , motivated by the fact that we understand their problems , that we encounter these problems every day .
I have very strong feelings about the Mediterranean , not because I was born in that region but because I want to remind people that coexistence , peace , war , and compatibility between regions and cultures appear , in the main , to originate there .
I would like to remind everyone of this , both because it is already a well-defined path and the Spanish Presidency is planning - we have had extensive discussions about it with the Prime Minister - a Summit on the Mediterranean during the Spanish Presidency next year .
The preparation of this year , therefore , is a perfect opportunity to integrate this policy .
Regarding sustainable development , I agree with what has been said .
I would like , once again , to emphasise that this is an extraordinarily important but extremely difficult matter .
Very often , in fact , we use this expression simply to save face , but sustainable development means taking decisions which are extremely complex and difficult , decisions which concern industry , our daily way of life , housing , or the use of energy .
It is something of great importance and consequence and our great responsibility , which we cannot avoid if we want to do more than - I repeat - merely save face , something which can be done in other ways .
I have the same concerns over emigration and internal and external security policy .
Finally , I strongly welcome the appeal made to me by some Members not to delay enlargement .
I have to say : we are not delaying it .
The Swedish Presidency has given great vigorous and personal impetus to this issue ; Commissioner Verheugen has put an enormous amount of energy into organising the negotiation groups ; they are relentlessly working through the various chapters .
The great political decisions - agriculture , environment , structural funds - are now reaching the critical point , which will involve a very difficult period , a period in which political wisdom will have to come strongly to the fore , for it is this that will give the final impetus to the great process in progress .
Earlier on , I quoted Kofi Annan , but , in fact , the process of enlargement itself is regarded by the United Nations and by everyone as a supreme message of peace and civilisation to the whole world .
We must resolve the practical problems to make this possible .
I would like to finish with a word on the invitation made to me by one of you , Mr Goebbels .
I will say that the Commission is here not only to give opinions but also to make proposals on these matters and , if at all possible , also to take up Mr Goebbels ' call to be the architects of the new structure : naturally with your help , your cooperation and also your scrutiny .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
I should like , nonetheless , to move straight on to the next debate because , with the schedule for the night sitting , it is already nearly midnight and we must be grateful for every extra minute which we have .
Industrial restructuring and mergers
The next item is the oral question ( B5-0008 / 2001 ) by Mr Rocard to the Commission on Community initiatives in connection with the social consequences of restructuring and mergers in industry .
Mr President , Commissioners , this is an oral question addressed to the Commission .
Several months ago , the President , Mrs Fontaine , addressed the Lisbon European Council with concerns , to quote her , " the devastating effect [ of unregulated mergers ] on the Union ' s social cohesion " .
She urged the Heads of State and Government , and I shall quote her words once again , to " ensure that , before such mergers can take place , a serious assessment of their social impact is carried out so that the necessary accompanying social measures can be taken " .
In so doing , Mrs Fontaine was highlighting the major problem of how to reconcile the necessary flexibility in businesses with the necessary safety of workers ?
Since Lisbon , Mr President , restructuring has intensified further .
We now hear that there are more than three hundred mergers every year .
Every new day brings further sources of anxiety for employees whether in the sectors of what is curiously termed the ' old ' economy , which is the bulk of the economy , or in the new information technology sector .
In this respect , the Nice Summit sent out some very positive signals .
Overcoming the thirty-year deadlock on the European Company Statute , including the section on employee participation , and the adoption of the social agenda , illustrated the importance that the European Council attaches to improving the situation of the European Union ' s workers .
The request we would make of the Commission through this unanimous oral agreement - and let me stress that there was unanimity within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - is that they use this new political will as a firm basis to truly guide their proposals .
It is our honour , therefore , to ask the Commission to make some specific commitments .
First of all we want better provision to be made for the social effects of restructuring .
How , for example , do you plan to use the new European Industrial Relations Observatory , to be operated by the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin , which this great House , the European Parliament , was so dedicated to creating ?
We would like you to undertake a reassessment of the existing directives on social matters with regard both to their record of implementation and to the new challenges presented by their restructuring .
We urge you to propose the necessary revisions wherever they are needed , particularly in order to have stricter scrutiny of workers ' rights to information and consultation and as far as possible to bring forward the provision of information to the social partners in the restructuring process .
In this regard , we would appreciate the Commission ' s immediately proposing , now , not in 2002 , as announced , revision of the current directive on the European works council , a directive which itself stipulated it would be revised after a few years .
The time for that has now come . We also urge you to revisit the directive on collective redundancies in order to incorporate the procedures needed to prevent the requirement to inform workers being contravened .
Finally we would like to see the internal procedures for competition policy within the Commission being amended in order to take greater account of social factors . We know that Mrs Diamantopoulou is not completely averse to this idea .
Well , " not completely averse " is a polite way of saying it , as I am in fact fairly sure that she is in favour of the idea . Would it not be only natural , when a firm asks Brussels for permission to go through with a merger , for the Commission to ensure that the minimum requirements for the information and consultation of employees as laid down in Community legislation have indeed been respected .
These , Commissioners , are our demands , which have a symbolic value as far as public opinion is concerned , a justified value as far as the employees are concerned , and , if I may say so , are useful as far as the economy is concerned , for how is it possible to manage a knowledge-based economy without the employees being involved ?
Within my committee , we were unanimous in our discussion of this oral question and also on a motion for a resolution that is now before us .
I must point out that a further motion was tabled by the Liberal Group .
As we are of one mind with our liberal friends , who voted in favour of the first resolution and , above all , in favour of the committee ' s question , we think there has been some technical hitch and that our liberal friends did not receive proper information .
Do not , at any rate , see this as discord . It is a matter we are going to sort out .
Until now we have worked in perfect agreement , and that includes with our liberal friends .
Commissioners , we impatiently await your responses .
Mr President , honourable Members , Europe must face industrial restructuring and its social consequences by combining innovation with social cohesion and improving its capacity to manage change .
Our positive and pro-active answer to change covers three main fields : improving our capacity , anticipating and managing change i.e. in the Dublin Observatory ; creating or developing the legal mechanisms which can ensure adequate protection of workers in situations of industrial restructuring and promoting in general their own capacity to anticipate change ; and developing corporate social responsibility .
The establishment of an observatory on industrial change is one of the actions proposed in the social policy agenda adopted by the Nice Summit as a means to develop a pro-active approach to anticipating and managing change .
I personally attach much importance to this matter in view of the current situation regarding mergers and acquisitions .
The Dublin Foundation has included this initiative in its four-year rolling programme .
In the framework of its current limited resources , the Dublin Foundation has planned in its 2001 work programme to set up the observatory 's steering committee .
This work will provide a basis for further development of the observatory from 2002 onwards , if additional resources become available .
The directives on collective redundancies and transfers of undertakings , dating back from the seventies , were conceived and adopted in a context of full employment and slow change .
Since then the situation in the economic world has radically changed .
It is true that their provisions are no longer adapted to the needs of companies and workers .
Today they focus on promoting anticipation , prevention of crisis , employability and adaptability .
Our answer to the weaknesses of the existing rules , and the only efficient way to modernise national systems of worker involvement , consists in refocusing the information and consultation procedures on economic and strategic issues and putting the long-term evolution of employment within each company at the centre of them .
That is the aim of the Commission 's proposal on information and consultation .
Once this general framework is adopted and widely applied , the specific rules on collective redundancies and transfers of undertakings will make sense ; first of all , because crises in the employment relationship like these would in many cases have been prevented .
Secondly , even when they cannot be avoided , the normal losers would have been alerted well before and would be in a position to adapt better to inevitable changes in their employment situation .
I know that you are very supportive of this approach and that you share the Commission 's satisfaction with the irreversible progress recently achieved on this sensitive dossier .
With your cooperation and a strong political will from the Council , we may finalise it before the end of this year and that will be a decisive step forward .
I also share your point of view according to which the European Works Council Directive will also have , sooner or later , to be updated .
Nevertheless , we will have much to gain from pursuing the evaluation of the rich experience of practical application of the directive .
In addition , before doing so , we would conclude some unfinished tasks which are also at the centre of your concerns .
First of all the information and consultation dossier must be finalised .
Then at the end of last year we had another major and long-awaited achievement : the European company statute .
It is worth mentioning in the context of this debate because this new form of incorporation will certainly be widely used by companies in Europe operating on a trans-national basis , above all , when they restructure themselves and adapt to new economic and market conditions .
One of the outstanding positive elements of the statute is that it contains well developed provisions on worker involvement , which reflect the modern approach also translated in the national information and consultation proposal .
This will surely contribute to a better treatment of the social dimension of corporate restructuring in Europe .
Then the five other legislative proposals are on the line , following the unlocking of the European company texts : the three twin statutes for cooperatives , mutual societies and associations and the draft directives on trans-national mergers and transfers of the registered offices of companies from one Member State to another .
All of these instruments will require the same kind of provisions as the ones found in European companies .
This is another reason for waiting a short while before launching the revision of the European Works Council Directive , which , incidentally , will have much to gain from the debates held on these other dossiers .
They will inevitably inspire and facilitate the acceptance of the solutions which will be on the table for discussion when we turn to the task .
Finally , I know that there is concern in this House about information and consultation of employees in the context of mergers and acquisitions control .
As you know , from previous speeches , we are holding a debate within the Commission on how better to address this concern .
Under the merger regulation , workers and representatives are already entitled in some cases to be auditioned by the Commission 's services , which conduct an inquiry on the conformity of a merger with the Treaty .
Our idea consists in making these auditions more systematic .
On the other hand , we could usefully remind merging companies of their responsibilities and obligations with regard to worker information and consultation on these operations which very frequently affect them .
As social cohesion is now top priority for Europe , public authorities can no longer be expected to be solely and wholly responsible for it .
Like every other part of society , businesses are expected to undertake their share .
Promoting corporate social responsibility is now an essential part of the European strategy for social cohesion .
The guiding principle of corporate social responsibility for companies is to be competitive and profitable by living up to their social responsibilities .
In response to the Lisbon Council 's appeal to companies ' corporate sense of social responsibility the Commission has included this theme in its own social policy agenda published in June 2000 by stressing its importance in addressing the employment and social consequences of economic and market integration and adapting worker conditions in the new economy .
It has announced a communication to support initiatives related to corporate social responsibility and management of change .
The Commission will issue a Green Paper this year to facilitate further development towards a framework for corporate social responsibility practice at European level .
In conclusion , it is the combination of the different lines of action which I mentioned to you , as well as adequate action from public authorities , private organisations , companies , workers and the social partners at all levels , that will allow us to deal properly with the social implications of industrial change and corporate restructuring .
All of them are important , all of them require an innovative and open attitude on the part of policy makers .
I know that is your stance on this and I thank you for your support .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have to inform you that I have received a motion for a resolution under Rule 37 paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The vote on this motion will take place on Thursday .
Mr President , this is never the most gratifying moment to make speeches of this kind .
I am delighted with the Commissioner ' s response .
I think we will find that it contains all kinds of points worth acting on - particularly if we give it another good read through - in order to reach the goals we are seeking to achieve through these questions , and find the necessary solutions .
Whenever restructuring takes place there is a debate as to whether our institutions are sufficiently well-designed to cope with such eventualities .
That is quite logical .
Indeed the Treaty on the European Union , specifically Article 136 , bestows this task on the European Union .
Needless to say , we must tread a fine line , i.e. the companies concerned must be given as much leeway as possible to make their own policy decisions , and so promote commercial growth of their operations , which will help to combat long-term and structural unemployment in Europe .
On the other hand , we have a moral duty to engage in consultation .
Volkswagen in Germany is a good case in point .
If these consultation obligations are properly observed , then it is far easier to resolve a particular structural problem than were this not to be the case .
If you compare the restructuring of Volkswagen with restructuring operations now taking place in other European countries , which do not have such a good record when it comes to observing consultation obligations , then the differences are plain for all to see .
That is why it is so very important for these consultation obligations to be included in the agenda as soon as possible , and for the matter to be resolved , preferably within the term of the Swedish Presidency .
That is what we aim to achieve with these questions .
Mr Rocard was right in saying that the resolution was submitted on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Having said that , we still need a number of amendments , precisely in order to underline the point that companies must be given as much leeway as possible to make their own policy decisions .
Of course , that is what the resolution implies , but the point is not made quite as clearly as we would wish .
So we will go along with the resolution , but only if it includes the amendments we have yet to put forward . Obviously we still have up to Thursday to discuss this .
Mr President , on this side of the House we are not trying to stop restructuring but we want it to be done in a socially responsible way .
We want a pro-active approach to industrial restructuring and change .
We want to see a corporate code of social responsibility but we can see that this will be achieved only when we have an updated and completed legal framework in this area .
We want to see true partnership at work and the real benefits that this can bring to the European Union .
But the latest spate of restructuring in the United Kingdom and throughout the European Union shows that we are far from achieving those things .
To the Corus workers in the north-east of England or Wales , to the Vauxhall workers in Luton - or , for that matter , the Danone workers in France and Holland - the idea of a corporate code of responsibility - as I said in an earlier debate - is a sick joke , quite frankly .
The promise of a Green Paper in the middle of this year is not an adequate response to the anguish that those workers , their families and entire communities have felt .
We want to see a review of the law on collective redundancies , a review on transfers , a review of the European Works Council Directive , to make sure it is a directive that is observed rather than being systematically avoided by business .
We also want to see the general framework on information and consultation adopted as a matter of urgency .
This is absolutely essential if we are going to introduce an ongoing day-by-day flow of consultation and information and , in that way , build a true partnership at work : a partnership that can deliver improved innovation , competitiveness and productivity .
We want to see that true partnership .
We are tired of the linkage of various directives in this package , with the excuse that we cannot look for a review of the European Works Council Directive until it has been further bedded-in and the European company statute is in place .
Yes , we need to establish linkage , but in taking this package now and taking a holistic approach to the need to improve information and consultation for workers .
We believe that if this framework of legislation can be updated in this way , coupled with the new observatory on industrial change , it can give us the tools for a more pro-active approach to industrial change within the European Union .
I would also like to make an appeal to the Liberal Group .
We were given a mandate by this House in January to look at this issue of restructuring in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We have done that .
We have come up with an oral question and a resolution in a spirit of cooperation .
I would ask the Liberals , in the spirit of cooperation , to withdraw their highly destructive resolution .
It would be helpful .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , do you sometimes get the feeling that this Parliament suffers from collective dementia , by any chance ?
We had the self-same debate exactly a year ago , on 17 February .
I would not find this disconcerting , were it not for the fact that we also discussed this topic back on 27 October 1999 , and I could mention a few other occasions .
Ladies and gentlemen , what is it that Europe needs ?
It was agreed last year in Lisbon that we want to become the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world , and Parliament has thrown its weight behind this objective , in a spirit of generosity and with a large majority .
That is why , on Thursday next , we will hold a debate on a European research area , and the need to invest in research , technological development , innovation and education .
In addition , it is more important than ever for businesses to exploit their competitive potential to the full , because an uncompetitive business costs jobs .
Seen from this perspective , it is sometimes unavoidable that businesses have to undergo reorganisation and occasionally take painful measures such as transferring or replacing workers , or making them redundant if the worst comes to the worst .
Needless to say , the rights of workers as laid down in the various European directives must be upheld in the process .
You will understand that the Liberal Group cannot endorse the question raised by Mr Rocard or the resolution tabled by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs as it stands , for it provides renewed evidence of the fact that Parliament has a very selective memory .
After all , only the Nice social agenda is discussed in the joint resolution , whilst Lisbon is forgotten for the sake of convenience .
We will therefore table a number of amendments in the spirit of the Lisbon objectives .
Mr Rocard thinks that not responding immediately to an e-mail signifies automatic acceptance ; he is wrong on that score .
But we will withdraw our resolution .
Mr President , unfortunately it is very timely that we should be discussing these issues today in the light of current examples of restructuring .
As has been mentioned earlier , the Anglo-Dutch company Corus - the steel company - is a classic example of a company making decisions based on profit with no regard to the disastrous social costs of its actions .
Corus has just announced total job losses of 6 000 in the UK - nearly 3 000 in my own constituency in Wales .
Despite months of speculation over possible plant closures the company was unwilling to reveal its future plans to the government , let alone to its own workforce , until the formal announcement was made on 1 February .
There was no prior consultation with the workforce , although since announcing the decision the company has been holding what it calls " consultation " .
There is speculation that Danone , a profitable company , is to shed 3 000 jobs in Europe .
Again there has been no consultation with the workers and no discussion about alternative ways forward .
That is why it is so important to adopt the directive on the information and consultation of workers without delay , together with a review of the European Works Council Directive and the Collective Redundancies Directive , which incidentally proved to offer so little protection to the Corus workers in my constituency .
Companies cannot be free to wreak such havoc on people 's lives and communities .
There is a positive framework of controls and sanctions which we can use .
We must make sure they are effective .
Mr President , faced with massive mergers and industrial restructuring resulting in thousands of redundancies , many employees , many European citizens , have found Europe to be powerless if not actually colluding with these actions , in line with the law of free competition .
It is high time that we provided means to intervene on behalf of employees .
There is an intolerable contradiction between the Council and the Commission ' s declared priority of promoting employment and the massive redundancies that big businesses are making , and who are , at the same time , making fantastic profits .
Michelin , Moulinex , Danone and Alstom are not businesses experiencing difficulties .
They are perfectly competitive , and have a record of making more than adequate profits , but they are laying off thousands of people nonetheless .
The case of Danone is very instructive , making 3 000 people redundant in Europe and 1 700 in France .
In the year 2000 , this firm ' s European installations made a net profit of EUR 795 million , or 17 % more than in 1999 .
It is not possible to sit back and simply watch the unfolding spectacle of mergers that make men and women redundant , plunging entire families into chaos .
The European citizenship we so often refer to in this society will continue to be nothing more than just so much hot air as long as employees are not properly informed and consulted on choices which determine their own future and that of their region and their country .
How , furthermore , can we find it acceptable for groups to benefit from grants of public financial aid to promote employment without being obliged to comply with the commitments they have made ?
In such instances , the aid funds should be paid back to the community which will have to bear the social costs resulting from the choice of financial profitability over employment .
I do not think that the problem boils down to employability or adaptability or to simply dealing with the social fallout , as the Commissioner suggested .
I therefore endorsed the proposals made in the resolution as well as the amendments that clarify and strengthen certain aspects .
We shall have to go much further to respond to the democratic demands of the working citizens of Europe .
I therefore feel that rights should be developed to the point where it is possible to halt scheduled redundancies and ongoing mergers .
Any merger contract must include social clauses .
Penalties must also be introduced for failure to comply with the directives on worker consultation .
At this time when there is a great deal of debate on the subject of European identity and the direction that European integration should be taking , I feel that a text specifying certain employee rights in the face of financial objectives would be the least that could be done so as to give the European Union a degree of credibility .
I shall therefore vote in favour of the resolution which I hope will be enhanced by a number of amendments .
I have received a motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Since it is now time for the vote , the debate is now suspended and will be resumed at 3 p.m.

We shall now proceed to the vote .
VOTE
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report without debate ( A5-0021 / 2001 ) by Mr Dover , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission report on the effects of the transitional period granted to the United Kingdom concerning certain provisions of Council Directive 94 / 33 / EC on the protection of young people at work [ COM ( 2000 ) 457 - C5-0010 / 2001 - 2001 / 2002 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0038 / 2001 ) by Mr Zimeray , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the request for waiver of immunity concerning Mr José Ribeiro e Castro [ 2000 / 2178 ( IMM ) ]
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0016 / 2001 ) by Mr Savary , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system [ 10185 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0564 / 2000 - 1999 / 0252 ( COD ) ]
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0037 / 2001 ) by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive establishing requirements and harmonised procedures for the safe loading and unloading of bulk carriers [ COM ( 2000 ) 179 - C5-0254 / 00 - 2000 / 0121 ( COD ) ]
Before the vote on Amendment No 16Fava ( PSE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , the oral amendment seeks to replace the word " qualification " , the last word in the amendment , with the word " expertise " .
President .
Are there any objections ?
MacCormick ( Verts / ALE ) .
Mr President , the interpreter interpreted the oral amendment as " experience " .
The voting list text says " expertise " .
" Expertise " is the appropriate word .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0031 / 2001 ) by Mr Bakopoulos , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on
I. the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation concerning the Committee on Safe Seas and amending the regulations on maritime safety and the prevention of pollution from ships [ COM ( 2000 ) 489 - C5-0475 / 2000 - 2000 / 0236 ( COD ) ]
II. the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending the directives on maritime safety and the prevention of pollution from ships [ COM ( 2000 ) 489 - C5-0476 / 2000 - 2000 / 0237 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0042 / 2001 ) by Mr Nicholson , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing measures to be applicable in 2001 for the recovery of the stock of cod in the Irish Sea ( ICES Division VIIa ) [ COM ( 2000 ) 745 - C5-0683 / 2000 - 2000 / 0292 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- Hansenne report ( A5-0029 / 2001 )
In order to justify European aid , the rapporteurs emphasise the difficult economic situation in Cambodia and Laos and the performance of the bomb disposal programmes that are essential after many years of conflict in this region , while carefully avoiding pointing out , in both instances , the significant responsibility of the imperialist powers , including France and the United States .
If this were simply European aid , pure and simple , paid as reparation for years of looting and destroying these two countries , without any form of recompense , then it would have our support .
However , this so-called aid is no more than a flimsy screen designed to conceal the goals which are revealed , nonetheless , in the phrase about turning around the downward trend of European Community exports to this region of the world , or , to put it in plain terms , enabling the predators in the shape of major European businesses to conduct , and intensify as far as possible , what is effectively still a policy of plundering this region of the world .
We have therefore abstained from voting on these reports .
Dover report ( A5-002 / 2001 )
The United Kingdom had obtained a derogation of the regulations on maximum hours of work and on night work of adolescents .
The Commission , and this report , now propose waiving this derogation .
We might have been able to welcome seeing the United Kingdom apply rules granting young people in work greater protection .
The fact is , however , that the perfect agreement that has been reached between conservatives , Labour Party members , liberals and socialists , on the end of this derogation period is based on the fact that , as the report itself says , " the possibilities for derogation [ are ] sufficient in order to provide the necessary flexibility " and this will not therefore have " adverse effects on employment opportunities for young people " .
This clearly demonstrates the fact not only that this regulation of the European institutions may be sidestepped , but that , even when it is applied , it does not protect youths from employers ' thirst for profits .
We have voted against this report .
Unfortunately , the young workers of Britain are not likely to see a great improvement in their situation as a result of our adopting this resolution .
The directive will not meet the needs of young workers any better just because we have put an end to the scandal of this derogation for the English ( as the United Kingdom did not fully comply with the directive limiting the work of children and adolescents ) .
This debate should , instead , have provided an opportunity to amend the directive to remove all the derogations it contains , which prevent it from being properly effective .
There is no justification for authorising young people of 14 and even 13 years of age to work in any way whatsoever [ Article 4 ( 2c ) ] , outside compulsory school attendance [ Article 8 ( 1b ) ] and during school holidays [ Article 8 ( 1c ) ] .


Nor is there any justification for the derogations allowing young people of less than 18 years of age to work more than 40 hours per week , over 8 hours per day [ Article 8 ( 5 ) ] , and do night work [ Article 9 ( 2 ) ] .

There is no justification for applying any restriction to application of the directive in the case of domestic service in a private household or to work in a family undertaking [ Article 2 ( 2 ) ] .
There is no point in denouncing child labour in Africa or Asia if we do not protect our own young people against economic exploitation and work that is harmful to health , safety and development and if we do not ensure that they receive training leading to qualifications in a system quite separate from that of the employers .
I wholeheartedly support this report by Mr Dover which aims to improve working conditions for young people in Britain .
It supports the view that the UK falls into line with a 1994 directive which limits the working hours of young people to eight hours a day or 40 hours a week and bans night work , although it provides for exceptions in special circumstances and for certain kinds of work .
Employment , particularly youth employment , is of course extremely important for both our young people and our economy .
We must not do anything to harm the job prospects of young people in Britain .
Sometimes , however , employers take advantage of our young workers and force them to work unnecessarily long hours .
Long hours and difficult working conditions are extremely dangerous and can be harmful to the health and productivity of our young people .
It is therefore vital that working hours are monitored and that employers are prevented from exploiting youngsters at work .
Exploitation is harmful and irresponsible .
We must act to curb it and ensure that our young people are protected from exploitation and its destructive effects by hard-pressed or greedy employers .
The legislation for reducing the working hours for young people already exists .
We just need to make sure that it is used .
The sensible measures put forward by the Commission should encourage the utilisation of these measures .
I find it ironic that the Tories who constantly argue against Brussels bureaucrats interfering and who opposed this legislation , do in fact support this report on social policy .
This illustrates their totally schizophrenic attitude towards Europe .
The Labour Government is at the forefront of providing jobs for our young people and also measures to protect them at work .
I strongly urge the House to show its support for the protection of young people in Britain and to vote in favour of this report .
Savary report ( A5-0016 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for this report , which seeks to promote railway infrastructure in Europe .
A European rail system is an important goal for Europe .
Before I left to come to Strasbourg , some pensioners urged me to vote for the report tabled by the committee chaired by Mr Hatzidakis , saying : " We want to travel throughout Europe by train and we want to travel in luxury .
We would like there to be sofas , bars , high quality restaurants and televisions on trains .
Europe can and must provide us with this as well .
We are sure that Mr Hatzidakis will make it possible . "
Mr President , with the imminent accession of the Central and Eastern European countries to the Union , an efficient rail transport network is becoming more and more crucial to smooth cross-border rail transport , which is why we need to integrate the national networks into a single European network .
Ironing out differences in the specifications used by individual railway undertakings is an important step towards a trans-European network .
Creating transport connections and removing traffic bottlenecks in less favoured or remote regions is another important step .
Developing the infrastructure will also give these regions a chance to participate in and profit from the internal market .
I am very pleased to welcome the report by Gilles Savary on the interoperability of the rail system , since it approves the common position of the Council without amendments .
This common position incorporates 33 of the 46 amendments put forward at first reading .
Like the rapporteur , I think the future of the European transport system necessarily involves revitalising the rail sector .
As we have often had cause to point out , within the European Union , investments in railways are differentiated to a great extent on a national basis .
It goes without saying that these national disparities represent a considerable obstacle to the development of rail transport in Europe , despite the many advantages offered by this less polluting form of transport .
At the same time , the establishment of the internal market has brought about a considerable increase in the movement of goods and persons around the European Union .
This increase has mainly benefited the road sector , particular as regards freight movement .
There are many reasons for the decline in the railways .
One reason is that rail has been organised on individual national lines .
There is no single market for railway services within the Community .
Moreover , the networks are not always terribly well suited to new patterns in the organisation of economic activities and urbanisation , or indeed to the changes that these have entailed in traffic flows .
Having said that , it is clear that the future of the European transport system necessarily involves revitalising the rail sector and in short order .
I am speaking in favour of this because I believe that rail has a key role to play in solving the mobility problems facing the European Union .
On a daily basis , the citizens of Europe suffer from pollution , congestion and the risk of accidents as a result of an excessive dependence on roads , a dependence that has only been exacerbated in the course of the last thirty years .
The objective of sustainable mobility is thus closely linked to revitalising the railways .
I am pleased , moreover , that the European Parliament has succeeded in getting through some amendments , which seek to have important social standards taken into greater consideration , such as vocational qualifications and conditions of health and safety at work .
The Council also took note of a number of sensitive areas , such as , for instance , the protection of the existing railway system , the need to adopt a system of exemptions or specific cases , such as the situation of some countries that are isolated from the rest of the Community , or the difference in track gauges .
Similarly , the Council has put forward a realistic common position that draws up a gradual schedule for work and takes account of the problems which enlargement will present for the rail sector .
For all these reasons I voted in favour of the Savary report .
We shall vote in favour of this report since it is important to promote the interoperability of the trans-European rail system .
The road transport network is currently saturated and in need of an overhaul .
We must also undertake procedures to increase rail transport in order to relieve the pressure on the roads .
Yet , behind the laudable objectives of the rapporteur in terms of revitalising the railway sector , we see the spectre of liberalisation , since another objective of this report is to contribute towards opening up of markets in transport services and equipment assets and towards promoting the competitiveness of the rail sector as a whole .
We must express our grave reservations on this count , since we remain steadfastly opposed to liberalisation .
If the intention is indeed to create a solution that is a real alternative to road transport taking over everything , then there must be harmonisation of the disparate rail transport infrastructures in Europe .
In this respect I am forced to agree with the rapporteur .
Furthermore , I feel that incorporating social standards , vocational qualifications and health and safety and working conditions in the process of creating a trans-European rail system would be the very least we could do .
However , I shall be extremely vigilant in ensuring that harmonisation is carried out on the basis of the best existing social rights and not at the expense of users and employees in this sector .
There is , however , a dangerous failure to address one question : in what context is network interoperability to be achieved ?
In the context of public services coordinated throughout Europe , which are guarantors of jobs and safety , or in the context of a market which has been sacrificed to competition and profit ?
The three directives in the railway package recently adopted by Parliament and the Council would suggest that Europe sees the future of trans-European rail transport in the second of these .
Van Dam report ( A5-0037 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the van Dam report on the safe loading and unloading of bulk carriers . And why is that ?
This time , I took the advice of Mr Fatuzzo the sailor .
I say " sailor " , Mr President , because you may not be aware that I nearly made ships my career . I might even have worked on bulk carriers .
Therefore , my potential colleague , Mr Fatuzzo the sailor , the man I am not but could have been , said to me : " I have been sailing for many years on bulk carriers .
I have read the report seeking to prevent ships sinking but , in my opinion , Mr Fatuzzo the MEP , ships sink because they are too old .
Old , unusable ships need to retire .
This would make sailing safer . "
I do not know whether to thank the MEP or the sailor .
There are other types of merchant vessel , apart from the oil tankers in the news , which are in a deplorable condition .
The consequences are perhaps not as spectacular as those of wrecked oil tankers , but the human death toll is far worse , when it is known that 146 bulk carriers have sunk in 10 years and that 780 crew members thereby lost their lives .
In voting for this report , we voted in favour of practical measures contributing to stepping up the safety of bulk carriers and their crews .
We must , however , point out the contradiction that exists between the concerns for safety and the concerns relating to what the report terms the risk of " distortions of competition " for European ports and terminals .
Safety is inevitably sacrificed in the attempt to safeguard the profits of shipowners and contractors .
It is a good idea to give the master the option of objecting to loading or unloading operation he considers might endanger the safety of his crew or ship .
However , it would be hypocritical to disregard the fact that the laws of competition and of the market ( including the labour market ) imposed by the shipowners and contractors are such that the master ' s theoretical option of objecting does not carry much weight in the face of the means available to the capitalist forces in maritime transport to impose dangerous , and occasionally lethal , conditions on navigation and on living on board ships .
In 10 years , almost 150 bulk carriers have sunk , causing 800 deaths .
This is the tragic record of a sector which has been abandoned to the laws of competition and the market .
Like the rapporteur , I consider that the physical condition of the ships and the incompetence of the crew are the chief factors behind these wrecks .
So , in the first place , we have to do something about inspecting these ships , their crews and shipboard working and living conditions .
I therefore support any binding measures to improve safety standards , port State inspections and to ensure that loading and unloading terminals and masters are aware of their responsibilities .
For that , however , we have to set aside human and financial resources to actually implement the legislation in the Member States , particularly by increasing the number of inspectors .
Moreover , if we are to tackle the impunity from prosecution and leniency which prevail in maritime transport then we also have to drive home the message that shippers and shipowners are responsible too , if necessary by providing ourselves with the means to enforce judicial and financial penalties .
I shall vote in favour of all the proposals to that end .
Bakopoulos report ( A5-0031 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Since it is on safety at sea , I could not fail to vote in favour of Mr Bakopoulos ' report too , concerning the establishment of the Committee on Safe Seas and the Prevention of Pollution by Ships .
This time , Mr President , I communicated via e-mail with one of my former bosses who worked on the ships on which I travelled between New York and the Bahamas when , at 21 years old , before entering political life , I worked as a sailor , as I said before .
This gentleman , who has become a purser - his name is Augusto Fazio - said to me : " Well done . The European Parliament is right to concern itself with the safety of the sea and to prevent it becoming polluted .
But are you also concerning yourselves with the safety of us sailors who work on the ships ? "
" Of course , " I said . " Be patient .
There will also be reports dealing with your safety as well . "
The proposal by Mr Bakopoulos , the rapporteur , to set up a Committee on Safe Seas and the Prevention of Pollution by Ships , which would replace the current committees , is another step towards the renationalisation of Community policy on maritime safety , but is also an extra asset for improving monitoring of the implementation of Community and international regulations .
However , the recent disasters involving the Erika and Ievoli Sun vessels have shown that the even best resolutions are worthless unless we provide ourselves with the means to apply them and to have them applied .
That is why the legislation currently under discussion must be imposed on Member States , particularly legislation that governs prevention of pollution , monitoring the criteria regarding the training and formal qualifications of seafarers and working conditions at sea .
In order to do this , we must allocate resources to ensure the quantity and quality of inspections and inspectors , and in terms of making all concerned such as shipowners , charterers , tankers and classification societies responsible in financial terms .
In order to curb the impunity and complacency that pervade this industry , I voted in favour of this report .
Nicholson report ( A5-0042 / 2001 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , my name is Fatuzzo and the Italian for cod is " merluzzo " !
I will now give the interpreters a few moments to translate this profound , important connection into the other languages .
Today is 13 February , Mr President , and tomorrow is the day dedicated to lovers .
How could I fail to appreciate the European Parliament 's impeccable timing in , the day before Valentine 's Day , concerning itself with cod which make love in the Irish Sea , and producing a directive banning the fishing of cod between tomorrow , 14 February , Valentine 's Day , and 30 April , precisely in order to allow them to reproduce ?
In my opinion , with regard to respect for fish and cod , the European Parliament has done well .
Here 's to Saint Valentine and here 's to all lovers !
And here 's to the cod as well !
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.36 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Industrial restructuring and mergers ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the oral question ( B5-0008 / 2001 ) by Mr Rocard , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , to the Commission , on Community initiatives relating to the social consequences of industrial restructuring and mergers .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Charter of Fundamental Rights has enabled us to take a great step towards the reconstruction of a Europe of the citizens ; this is what Mr Méndez de Vigo likes to tell us ; this is what we have heard on many occasions from Professor Rodríguez Bereijo , the representative named by the Head of the Spanish Government , Mr José María Aznar , for the convention drafting the Charter .
And I believe that this is to the liking of the Europeans .
To build , through this long process , a social Europe seems to me to be a great challenge and a great opportunity , which must be taken advantage of .
But this construction is taking place at a specific moment , in particular economic , social and political circumstances .
The Lisbon Summit decided to liberalise the telecommunications , gas , electricity and transport markets .
We are experiencing a process of general globalisation and a change in the concept of industrial society and the labour market .
We may ask ourselves : and what about the human factor ?
Both Nice and the social agenda agreed at that meeting highlight the need to count on the workers in management changes and combine the security and flexibility of economic growth with labour relations and the consequences for the social environment .
And that is why , within the globalising dimension , we cannot ignore the importance of certain companies in certain regions and areas , for example the outlying regions , such as Galicia , where I come from myself , where they are the only or the main source of employment and where the threat of globalisation without guarantees would make families worried and nervous .
Secondly , economic competitiveness and a healthy society must not be contradictory terms but rather harmonious ones .
Thirdly , industrial restructuring , to use the expression in a broad sense , which is perhaps acceptable and inevitable from an economic point of view , cannot ignore the social consequences of that restructuring , which must be prepared for , since the objective of Community economic policies and measures must be to achieve a high level of employment .
Fourthly and lastly , national Community aid , tax incentives etc. should be conditional upon long-term temporary binding commitments in the field of employment and local and regional development .
These four points are only some of the considerations that the Commission and the Council must take into account in the face of the phenomenon of industrial restructuring .
Of course , the participation of the works committees , the representatives of the workers , is expected .
Mr President , globalisation reduces economic distances .
We must commit ourselves to preventing it from increasing social differences .
Mr President , Commissioner , the cases of industrial restructuring which are most traumatic , because they are unforeseeable , are those dictated by aggressive , acquisitions-seeking behaviour in the market .
Much has been said about the lack of technical adaptation and market trends , but the extent of their social consequences is never considered .
Do we know how much they have contributed to the impoverishment of people and regions ?
Do we know how those that suffer from them recover from depression and at what cost ?
Do we know in what way and how much these factors contribute to the long-term unemployment of people over the age of forty ?
Do we know in what way and how much these factors contribute to the fact that the true retirement age in the European Union is between fifty-five and fifty-seven ?
The Lisbon resolutions were designed to respond to these points by giving priority to employment , to the viability of social protection , to combating social exclusion and also by preventing changes to the economy .
We do not know how much these approaches are contributing to increasing social security costs and we do not know how many people are becoming more dependent on systems of social protection .
Who is it that ultimately pays for social restructuring ?
Is it the market or the taxpayer and the working person ?
Prevention and fair , balanced change are impossible . The social partners say so and have even just signed a pre-agreement document in order to implement the directive on European society concerning information and consultation .
Commissioner , we have also heard it said that the market is not governed by the laws of nature and that the political authorities should act by means of legislation , institutional action and social dialogue .
Social insecurity and the increase in crime are becoming part of post-industrial society and affect both traditional sectors and the so-called new economy .
The Portuguese , French , and now Swedish Presidencies have raised expectations by pushing ahead with dossiers that had been hitherto neglected . The Commission ' s programme for 2001 , however , gives no hint of these dossiers being brought to a successful conclusion .
Mr President , there is no justification for large companies making part of their workforce redundant on the pretext of mergers or restructuring , when just a small fraction of their profits would be enough to safeguard the jobs that have been lost .
Danone , Michelin , Aventis , Bull , Alstom , Moulinex and similar companies have shown a total disregard for the workers that they have made redundant and for the regions that may be condemned to a slow decline by the closure of a factory , and this shows the harm that these companies inflict on society .
We oppose the political opinions , in this House or elsewhere , that justify these criminal activities .
Such opinions show that they do not in any way seek to act in the interests of society ; only in the interests of the industrial and financial groups that dominate the economy and in the interests of the owners and shareholders of these groups .
We also oppose those who pretend to deplore the effects of restructurings on society yet who do nothing to propose the slightest binding measure to prevent them .
Apart from a complete ban on job losses upon large companies which are making a profit , all other action is mere posturing .
We assure those who work for these companies , and who are fighting off these attacks upon them , that they have our solidarity .
They have chosen the only sensible route in this economy dominated by the law of the jungle .
Mr President , in her speech before the House this morning , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel expressed her amazement and alarm at the frequency with which this issue comes up in this House , and wondered why this is . I too am amazed at how often it crops up .
We are concerned at the tragic implications of industrial restructuring and mergers - of which the workers are all too often only informed at the last minute when all the decisions have been made - for unemployment , working conditions , the very competitiveness of Community businesses and economic cohesion , and we appeal to companies ' sense of responsibility and express our sympathy , but then we do not follow the cases up .
Community legislation does not go far enough and , what is more , in many cases it is disregarded or applied too leniently .
I could produce a long list , as many Members have done , of relevant cases which we have discussed in recent years .
One of the objectives set by the Lisbon Council was to achieve a high level of high quality employment .
How can we achieve a Europe which is both competitive and has a high level of high quality employment ?
Of course , this can be accomplished by improving coordination and the play of balance between the Union 's different policies , but there is no doubt that the Community legislation on the subject needs to be more effective and more stringent .
Therefore , we can wait no longer - and here the Commission must assume its responsibilities - for a revision of the directive on European works councils , mass redundancies and relocation of enterprises , which does not make specific provision for a system of effective penalties for failure to comply .
But what really appals me - and here I refer to the Council in particular - is that it is already two years since Parliament expressed its opinion at the first reading of the only instrument which would allow us to deal effectively with these issues , the information and consultation directive , and in these two years , despite the general agreement that dialogue is the best way to deal with problems , the Council has not yet been able to summon up the courage or the strength to adopt a position on the matter .
Parliament can no longer tolerate such behaviour .
Mr President , the Financieel Dagblad ( Financial Times ) published last Friday , 2 February , carried the front-page headline : " Corus gives a fifth of its workers their marching orders " .
A little further on in the financial pages , there was the headline : " Corus experiences sharp upturn " .
The contrast in the pictures - it is a shame I cannot show them to you - was almost more telling : on the front page there was a picture of a sad steelworker from Wales , and in the financial pages a graph of how the profits went up when these redundancies were announced .
This sort of news is commonplace now .
It confronts us with the fundamental question as to what actually motivates businesses these days .
Are they only in it for the money or do they have a broader vision and mission ?
In the Netherlands , the Socio-Economic Council published two important opinions recently , one about doing business in a socially responsible manner , with the grand title : " The acquisition of values " , and the other was about corporate governance and industrial relations .
In its opinions , the Council expressly opts for a broad characterisation of a business as a joint venture between various stakeholders , and so it expressly avoids focusing attention on the creation of shareholder value for the shareholders , who seem to be the main reason behind many of the restructuring operations that have recently taken place .
I see no evidence of this broader perspective or these more fundamental discussions in the European debate .
The European Parliament has put this issue on the agenda again today , but this discussion must also filter through into other areas of European policy .
To my mind , it lacks coherence in this respect .
I will cite two examples .
As regards the legislation on partnerships , people argue in completely one-dimensional terms from the perspective of the shareholders .
A case in point was the discussion on the thirteenth directive on takeover bids , when Mr Bolkestein well and truly dismissed Parliament ' s amendments .
Another example can be found in competition policy .
Commissioner Monti made it abundantly clear in our Committee on Employment and Social Affairs that he only wants to approach mergers from the point of view of the markets and consumers , and has little interest in the bigger picture .
A Green Paper on corporate social responsibility , as announced this morning , is not enough .
I feel the Commission must make it its business to develop a more integrated outlook , and to ensure that this works its way through into the various policy headings .
Newspapers may display a certain amount of schizophrenia , but not politicians and policy makers .
Mr President , as the honourable Members have said , some of the directives were obviously adopted in times of full employment and very slow change .
Certain parts of the legislative framework therefore need amending and changing .
But I think that we should acknowledge the attempt being made in Europe to strike a balance between competitiveness and social cohesion .
Restructuring , mergers and takeovers do indeed often have dramatic consequences .
We recently saw over 5 000 jobs lost in a single month as the result of takeovers .
But if we look at the competitive environment as a whole , if we look at the environment in which European companies operate , then we will realise that there would be very adverse consequences if there were no reorganisation or restructuring , if European companies did not take an active part in the business economy .
And we need to calculate how many jobs are saved every time , because unless they restructure , some sectors risk disappearing altogether in the future .
In this extremely difficult environment , there are four strands to our efforts to combine social cohesion and competitiveness .
The first is forecasting .
This morning we examined how , through the Dublin Institute , we are trying to study , forecast and prepare changes .
The second is the legislative and institutional framework .
As you know , huge changes were made this year to legislation on the European company statute and to the five directives which follow and complete the legislative framework on the European statute , and the directive on information and consultation finally went to the Council after years of discussion between Parliament and the Commission and we achieved a majority within four months .
We reckon that , with the undertakings made by the Swedish Presidency and following the Belgian Presidency , significant changes will be made to the legislative framework .
I should point out here that legislation alone is not enough and that serious efforts have been made to extend controls . We are also endeavouring , in cooperation with Commissioner Monti , to check that the directives on information for workers are being properly applied during all mergers and takeovers .
In addition , a committee was recently set up within this legislative framework , one of the basic subjects of which is social dialogue and the role of social dialogue in helping to ensure that mergers and restructuring proceed smoothly .
The third strand is specific policy .
The strategy on employment and the availability of money from the Social Fund mean that problems of mass redundancies can be dealt with at national level , by retraining workers , through special structures to support their reintegration into the job market or by helping them start up their own companies .
Finally , the fourth strand is the role of companies , the social responsibility of companies .
This is one of the new basic items on the social agenda ; we expect workers to change , to agree to a new , flexible environment , to train , to be prepared to move from one sector to another or one place to another .
But we cannot just ask workers to change their behaviour , which is why companies too have a new role in this area .
We are trying very specifically to define - and the second stage will be to look at this from an institutional point of view - to define the social responsibility of companies , their responsibilities in the wake of restructuring and their responsibilities in the local area , in the society in which they operate , which is why , as we said this morning , a Commission communication will be presented at the end of June .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Copyright and related rights in the Information Society
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0043 / 2001 ) by Mr Boselli , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , with regard to the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the Information Society [ 9512 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0520 / 2000 - 1997 / 0359 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this directive regulates the protection of copyright and related rights in the information society .
It is an important directive and its path has by no means been easy .
We have reached the second reading and Parliament is now called upon to express its opinion on the position adopted by the Council which , as you will remember , was forwarded to us 18 months after it had been adopted at first reading .
The reason for this is that a controversial , delicate compromise had to be found between all the interests covered by the directive .
I see this difficult , delicate compromise as a step forward for , apart from anything else , it includes many of the points proposed by Parliament at first reading .
There was room for improvement in some parts of the directive and this is what I have attempted to do .
Although some compromise amendments were adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , opinion is still divided , particularly with regard to the article on copying for technical purposes , or caching , and the article on private copying .
There are many amendments regarding this point which I do not endorse .
The reason why , as far as private copying is concerned , the compromise amendments adopted in committee represented a major new development benefiting the authors lies in the fact that they stipulate that private copying - and I quote - must be " made by a natural person for private use and for ends that are neither directly or indirectly commercial , on condition that the rightholders receive fair compensation " .
This amendment introduces a new principle into Community legislation , in that it limits the scope of the definition of private copying , to the benefit of the authors , while clearly , at the same time , safeguarding the legitimate interests of the consumer .
This amendment , adopted by the committee , halts the huge increase in exchanges of unauthorised copies between users of sites such as Napster , and it will mean that it is no longer possible to describe the exchange of unauthorised works between Napster users as private copying .
I see this as an improvement on the text of the common position .
With regard to the other element , technical copying , I feel that the balance achieved in the common position is more than sufficient to protect both rightholders and consumers .
Although the intention behind the amendments tabled on this issue - Article 5 , point 1 - to provide greater copyright protection is commendable , none of the amendments are acceptable , apart from anything else because they relate to application , not regulation which is the subject of this directive .
Furthermore , these amendments are intended to introduce a system of dual authorisation of works on the Internet , one for hosting and one for caching , which would be a heavy burden for the network management .
Therefore , to sum up , the vote in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market showed that it is possible to reach a broad consensus , to adopt the directive and to improve the common position without running the risk of a long , tedious conciliation procedure ; all this after three years of debate , argument and dispute .
In my opinion , this is an opportunity which the European Parliament must take : if , tomorrow , it supports the agreement reached in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and adopts the amendments which are the result of a broad compromise between a large number of political groups , then we will , at last , be able to adopt the directive .
This will benefit not only the European Union , which has been waiting for legislation on the subject for a long time , but also and most importantly , the rightholders .
Indeed , if the directive is adopted , not only will the exceptions which are still disputed enter into force , but also , most importantly , the rule established by Article 2 which lays down the principle of authorisation of rightholders for the use of works in new digital environments .
For all these reasons , it should I hope , be possible , at last , to adopt the text of this directive tomorrow .
Mr President , before beginning my speech , I must confess that I have a double interest in this issue .
On the one hand , I am an owner of intellectual property , being the author of several books and publications , and , on the other , I am a member of the Internet Foundation , which has various supporters in this Parliament .
Today coincides with an important event from the point of view of intellectual property in the information society , that is the judgment of the San Francisco Appeal Court in the Napster case , which brings us closer to finally resolving the vexed question of the use of the Internet to breach intellectual property rights .
The judgment of the San Francisco Court of Appeal confirms intellectual property rights and establishes certain measures for the protection of intellectual property in the United States .
The challenge facing us is to ensure that Europe also establishes a system which would safeguard intellectual property , otherwise we could find that , by means of installations in Europe , the effective protection measures which are currently being adopted in the United States under the Millennium Law , which has been in force for more than two years , could be violated .
We are lagging behind the United States , and , in this respect , I am in agreement with the rapporteur in the sense that we should bring this directive into play as soon as possible .
Now , in doing so , the Socialist Group is concerned that we do not throw the baby out with the bath water .
We have tabled two amendments which we consider to be very important .
Firstly , the amendment relating to what is known as private copying .
Private copying , which was a traditional right of any person obtaining an intellectual work or intellectual property , must now , in the information society , be subject to very strict requirements , because of the enormous ease of reproduction .
This amendment proposes that the private copy should be intended for the personal use of the person making it , because otherwise , given the ease of reproduction , we run the risk that many copies can be made for the private use of persons other than the person making the copy .
Secondly , another very important amendment is the one relating to the incidental and transitional nature of reproduction .
If , as a consequence of the processes established by the information society , it is necessary to make a copy of a transitional and incidental nature , this should be intended to be of a genuinely transitional nature .
It would be unacceptable to create large libraries of intellectual property so that , at any given moment , the person who has been using that property can access it at will .
We believe that the accumulation of requirements that they be of a transitional and incidental nature is essential to safeguarding intellectual property .
I hope that in tomorrow 's vote the various political groups can come to an agreement in order to offer alternatives which will truly guarantee the protection of intellectual property in the information society , since in a few years time , all intellectual property will probably be of the type that travels around the great communications networks .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to heap praise on Mr Boselli for his handling of this topic .
It was a tough job and he had to walk on eggshells to do it , but I feel he has managed to strike a better balance with the aid of his compromise amendments .
I also think - and perhaps we should really look into this as a Parliament some time - that there has perhaps been more lobbying over this issue than I have ever experienced in my brief career as an MEP .
If you consider that over 300 lobbyists have an interest in this report , then that means half a lobbyist to every MEP , and perhaps a few question marks are in order here too .
It would be a good thing if the common position , together with Mr Boselli ' s compromise amendments were to be adopted tomorrow .
The liberals disagree on quite a few points , but as I understand it , we are at least united behind it , and I think that is indeed a positive sign .
In addition , there are a number of issues that Mr Boselli and Mr Medina have already mentioned today .

I have yet to see whether the compromise amendment on private copies goes far enough because I still have not read to the end - and as a lawyer , I dealt with intellectual property in my practice over a long period of time . I have yet to discover whether it is now no longer possible for a student to make copies for all his or her fellow students which they are allowed to use in private .
I have my doubts about this because I think it will allow illegal copying to continue with a vengeance .
So I am in favour of restricting private usage .
I also have my doubts about the technical measures that Member States are at liberty to introduce .
I fear that this will have a distorting effect on the internal market and will lead , in the final analysis , to the Court of Justice having to settle the matter again on the basis of the internal market principles .
Caching , now that is something I still have some difficulty with , the way things are going at the moment .
I believe this only has to do with the e-commerce directive , so I hope the Commissioner will take another look at the issue .
I would like to close with a comment , and I hope - on behalf of the Liberal Group at any rate - that an even-handed and fair balance will be found in this directive for all market participants and all parties concerned , and I feel that the digital copy should be regarded as an opportunity and not a threat .
Mr President , my thanks to all the honourable Members for their constructive cooperation and , above all , to the Commission and the rapporteur , Mr Boselli .
Numerous problems , numerous conflicts of interest have still not been resolved .
Harmonising cultural traditions is no easy task .
A compromise does not really satisfy anyone and the European Parliament does not hold a magic wand .
There is talk of a balanced common position .
A balance between whom ? Between rightholders and the public interest .
First and foremost - and this is my opinion and the opinion of the Greens - the rightholder 's status under copyright law must be strengthened .
Copyright law must serve the rightholder .
His position must be strengthened for future contract negotiations .
As a politician for culture , my responsibility is , firstly , to give rightholders a secure basis for their existence and , secondly - and I do not mean secondarily but equally - to guarantee the public free access and , at the same time , ensure that high-quality works are available to the public in all their diversity .
We are opposed to extending the list of exceptions ; some of the contentious points can perhaps be resolved between the parties , because we too are keen to find a satisfactory solution which we can all live with .
The Greens , you may have noticed , confined themselves to proposed amendments which relate solely to the rightholder - I refer to Amendments Nos 34 and 36 . Perhaps , you will say , they anticipated future contracts .
Allow me now to reply : much is anticipated in the recitals which is of benefit not to the rightholder author but to other interested parties .
And as the Napster case has already been raised , Europe should discuss whether or not it wants a miniature version , a European Napster , and then it should hold a round table discussion between providers , producers , rightholders and consumers .
But I would not want Napster to find its way to Europe , in through the back door simply because copyright law is weak and the wording woolly .
This too is a possibility which we should debate .
We shall also have to hold a discussion at some point in the future - soon , I hope - on performing rights societies and on the possibility of contracts for copyright contract law .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after considering this issue of the directive on copyright and harmonisation which primarily involves a list of exceptions , I feel that we have quite simply agreed to maintain a confused situation in order to give ourselves time to give some thought to this matter .
This confusion is due to the fact this directive represents three different interest ; i.e. authors and creative artists , consumers , who are also users , and producers and market makers .
Producers and market makers are trying to fit in between the other two and I feel that the directive is also in this uneasy position with its list of exceptions , to which the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has just added another , extremely problematic , exception regarding broadcasting .
I believe that we are favouring the opinion of consumers .
However , what are we trying to make them buy ?
I put to you the question : just what shall we buy in the near future , if we fail to protect and defend creativity ?
That is the question we should ask ourselves .
As it happens , outside my parliamentary career , I have written books and I use public libraries and research centres .
In both cases , we need to have some protection , some security rather than insecurity , in order to be able to produce works .
If I look at this from the consumer ' s point of view , I am surprised that Parliament , the defender of Market Europe , defends production in this market in such an ultimately very poor fashion , because , given this list of exceptions , people will refuse to pay for goods which they will want for nothing .
You must admit that it is surprising .
The conditions in which these goods are produced are not being questioned either ; yet , to produce goods , we need creative artists and authors .
I have no idea what you will sell or buy when you no longer have any creative artists or authors but , in any case , Market Europe will not fare very well .
That is what will happen to the markets .
Now , if we take a close look at the details of the directive , it becomes apparent that if we say , for example , that archives come into being immediately , or after an hour , this means that everything broadcast on television is archive material .
Anyone with an interest in history is slightly surprised to hear archives being defined in this way .
If archives are just that and if private copying is widespread , what can we do to ensure that culture , and indeed cultural diversity , is not just heritage , museums , not just a list that we will find in places that are the stuff of archives and museums , but that it is a living creative field ?
To do that , we must - like it or not - assist artistic creation .
To assist artistic creation , we must support copyright rather than criticise and attack it .
That is what my group will try to defend by its vote tomorrow .
Mr President , the report that has been presented on copyright and the information society , or rather the alleged information society , is a perfect example of the increasing depravity of a Community system whose only motivation is , in fact , to create a market where all products , goods and services are included .
Although the harm caused by this system is obvious , because harmonisation provides less protection than that previously afforded by Member States , despite that fact - I shall not give an example - the Commission and the Council are now proposing to transform all cultural services into saleable commodities , as Mrs Fraisse has just clearly said .
Using as an excuse the concept of the information society , which the financial markets are in the process of levelling out - we have come a long way in the last three years - this directive and the common position , which the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market suggests we adopt , seek to make all European creativity , i.e. all creative artists , subject to the international trade regulations of the World Trade Organisation , though it is here dubbed the World Intellectual Property Organisation .
It is utterly ironic that the European Union institutions are basically in the process of becoming a subservient lapdog to globalisation without restriction or conscience .
That is why I believe that many of us here in this House will try to stop the acceleration of this process which completely strips the concept of Europe of all content and all meaning .
I hope that we shall reject the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market because they break with the tradition of a Parliament - as Mrs Fraisse quite rightly said - which has , until now , defended diversity in cultural production in Europe and the specific , and indeed exceptional role , of creative artists , writers and artists in European civilisation .
The information society is no more than a snare and we are indulgently allowing it to be used here in an attempt to confiscate the most timeless and most precious thing we can own - intellectual property .
Mr President , all copyright consists in a balancing of two sets of interests , on the one hand the authors ' , producers ' and production systems ' interests and , on the other hand , the consumers ' interests .
It might be said that consumers ' interests are society ' s interest in seeing the dissemination of both knowledge and cultural expression rather than the suppression of these and their subordination to the interests of capital .
Naturally , creators and authors must , and ought to , be assured of a fair economic return , but I have to say that , for me and the People ' s Movement I represent , there are two crucial main points .
The first is to ensure the public ' s or consumers ' interest in being able to use both knowledge and culture .
In Denmark , the country I come from , we have a very well developed tradition of youth and adult education , and this must not be interfered with .
The second point is that the systems of enforcement and sanctions that have been developed and are practised in the different legal cultures in the different countries must not be interfered with either .
We have our own special system in Denmark , and I do not think it should be substantially interfered with .
I can say that I have seldom been exposed to such intensive lobbying as in connection with this proposal , and that is by no means strange .
There are billions of kroner and euros in the system in a sector dominated on the producer side by , above all , the American entertainment industry , but it is not of course this that we must mainly take an interest in .
I might also add that copyright is , of course , among the most complicated aspects of the legal world and that , within the copyright field , the law relating to digital products is practically incomprehensible .
I cannot imagine that more than a few per cent of MEPs at the most have any idea at all of what the problems really relate to .
Against this background , it is an interesting fact , and one worth noting , that the proposal has been so balanced that I shall recommend my group to vote in favour of it .
Mr President , as the first speaker from my group , I would like to pay tribute to the rapporteur on behalf of all my colleagues who work closely with him .
We welcome the robust way that he has defended the balance of this directive .
As the rapporteur said earlier , with the compromise amendments - the set of amendments passed by our committee - I am sure that we have the right directive at the right time .
No one pretends that it is perfect .
It is important to emphasise that .
There has been considerable difficulty in reconciling national traditions and exceptions .
There are countries that have levies , for example , on recording media .
We have sustained the objective of this directive because , above all , we want to encourage new creative artists to exploit this new technology .
This is an enabling , liberating directive .
It gives them the assurance that they will be able to create new works and to get fair rewards .
Equally , on the balancing side , consumers expect that their existing rights to be able make private copies , to be able to use library facilities , to be able , if they are disadvantaged , if they are blind or disabled , to have access to new forms of media will be safeguarded .
We have got that balance right .
The other point , colleagues , is that we are not arrogant enough in the Legal Affairs Committee to suggest to you that this is here for all time .
We have proposed and recommend very strongly to you that in 18 months ' time this directive be reviewed .
We must , in a very fast-moving world , take responsibility for our work but be prepared to modify it in accordance with what is going on in an entirely new world .
That is a very important provision .
We have strengthened the review provisions .
We propose a very speedy turnaround , and that shows that the Legal Affairs Committee has taken a very responsible attitude to this directive .
We now want to get it transposed as soon as possible .
Why do we want to get it transposed as soon possible ?
Because a crucial element in this quick transposition is that the European Union will be able to accede to the World Intellectual Property Organisation Treaty and that will bring a very important measure of global protection to all the artists involved .
That is really a prize worth having and worth having as quickly as possible .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor , despite the fact that I have not yet written a book and have not read a great many .
The protection of intellectual property has always been a cause for concern to the European Union and to the European Parliament , because we know that only this protection guarantees that we have culture , that culture flourishes and that economic production takes place .
This could have been an historic moment for the European Parliament .
But it is not .
For the first time in our lives , the protection of intellectual property is being undermined .
With the consent of the European Parliament .
As we have found out , the European Parliament still has only one objective : no conciliation .
After 18 months of deliberation in the Council , we have been told to get a move on .
After 18 months of deliberation in the Council .
And then the Council says " unanimously " , although it could have voted by a qualified majority , given the balance we keep hearing about .
And then Parliament is asked not to make any more amendments .
We might just as well shut up shop and go home .
I have never seen Members put under such pressure by their governments and parties .
But with the Council and the governments on either side , in the Council and in Parliament , what need is there for Parliament ?
Parliament has its own responsibility and it must live up to it .
The common position has dramatically undermined authors ' rights .
I am on the authors ' side and I call on Parliament to restore these rights - at least to some degree .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that many people must have been rather anxious when Mr Harbour said he wanted to see a review of the directive within 18 months .
So , is there to be a return to all that lobbying ?
Is it not all a bit too soon ?
Everything that can be said about the directive has already been said .
It is therefore a little difficult to begin to speak now .
I nonetheless want to express my warm thanks to our wonderful rapporteur .
I also want to say that the official line of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party at first reading was more balanced than that of the parliamentary majority .
We may therefore also consider that essential parts of the common position need to be changed .
At first reading , we were concerned that the parliamentary majority was jeopardising the Internet ' s function and that there was a danger of creating a system which also made it unattractive to have material on the Net in Europe .
The results of the Human Genome Project have been published on the Net in the last few days , partly in the journal , Nature and partly in the journal , Science .
Via Nature , everyone can access the material but , via Science , it can only be accessed by paying SEK 3 million .
That is , of course , a protection of copyright .
But is it the same thing as promoting the spread of science and knowledge ?
Where is the right balance to be found ?
This is something I believe we should reflect upon when we adopt a position on the directive .
I also want to point out once again that our group ' s official position now is to have as few amendments as possible .
The common position is a fragile compromise which must not be disturbed . Otherwise , we might not get the WIPO Treaty signed , which is of course the most important thing .
Mr President , it is a great privilege to take part in this important debate .
I am a bit sad that the tone of the debate has been in part negative and guarded .
We need to remember that new communication media have in fact liberated interaction between people and ideas and between people and people .
Of course , that does give rise to some reasonable concerns about the protection of legitimate copyright interests in this age .
Meeting these concerns must not result in obstructing the ordinary person , the scholar or the scientist from accessing and using materials that are subject to copyright .
The balance between producer interest and consumer interest has been stressed in this debate and is the balance that we have to try and strike .
If we in the Union were to strike the wrong balance , it would seriously inhibit the democratic openness of discussion that the Internet and related media facilitate .
If , for example , unreasonable restraints are placed on libraries , students , scholars and scientists will be the sufferers .
The Inter-Library Loan scheme might become an accidental casualty of change .
The draft directive before us refers critically in Article 5.5 to the well-established restraints on fair practice that are enshrined in the Berne Convention .
Subject to this , Member States will be able to create regulated limits on copyright interests for the benefit of disabled people , private consumers , public libraries and museums and some others .
That is permissive - Member States will not , in any case , be required to do it .
It will be a matter for local judgment guided by subsidiarity .
As an author myself , I yield to no one in maintaining the rights of authors and performers - I add " performers " deliberately - to fair recognition and reward , but these values will be misapplied if they are used as a ground for obstructing reasonable limitations on commercial copyright interests and , I stress " the commercial interests " , which we need to differentiate from the moral right of the author , which is expressly excluded from this directive .
Like others , I am delighted with Mr Boselli 's work and I hope that we will pass this with relatively few changes .
Mr President , serious infringements of and a lack of protection for intellectual property have long been a way of life in Greece , well before the advent of the information society .
With the new technologies available , artists are now looking more than ever to the European Union to deal with this issue at Community level .
Clearly , there are numerous contradictory points , multiple pressures and disputed theories and we ourselves - over and above the lobby - have seen another side of authors , another side of consumers of these works and , in this sense , I think that the work undertaken by Mr Boselli and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is the work of a magician .
I think they have seriously improved on the Council 's common position , which did too little to protect intellectual property .
It is important that we limit the exceptions and I think that the amendment by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal market is a careful amendment , although it might have gone further .
We also have to take care with libraries and archives because , if we make various amendments here , we will end up infringing intellectual property rights .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on having the wisdom of Solomon , the patience of Job and the tenacity of myself .
In particular , this issue , which is difficult and has been a very arduous task for all of us in the Legal Affairs Committee , has thrown up a number of conflicts , one of which most often mentioned within this House is the conflict between copyright-holders and consumers .
Many people feel that these two differing groups cannot be reconciled .
I believe that within the present text we have the opportunity to reconcile these two parties , and to lay down a number of fundamental principles which could be copied in other parts of the world .
These principles comprise , firstly , remuneration for those who are entitled to remuneration for creative works and for new ideas ; secondly , the right of access to those works ; thirdly , the rights of libraries and other institutions , educational institutions in particular , to make use of these works for research purposes ; and fourthly the introduction of a number of exceptions to the copyright legislation to ensure that people with disabilities will not be unfairly discriminated against and to ensure that educational institutions can continue .
This is no easy task .
Each of us has a right , and indeed a responsibility , to ensure that we can maintain the best possible balance for all within the fundamental principles of consumer rights and protection as well as remuneration for the artists .
Mr President , I would , of course , also like to commend Mr Boselli ' s determination to achieve a balance in a text that has been under discussion for nearly three years .
His task was made all the more difficult by the Council ' s failure to adopt all Parliament ' s amendments at the first reading stage .
As has been mentioned , the aim of the new directive is to adapt current legislation to the new technologies while respecting the international treaties adopted in 1996 .
There is a legal void with regard to copyright protection in the digital age .
The Internet is a powerful tool but it must not be an unregulated area .
The cultural and economic stakes are high and , with the Internet expanding at an incredible pace , a legal framework in Europe must be found , as in the United States , where this kind of framework was adopted two years ago .
It is , therefore , an urgent matter , all the more so because this directive is a key factor in the fight against illegal copying , a matter particularly close to my heart , and because pirate copying is the scourge of the information society .
It becomes all the more crucial in a digital age because the first copies and any subsequent copies retain a quality close to that of the original .
Consumers are acknowledged as being entitled to make private copies .
It is only natural that the eligible parties are fairly compensated in return , it is only fair .
In order to ensure that we are talking about purely private copies , the law must be written in sufficiently restrictive terms and the wording of the definition must be perfectly unambiguous .
So I am in favour of a restrictive definition of private copying .
In order to protect works of art against illegal copying , eligible parties must be given the opportunity to use technical protection .
That is why hackers , as they are called , must be fought by clamping down on the means they offer to the public to overcome protection systems , thereby encouraging the illegal copying of protected works of art .
This new context is constantly changing and raises many questions and concerns .
The directive must balance the interests of consumers and eligible parties .
It is trying to resolve these issues as quickly as possible but in a necessarily imperfect way .
If we amend this directive , we shall , in two years ' time , be able to determine its shortcomings and weaknesses in the light of the incredible developments in the information society .
Mr President , as we say in my country , ' until the baskets are washed , it is still harvest time ' . In other words , hope remains for authors and performers that this Parliament will have a change of heart , if not today then tomorrow .
I say this because I believe that a balance can be reached between the democratisation of knowledge that the new technologies and the Internet offer us with one click of the mouse and the continuity of the creative act , which will die out as a result of non-payment and lack of fair compensation for its value .
The virtual contradictions that mask financial interests and demagogic opposition are therefore unacceptable in this real social debate .
Let us not be naive , Mr President .
Creation and performance are economic factors and always have been . Hence the need for copyright and performers ' rights .
Unfortunately , the Commission proposal and the Council common position reveal a degree of thoughtlessness that warrants our criticism .
In the name of consumer freedom , the consumption of art is pitted against artistic creation , in the same way that the Council accepts creative freedom as an obstacle to knowledge and to Europe ' s citizens becoming enriched by culture .
New media technologies are not the enemies of intellectuals and authors , but we cannot pretend that , in this cyber world we live in , protecting the weakest member , i.e. authors , means defending a monopoly .
Let us not , in the name of consumers ' rights , sacrifice authors ' rights , and , above all , let us not accept the idea that artistic creation should be suspicious of technology , which is the cardinal sin of the text we are discussing .
Mr President , despite the considerable efforts that have been made and despite a certain amount of progress , which is due to the attitude of our rapporteur , whom I warmly congratulate , we still do not have a text that brings together the three fundamental freedoms of the cultural act : the freedom to create , the freedom to communicate and the freedom to consume .
Unless we achieve this quickly , some of Europe ' s fundamental values will disappear for good .
Furthermore , our languages will be of little use if , at the altar of technology , they become merely the remnant of the identity that gives any European uniqueness in the eyes of the world .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the honourable Members from the various groups for supplying the 32 signatures which allowed me to submit a number of amendments in Parliament .
I am absolutely convinced that we must endeavour , on a couple of points , to revert back to Parliament ' s opinion from the first reading , which we adopted exactly two years ago by a very large majority .
It is mainly to do with tightening up on private copying , establishing clear regulations for the on-line storage of data so that the responsibility of Internet providers is better defined in line with the e-commerce directive , and the possibility of Member States being able to introduce technological protection measures without disrupting the internal market .
Why am I defending this opinion ?
First and foremost for reasons of principle .
Is there anything more important than protecting private property ?
Is there anything more personal than the product of human talent , the creation of something which rejuvenates .
The European Parliament has always been the guardian of Europe ' s cultural heritage and that is how it must stay , also in the digital age .
If we do not put a brake on indiscriminate copying , there will soon be nothing left to copy .
After all , if we fail to provide protection , people will lose the incentive to be creative and produce new works of art .
But there is more to this debate than principles .
Copying will also cost jobs .
According to current estimates , one hundred thousand jobs have been lost in the European Union owing to the copying of CDs .
The State loses out on income too .
Apparently , the State of Belgium alone , which I know very well , misses out on one billion Belgian Francs in VAT as a result of this practice , and the same goes for all government coffers .
We must be in no doubt about what it is we are risking .
I would like to echo Mr Rothley ' s sentiments .
So all in all , I think there is good reason to support the amendments which I tabled , together with many of my fellow delegates , for which I would like to thank you in advance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this directive is of great importance to growth and competitiveness in Europe , but the directive does not need to be worded in such a way as to make using the Internet more difficult and more expensive .
If we impose higher costs on e-commerce and increase the cost of connection , Europe will not be the world ' s most competitive economy in ten years ' time , which was , of course , the goal set in Lisbon .
If we in Parliament are to increase people ' s confidence in us as European legislators , European legislation must be coherent .
The e-commerce directive and this directive must be in line with each other .
We must not therefore alter Article 5.1 or recital 33 .
Copyright must not become a patent right because of the new technology .
Our good will towards copyright holders must not involve our creating regulations which restrict freedom of expression or obstruct the free flow of information .
The ceiling above which an outsider ' s server may be closed down must be set very high .
If every bit of data that passes through the server every second is to be monitored , we forfeit what basically has made the Internet successful and has increased productivity in countries with high Internet use , namely the fact that everyone gets to be involved and to share knowledge .
I would therefore ask you to support Amendment No 4 .
Our copyright legislation must be created around the work and around the artist entitled to remuneration , and not around the technical form .
TV channels must decide for themselves how they make their programmes and the music they want to play available .
A right to copy on-air broadcasts for storage on electronic systems is required because , otherwise , the giant recording companies will be able to control the radio and television companies ' music output .
I would therefore ask you to support Amendments Nos 31 and 32 .
Copyright is not absolute . Exceptions are required .
I therefore hope that the Chamber will safeguard the exceptions for libraries and for people with disabilities so that we do not undermine democracy by shutting people off from information .
Finally , we have a WIPO position to defend , and we must vote consistently .
I am hoping for a positive decision , for then we shall be accepting international responsibility .
Mr President , even as we try at second reading to tweak the common position on copyright here and there , we should not lose sight of the fact that , whatever the outcome of tomorrow 's vote or of the impending conciliation procedure , we have achieved both very little and a great deal .
Very little because the level of harmonisation of copyright in the European Union will not be very high , much lower in fact than in many other less important areas .
National traditions are simply too varied here and the interests of all those involved are too diverse and too contradictory .
But , compared with the current situation , we will have achieved a great deal if the directive as contained in the common position or , even better , with the amendments adopted tomorrow , can be improved and can enter into force quickly .
At least we now have a standard definition for a few core concepts .
The full development of the information society will no longer be impeded by a grossly insecure legal framework and rightholders and their agents will have ways of protecting their interests .
Technical means of protection in particular are developing at a very fast pace .
At the same time , however , we must guarantee wide public access in the interest of cultural diversity .
This obviously includes not criminalising consumers or charging them several times over .
It also includes developing cultural heritage , such as the cultural heritage stored in television archives , and ensuring that libraries are able to fulfil their valuable role in the online world .
Like some of my fellow Members , I feel that the outcome of the vote in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has compromised the hard-struck balance in favour of the exceptions and I therefore hope that at least some of the proposed amendments tabled by my group will still be accepted .
Mr President , as an author and member of the Portuguese Society of Authors , I have a personal interest in a matter in which the cultural standing of European integration itself is also at stake .
It makes no sense for Europe to herald the fundamental value of its cultural and linguistic pluralism and , at the same time , render it devoid of meaning .
I do not know of a single author in Europe who agrees with the compromise amendments on private copying .
This means something .
I also wish to say that it would be much better if the directive were to give this satisfaction to authors now and were then to be reviewed within eighteen months .
Most of the exceptions to copyright that are provided for open the way for a cancerous type of process , which will give rise to the wild , uncontrolled proliferation of copyright abuses .
The more exceptions are provided for , the further the right to regulate is weakened and the more harm is done to the harmonisation and coordination of national organisations in this field .
It is extremely important that the range of exceptions should be limited .
It is not enough to remove the possibility of using copies for purposes that are directly or indirectly commercial .
Copies are very frequently used for atypical purposes such as exchanges , loans and gifts , and there are many other causes for the uncontrolled proliferation of further copies , which has serious consequences for authors and publishers .
Unless the concept of private use is made to mean only home use or copying with the author ' s permission , instead of solving the key problems , the directive will continue to be an incentive to unbridled piracy .
To conclude , I shall quote from one of the messages that I have received from various Portuguese authors , one of whom is the Nobel prize winner , José Saramago , who writes : " as artists , we are particularly concerned that large-scale unauthorised copying will make it impossible for all those who make up the creative community to earn a living .
Those who have nothing to do with the creative process will consume the fruit of other people ' s labours without making any productive reinvestment , unless private copying effectively retains its status as private copying " .
Mr President , we need to be clear about what we are trying to achieve in this directive .
This directive , as a piece of intellectual property legislation , must try to incorporate structures to reward the creative industries , which in my own Member State alone contribute GBP 60 billion to our national economy and GBP 8 billion of exports .
They also employ 1.4 million people .
At the same time we must not strangle or restrict freedom of access for legitimate users .
This fits in with the EU action plan and the forthcoming summit in Stockholm .
The fact is that the Internet genie is out of the bottle .
We cannot stop technology , but neither can we allow it to render copyright dead or to let it be abused as a safe haven for piracy , parasites and mass illegal copying .
Yesterday 's Napster ruling clearly showed that copyright has to be applied to cyberspace .
We must not encourage people to infringe copyright .
The composition of the compromise amendments tabled by the rapporteur has maintained this balance between rightholders and users effectively .
The exceptions which currently exist in Article 5 mean that the generous provisions on exceptions that we have in the UK will continue to help vulnerable users and ensure that schools , libraries and research and education institutions can benefit from private copying .
In the UK we also record programmes so that we are able to watch at the time and place we choose and that , of course , needs to remain intact .
It is however regrettable that some unnecessary , unhelpful amendments have crept in at the last stage in committee .
I refer to : Amendment No 11 , which seeks to give an exemption to broadcasting companies which no one else enjoys and which would reduce performers ' and artists ' rights in contravention of the WIPO Treaty ; and Amendment No 4 which , in the second part , introduces an unnecessary and unwarranted EU restriction of the freedom of national courts to decide how to deal with injunctions , in particular concerning piracy , and amendments on levies .
While this is well-intentioned , we cannot support this approach because it could be interpreted , taken in a vague sense , to mean that levies should always be introduced when you have no technical protection in place .
The UK does not operate a system of levies and we do not want to see it introduced through the back door .
Finally , as with every other piece of legislation on the Internet that comes before us in this House , we should use the provisions of the directive , the review clause in Article 12 and the role of the contact committee to prevent both the abuse of private copying and any abuse or limitation on fair use .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to join the House in thanking the rapporteur .
It is amazing how calmly and composedly he has cut his way through this jungle of interests .
The lobby has already been mentioned .
It was indeed persistent but , on balance , it was , I think , a fair discussion and for that , too , I am grateful .
A great deal has been said about the need for balance .
I am afraid that the common position has not yet struck the balance needed .
Parts of the directive penalise the internal market , parts penalise consumers and parts penalise innovation .
The directive penalises the internal market because , at the end of the day , the harmonisation is only cosmetic and the Member States are defending their conventional payment systems tooth and claw , even though they are basically unsuited to the digital world .
We want to prevent that , which is why we suggest in proposed Amendment No 12 that the Member States should at least submit new compensation systems to the Commission and obtain a recommendation .
The directive also penalises consumers because it is quite possible that consumers will have to pay once when they buy a CD or a DVD and then again in the form of a levy .
Then when they come to make a copy , the data is copy-protected and the Member States have not even undertaken to look at copy protection systems and legal copying .
And the common position penalises innovation because it tries desperately to keep the global fee system alive in the digital age , despite the fact that new technology basically makes global fees superfluous , because copy protection allows the rightholder to be paid directly for copies and that is the fairest solution of all .
That is a directive for a citizens ' Europe .
It offers the citizen security and fair freedoms in the digital world .
Mr President , I am delighted to see that both the Legal Affairs Committee and the rapporteur accepted that it was unwise to reopen a large number of issues in this area and that much of what was achieved in the common position reflects a balance on this very complicated problem .
I hope that the House will also limit the number of amendments that are adopted and not interfere too greatly with the common position .
It is a directive which I and the British Conservatives welcome because it is vital that European citizens are given proper protection of their creative rights and creative works in the digital era and this directive will deliver that to them .
This is essential because , not only is there an enormous music industry and film industry , we must not forget the highly successful computer games industry which is generating a huge amount of revenue in the United Kingdom and in a number of other countries across the EU .
But the British Conservatives also firmly uphold the rights of those who take advantage of the public interest exceptions .
Groups such as the disabled , including blind people who need access to Braille copies in order to access the Internet , groups such as researchers , universities and libraries : these kinds of rightholder exceptions are vital for promoting research which is so important for our economic health .
A less high profile exception that is important economically is the right of reverse engineering of computer software .
We would entirely reject those amendments which are seeking to inhibit the use of those public interest exceptions .
We therefore accept the need to tighten up the wording of Article 6 ( 4 ) , to clarify its role and to restrict it to truly on-demand interactive services .
Having said that , there is another exception which is more controversial , which is ordinary private copying .
We are all pleased to see the rules have been tightened up to prevent it being abused and used as a loophole for piracy ; that is something that we would also support .
I would lastly express some reservations about Amendment No 11 .
If this amendment is passed , I fear that the broadcasters will have an advantage .
They are getting something for nothing .
I think this skews the common position a little and , unless someone can convince me otherwise , I would have grave reservations about Amendment No 11 .
We have a sensible and balanced position and I fear Amendment No 11 may tilt that balance in the wrong direction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the common position , as amended by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , is an attempt to strike a fair balance between the interests of artists , authors and rightholders and the interests of consumers .
The common position therefore regulates when third parties can copy copyright protected works such as texts , graphics , music or films .
Member States are also required to protect copy protection under the law .
It is important , from the consumer 's point of view , that private copies will be allowed in future .
There are - and this has been addressed several times today - differing views as to what constitutes a private copy .
In my view , the definition should include the family environment .
That means that the proposed wording accepted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has my full support .
Finally , it is also important from the consumer 's point of view that new remuneration schemes , i.e. levies on equipment or media , can only be introduced if they help to achieve equal levies throughout Europe .
Unilateral national action , such as the so-called PC levy , which keeps cropping up in discussions in the Member States , would only make equipment even more expensive .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has also tabled proposals here and I call on Parliament to support them tomorrow .
Finally , the directive also regulates when broadcasting organisations are entitled to use their archive productions for on-demand services and when they must first sign a contract with all the rightholders involved in the TV production giving them the right to do so .
The rights , the archives of broadcasting organisations are of immeasurable cultural and historical value .
We must therefore do everything we can to make these archives accessible , including for online use .
I therefore urge the House to support Article 11 and I agree here with my fellow Member , Mrs Villiers .
I think that there is every reason to offer a separate regulation for public radio .
I would firstly like to apologise for having arrived late for this debate : I was in another meeting and that is why I am speaking last , despite the fact that I have had the honour of taking responsibility for this issue on behalf of the European People 's Party .
Mr President , my first words are words of thanks , and I can also add my thanks as Chair of the committee , for the work carried out by the rapporteur .
I say this sincerely .
I believe that it would be hard to find a more complex issue , on which pressure has been unleashed from all the interest groups , which have legitimately fought to have their positions adopted by the various political groups .
There are few issues on which we have received so many , if not tonnes then at least metres of faxes and e-mails as we have on this one .
The rapporteur has been masterly in his navigation of these turbulent waters ; he has always remembered that a rapporteur is rapporteur for a committee , not for any group or any position : he is rapporteur for a committee and he is duty-bound to reflect the majority position of that committee .
I am pleased to say that the amendments put forward by the rapporteur were supported by a huge majority in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Mr President , please allow me now to make some comments which are going to reiterate what has already been said , because at this point in the debate everything has really been said already .
This is a much-criticised directive , and it is worthy of criticism ; but this is a case , as is so often the case in European integration , in which what is best and what is feasible are not the same thing .
As has already been said , we are starting from a situation in which there is complete divergence between the laws of the various Member States , where in reality the concept of copyright , the whole gamut of obligations and rights which this concept is represented by in our different laws , is not even similar .
It is not simply that are not the same , but that they are not even similar .
To try to harmonise them is an heroic quest .
This directive is a first step , but Parliament accepted this gamble on first reading and therefore it has to be consistent and continue in this vein on second reading .
At first reading we could have adopted disruptive positions ; that was not Parliament 's approach , and we accepted a directive full of exceptions .
At the moment , the amendments of the Committee on Legal Affairs , added to certain other notable amendments which deserve to be supported , improve this directive on certain substantial points , such as private copying .
I refer to what has already been said .
And in summary they improve the directive by making it a first step in a system of harmonisation which will have to be carried out over time , a first step which furthermore will enable us to fulfil our international commitments , since until this directive sees the light of day , the two WIPO Treaties will not be able to enter into force .
That is also an important responsibility at a time when we talk so much about globalisation .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor on this important subject .
I should like to begin by saying that the discussion on this subject has taken a long time , as Mr Boselli indicated a little while ago - I think he said three years .
That indicates the importance , as well as the controversial nature , of this proposal .
After long discussions , in which this Parliament played a very constructive role , we are meeting today to consider what I hope will be a balanced compromise .
We now need to agree as rapidly as possible on a set of rules on copyright and related rights in the information society at European level , in order to increase the competitiveness of the Community and to implement our obligations at international level .
This directive will be a cornerstone in the establishment of a harmonised legal framework on copyright , in a digital environment in particular .
As such , it belongs to those measures for which the Lisbon Summit at the end of last year set us a clear deadline .
The Community needs such a framework if it is not to lag behind its major trading partners and , as was remarked this afternoon , we are already lagging behind the United States .
Furthermore , without such a framework in place , rightholders and users cannot respond to the challenges posed by technology in the market place .
The adoption and implementation of this directive is also a precondition for the European Union to ratify rapidly the two WIPO treaties which were adopted in 1996 .
Here we carry an important responsibility as the coming into force of the WIPO treaties depends largely on this directive and therefore on us .
The formal decision to ratify the treaties was adopted by the Council on 16 March 2000 .
Parliament has already endorsed that decision , but without this directive neither we nor the Member States could move towards ratification of those treaties .
Throughout the legislative process , Parliament has played a significant role .
The important changes to this directive introduced after the first reading clearly reflect the influence of this Parliament .
We welcome the constructive approach of the rapporteur , Mr Boselli , and of the Chair of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , Mrs Palacio - whom it is a particular pleasure to see again today - and also the members of the committee which Mrs Palacio chairs .
They have shown a keen sense of appreciation of the issues at stake in this directive , reducing the number of amendments to 15 .
Most of those amendments were , in fact , compromise amendments , also on crucial issues .
The Commission appreciates the efforts made by the rapporteur on private copying and by the Committee on Legal Affairs when it voted not to amend the technical copies exception .
The Commission is in a position to accept all of the compromise amendments .
We have , however , concerns about some of the other amendments which have been voted .
I shall now say something about each of those amendments , although very briefly .
Firstly , Amendment No 2 .
It deals with remuneration schemes and the products to which they apply , even though such schemes are outside the scope of the directive .
This directive requires fair compensation for certain of the exceptions , one of which is private copying .
The system of fair compensation envisages flexibility for Member States , rightholders and users to establish the basis on which those exceptions apply .
Amendment No 4 does not respect the principle of proportionality because it seeks to lay down conditions for the granting of injunctions .
But the issue of sanctions is already adequately dealt with in the directive .
Amendment No 11 , about which I shall be speaking in reply to some remarks made a little while ago , adds a further exception for broadcasters , framed in terms which were rejected by Parliament itself at first reading .
The exception proposed goes too far and risks putting the Community in breach of its international obligations under the WIPO treaties , for which this directive is meant to be the instrument of ratification .
Amendment No 12 as currently drafted risks undermining the Commission 's own powers to take measures when Member States take action that affects the functioning of the internal market .
For this reason the Commission cannot see its way to accepting it .
Amendment No 13 adds nothing to the text of Article 6 ( 4 ) which already provides for fair compensation for private copying .
In the light of the above , we support the compromise amendments by the rapporteur and the Legal Affairs Committee but not Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 11 , 12 and 13 .
Moreover , a series of further amendments , namely Amendments Nos 16 to 45 , have also been tabled in Parliament .
The majority of those amendments have been rejected by the Legal Affairs Committee .
Three amendments , however , namely Amendments Nos 26 , 27 and 28 , are new .
In all cases , however , the issues raised by those amendments have been thoroughly considered , not just in the course of this second reading , but throughout the history of this directive - considered by my services but also by Member States .
None of those further amendments are acceptable to the Commission .
I should now like to address some of the questions and comments made this afternoon more specifically .
First of all , there are the questions and remarks made by Mr Medina Ortega , Mr Manders and Mr Echerer on private copying and on the use of the words " for private use " .
The question is should or should not the Commission support Amendment No 5 and if so , why ?
In reply to that question , I should like to say that the Commission is of the view that Amendment No 5 provides greater security for rightholders while at the same time allowing legitimate private copying in a manner which is enforceable both by Member States and by rightholders and it clarifies what is commercial by including ends that are both direct and indirect .
There are several safeguards built into this directive which qualify the extent to which private copying may take place and thereby act as a deterrent to piracy .
That is particularly the case in relation to the protection of technological measures .
The Commission is of the opinion that the reference to " private use " is too narrow a formulation and would give rise to difficulties in enforcement especially in the private domain .
Then there is the question and a comment made by Mr Manders on Article 5 and in particular on the words " transient " and " incidental " .
On that point , Article 5 ( 1 ) has been at the centre of attention in all institutions .
There have been many amendments tabled both in the Legal Affairs Committee and again here in Parliament which propose changing the text of the common position .
The Legal Affairs Committee very wisely rejected all those amendments when it voted on 6 February 2001 and the Commission accepted the text of the common position which states that the acts of copying , in order to be exempted , must be transient or incidental and that they should form an essential part of a technological process .
The Commission prefers " or " to " and " in this context because making the conditions cumulative by adding " and " may make the whole exception too narrow and less operational .
In addition , including " essential " seems to make sense , as it would be difficult to justify why the exception should privilege acts of reproduction which are not an " essential " part of a technological process .
The current text of Article 5 ( 1 ) together with the interpretative guidance provided in recital 33 ensures - in the Commission 's opinion - a satisfactory balance between the rights of rightholders and the legitimate interests of other parties involved such as telecom operators , users , consumers and other parties .
Together with Article 8 on remedies and sanctions , Article 5 ( 1 ) will help to provide for effective copyright protection against piracy whilst at the same time promoting the smooth operation of networks .
In particular , it gives service and access providers the necessary legal certainty for their activities on the networks .
Responding to comments made by Mrs Fraisse , Mrs Villiers and a number of others on Amendment No 11 , may I say the following . There is already an exception for broadcasters based on an amendment adopted by this Parliament at first reading .
It introduced a new exception for broadcasters relating to so-called ephemeral reproductions .
To introduce a further exception would not only disturb the balance of rights achieved , but could also lead to a violation of Member States ' international obligations .
In relation to Amendment No 11 , a similar amendment was proposed at first reading .
The Commission could not accept that amendment as it disturbed the balance between the parties concerned and might have caused considerable damage to authors , performing artists or other holders of the rights concerned .
The Commission is in agreement with Mrs Fraisse , Mrs Villiers and almost all speakers in rejecting this amendment .
I wish to thank Mrs Palacio for her support throughout the history of this proposal .
If it had not been for her leadership and guidance in the Legal Affairs Committee , it would not have been possible to steer our way through both the first reading and now the second reading , and the Commission is duly grateful to her .
The Commission would also like to thank the rapporteur and Parliament in general for the excellent work performed .
The common position represents the views of an entire cross-section of diverging interests : the creative and artistic communities , the academic , educational and scientific communities and also consumer groups and bodies representing socially disadvantaged users .
Nonetheless , in spite of the complexity of the groups whose interests have to be taken into account , the directive ensures a sufficiently high degree of copyright harmonisation and it should be possible to reach a final agreement today .
We have gone very far in meeting the concerns of everyone so , as Mr Boselli put it earlier this afternoon , I hope that this proposal will be approved tomorrow and that it will be adopted with as little change as possible .
Deliberate release of GMOs into the environment
The next item is the report ( A5-0032 / 2001 ) by Mr Bowe , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Directive 90 / 220 / EEC [ C5-0685 / 2000 - 1998 / 0072 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , we are now close to the end of what has been a three-year process of reforming the legislation for the control and genetically modified use of organisms as products within the European Union .
We have now completed the process of reconciliation and we have a text for final approval .
The text before us meets many of Parliament 's demands at first and second reading .
We have the precautionary principle reaffirmed .
We have tighter risk assessment of all GMO releases .
We have schemes for monitoring traceability that will ensure continuous assessment of all releases throughout the ten-year life of this time-limitation for consents .
We have achieved the phasing out of all harmful , antibiotic-resistant marker genes .
We have a clear timetable .
We have a clear and transparent process and a clear timetable for the approvals which ensure the mandatory consultation of the public which guarantees public registers of locations of GMOs grown and used .
Steps have also been taken on the issues of liability , traceability and labelling .
Parliament can only be satisfied on those issues , however , when we see the additional legislation and flanking measures which I understand are now in preparation within the Commission .
In short , we have in front of us today for our approval the toughest GMO legislation in the world , so tough , in fact , that some natural foods in common use today would not pass through this procedure .
Should we approve this legislation tomorrow it would mean the beginning of the end of the present informal ' moratorium ' on GMO commercial approvals .
Certain Members of the Council have , however , already made it clear that they will scrutinise individual applications for approval and may not allow commercialisation until legislation on traceability and labelling is in place .
I welcome this .
This is a final safeguard to the recommencement of an approval process which has been long awaited but it can be no reason for opposing the final approval of the new 90 / 220 legislation we have in front of us now .
This legislation is an essential building block and foundation for the success of those measures still to come .
I therefore commend this important legislation to the House .
It is essential to ensure the safe and proper use of GMO products within the European Union .
It is essential to ensure the building of public confidence in these products , it is essential to ensure that this new technology , which promises so much , will in the end deliver what we are seeking from it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we often begin our speeches in the European Parliament by thanking the rapporteur .
I wish to do so again today , and it is meant as more than just lip service .
Mr Bowe has done a magnificent job and brought a very complicated procedure to a close .
I should also like to thank you , Commissioner Wallström and the Chairman of the Conciliation Committee , Mr Ingo Friedrich .
Both put a great deal of effort into finding an agreement ; unfortunately , the same cannot be said of everyone else involved in the conciliation procedure .
We have brokered a good compromise .
The new regulation gives Europe a high standard of health , consumer and environmental protection .
The disputed antibiotic-resistant marker genes will be banned in Europe in the future .
Potential environmental dangers must be closely monitored .
Labelling of GMOs has been improved , although we expect further action by the Commission on this .
We have not passed a regulation preventing the application of green biotechnology and the PPE-DE Group welcomes that .
The PPE-DE Group is in favour of green biotechnology , provided that care is taken to ensure that rules to protect the environment and human health are respected .
Yesterday scientists and researchers from all over the world announced that they had completely decoded the human genome .
The euphoria which this announcement triggered throughout the world contrasts strangely with the emphatic rejection triggered by the release of genetically-modified plants , especially in Europe .
I think that neither euphoria at the human genome project nor total rejection of genetically-modified plants is called for .
In both areas there are huge opportunities , but there also risks which must be contained by suitable legislation .
The application of genetics to medicine is by no means risk-free ; there have already been deaths during research into gene therapy in the USA because the rules were not applied properly .
The so-called reproductive cloning of human beings is no longer a chimera and is being seriously pursued by a number of scientists , as we have again seen over the last few days .
The artificial distinction between clones of human embryos for stem cell research and so-called reproductive clones will become blurred in the long term and I believe that the first cloned baby will probably be born before the promised relief for patients with Parkinson 's or Alzheimer 's disease .
Just as red genetic engineering is by no means all opportunity , green genetic engineering is by no means all risk .
There is a realistic chance that genetically-modified plants will allow us to make huge progress with renewable primary products .
Specifically modified plants will perhaps soon allow cheaper and safer drugs to be manufactured .
We should therefore make use of the opportunities in both areas and limit the dangers with suitable legislation .
Developments in the release of genetically-modified plants from research into the human genome - for which we have practically no rules in Europe - will result , once the preliminary report is accepted , in a suitable set of rules for all the Member States in the European Union , which is why we should adopt this motion .
The PPE-DE Group will be voting in favour of the Bowe report .
Mr President , after three long years , we are , at last , nearing the end of the process of revising Directive 90 / 220 / EEC .
Anyone who has watched the progress made , step by step , towards this goal , as I have , cannot fail to agree that we are providing the European Union with legislation on genetically modified organisms which , in addition to improving upon the previous legislation , also places us at the forefront on an international level .
Just one example is the procedures for granting authorisations , particularly in terms of transparency and accessibility to the public , which is an essential condition for the necessary research trials to be able to proceed in a favourable climate .
Further examples are the assessment and monitoring of the cumulative effects on the environment , and the phasing out of antibiotic-resistant marker genes .
The lion 's share of the praise for this progress must certainly go to our rapporteur , Mr David Bowe , who has succeeded in combining decisiveness with flexibility .
It is certainly the fault of the Commission , rather than Mr Bowe , if we are still labouring under the burden of being unable , at present , to adopt flanking legislation on the tracing and labelling of GMOs and GMO derivatives placed on the market and thereby present the consumer with a complete framework of certainties .
The undertaking , confirmed yesterday in a letter from the Commission to the Members of the parliamentary delegation , is important in political terms but does not entirely make up for the delays in preparing a clear , well-defined proposal .
For these reasons , I am convinced that we should endorse the conclusions of the conciliation procedure , but with one explicit reservation : the moratorium on commercial approvals must remain in place until the gap has been filled .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the new directive is a huge improvement over the old one , on that we are all agreed .
The public register was a fundamental and central cause for concern to us Greens .
Monitoring is included , as is the testing of long-term effects .
We expressly welcome all this .
However , we shall abstain - and with good cause - because the main points of the directive have not been clarified .
There is unholy confusion in the area of genetic engineering at European level and no steps have been taken to label derivatives and GMOs and guarantee their traceability .
We have not clarified the question of exports of GMOs to non Member States .
I think that we have a moral responsibility to apply the same standards to third countries here as we do to ourselves and , more importantly , we have not clarified liability as a central factor .
The EU Commission is to make proposals here , it is true , but we do not know what they are .
I rather feel that we are buying a pig in a poke .
The BSE crisis should be a lesson and a reminder to us .
It is just not on , expecting the taxpayer to stump up for the damage and passing the risks onto society , while the genetic engineering companies only get the profits .
Which is why I do not expect any more GMO consents to be granted until legislation has been passed on liability .
So far , all we have is a declaration of intent ; we do not have corporate liability and it is just not on , insisting that anyone who wants to register a car must produce an insurance certificate , while someone producing dangerous organisms , some of the long-term consequences , risks and dangers of which are still unknown factors , need not .
There is therefore no reason for Member States such as Germany and France to lift their de facto moratoria .
I think we have a huge crisis of confidence in consumer protection and unless derivatives are labelled , in other words , unless there is transparency and liability and responsibility can be taken ...
( The president cut the speaker off )
Mr President , we in the Group of the European United Left wish to retain the moratorium on releasing genetically modified crops for commercial cultivation .
This position is not changed by the clear improvements due to Directive 90 / 220 and which we are now discussing .
In the conciliation , it was , in particular , we in the Group of the European United Left , together with the Greens , who fought for the improvements which have now in fact been made , for example the gradual elimination of antibiotic-resistant markers , greater transparency and better risk assessments .
We have also achieved at least a half victory when it comes to public registers of GMOs , but it is still very unclear whether the Member States really see themselves as being obliged to report publicly on all GMOs cultivated for commercial purposes .
Clarification from the Council of Ministers and the Commission is needed on this matter .
It is not advisable to adopt laws on matters about which , right from the beginning , there are different interpretations .
We have still not seen the new rules promised to us by the Commission and required for labelling , traceability and accountability .
Until we know what they look like and until they have been fully implemented , we cannot contemplate lifting the moratorium .
Nor do we believe that , when the moratorium is lifted , it should be possible for any Member State to be forced to cultivate genetically modified crops .
We consider the strategy devised by the Commission whereby new crops are to be approved before these rules are fully in place to be objectionable and contrary to the precautionary principle .
It is also significant that there is a desire here to pre-empt the reading in Parliament and in the Council of Ministers .
There is now no demand for genetically modified food in the European Union .
More and more parts of the world are abandoning GM crops .
There are major differences of opinion between researchers about the risks involved in GM crops .
This applies both to the risk of contaminating other species and to possible effects on human health .
To insist , in this situation , upon the cultivation of more GM crops for commercial purposes would be foolhardy and lead to a very great deal of opposition .
Recent scandals and problems involving food policy ought to have taught us to proceed carefully .
The interests of consumers and the precautionary principle must be allowed to take precedence over the commercial interests of a few large companies .
We want to retain the moratorium on commercial cultivation .
There is a risk that the revision of this directive may be taken by the Commission as a pretext for approving new GM crops for cultivation .
That is not something to which we can be a party .
In spite of the fact that , in the conciliation , our group has had an important role to play in making these rules as tough as possible , we cannot vote in favour of the final result .
Mr President , I compliment Mr Bowe on his work in this area .
Commissioner Byrne 's White Paper on food safety sets the ground rules and parameters within which the practical application of genetic research impacts on public health and the environment , and I have no doubt the vigilance of Parliament is a further safeguard .
While I have always favoured the application of safe and tested genetic research to agriculture , equally its practical application in future must be tempered by inevitable changes to agricultural practices resulting from the unrelated but nonetheless devastating consequences for farmers and consumers resulting from BSE .
The vigilance we are rightly demonstrating on the release of genetically modified organisms on the environment and food safety must be intensified with regard to research in the sensitive and ethical area of gene technology and its impact and implications for mankind .
There is a silent abhorrence of some of this research by citizens who expect us to reflect their concerns in this Parliament .
As I said on a previous occasion we should not play God with research .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , on behalf of the radical Members of the Bonino List , I would like to express my full support for the directive on the deliberate release into the environment of GMOs .
It has taken three years - too many - from when Commissioner Santer , urged by Emma Bonino and Ritt Bjerregaard , the then Commissioners for Consumer Policy and the Environment , presented the proposal to amend the old Directive 90 / 220 / EEC , a proposal which has resulted in the text we are debating today and upon which we are going to vote tomorrow .
We are going to vote in favour of the motion , for we feel that this proposal for a directive guarantees a rigorous legal framework for GMO authorisation , protecting consumers , economic operators and research scientists .
The proposal includes the major elements of innovation , environmental risk assessment and risk monitoring .
The new legislation also contains the precautionary principle , the rigid , ideological application of which , all too often proposed to us , would have the opposite effect to that desired , of paralysing not only research and innovation in the agri-foods sector but even commonly accepted aspects of our way of life , as the Italian Minister for Health , Umberto Veronesi , who is first and foremost a scientist , has pointed out in the last few days .
Improvements have been made in the areas of labelling and traceability , and a public information mechanism has been provided for .
On a more general note , it is my opinion that this directive represents a step forward in renouncing a prohibitionist approach to scientific progress .
Mr President , as well as the economic aspects , the new directive also expressly highlights the safety dimension , and rightly so .
As I have already pointed out on numerous occasions in earlier debates , we must pay particular attention to the ethical aspects of this sensitive issue .
Genetic modification of organisms constitutes interference with the characteristic properties of these organisms .
Given my belief that all these organisms were created by God , I recommend that we proceed with great caution .
We need to reflect on the ethical implications of the new developments in this sector .
Consideration of the ethical issues surrounding human genetics demonstrates that biotechnology can have far-reaching consequences .
Clear boundaries are essential in this respect .
I am delighted that the lion ' s share of the amendments were included in the Council and Parliament joint text in the end .
It is to be welcomed that the environmental aspects now fall within the scope of the directive .
It is also important that the antibiotic-resistant markers are to be eliminated in the fullness of time .
The Council should approve the Cartagena Protocol without delay .
It is important for exports to third countries to be carried out in a proper manner .
The argument that the development of genetically modified organisms will help to solve the world food problem should actually be put into practice .
The stories about the so-called terminator gene , which is said to prevent children from growing , are very disturbing .
It is my hope that abuses and incorrect practices can be prevented through effective observance of the protocol .
Mr President , all in all , the joint text has my backing .
Mr President , after years of work on this report , we have now arrived at what I hope is a final position in Parliament .
We largely have Mr Bowe to thank for this .
The rapporteur has done a fantastic job .
In this connection , I want to congratulate him on the report .
Let us just remember that genetic engineering provides humanity with new , unguessed at opportunities .
Just as always in the past , however , new knowledge also entails new risks and increased responsibility .
It is important that we be aware of the risks and accept our responsibility .
This applies both to environmental issues and to ethical considerations .
At the same time , it is important to make it clear that , when it comes to improving people ' s health and guaranteeing sustainable production of more food for a growing world population , we must not reject any form of science .
Instead , we must make use of science .
I would therefore simply urge that we make our decision in accordance with the proposal before us today .
Mr President , we refuse to endorse the draft directive which lays down the procedure for authorising genetically modified organisms , for fundamental reasons that I will set out in my explanation of vote , as well as for a very straightforward strategic reason .
It is because we are told that the implementation of this authorisation procedure , despite the fact that it is flawed , must be approved and we are also led to understand that the moratorium on authorisations , which was adopted by the Member State governments in June 1999 , will be lifted pending the further information needed .
In these circumstances , we believe that it would be much wiser for Parliament to wait for the actual implementation of all the additional guarantees that the Commission is promising for tomorrow , such as a future text on the liability and requirement for insurance by those who release GMOs - I stress this point - or even a future improvement of the provisions on labelling and traceability .
On the other hand , if we approve the authorisation procedure today , there is a considerable risk that we will have been duped , if , tomorrow , we find that the moratorium is lifted on the sly - something that the Commission would love to see .
The debate is suspended .
The debate will be resumed this evening at 9 p.m.
Reform of the beef and veal market
The next item is the statement from the Commission on the proposals for the reform of the beef and veal market .
I give the floor to Commissioner Fischler .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for giving me the opportunity to present the seven point plan to reform the beef and veal market which the Commission recently adopted .
What exactly is this plan ?
We all know that the beef and veal market is in serious crisis ; consumption in the European Union has plummeted ; prices in Germany , for example , have fallen by 39.2 % for steer and by 41.8 % for cows .
These historic lows have already triggered the intervention safety net in Germany and the Netherlands .
In addition , our exports have , unfortunately , collapsed .
Fast action is called for .
Storing meat is clearly not enough per se .
It would result in an unmanageable beef mountain , quite apart from the fatal consequences for taxpayers , consumers and farmers .
We therefore also need fast reform .
The Commission 's seven point plan is a sort of emergency package to prevent excess production over the next few years by taking another step towards extensive production , towards sustainability and towards organic farming .
However , this plan does not revolutionise the system completely for the simple reason that we first need to give our incipient reforms a chance .
Only a small part of the Agenda 2000 reform has really been implemented .
We have only just made the first step towards an overall 20 % reduction in intervention prices , with a further 7.1 % to follow this year and again next year .
The countermove - increasing direct payments and tripling the extensification premium - has still not entered into force by a long shot .
In short , implementing Agenda 2000 fully in the year 2002 will by itself contribute towards extensive cattle-raising and less production-orientated subsidies .
Today we are discussing the emergency package as a result of BSE and this neither anticipates nor replaces the mid-term review of Agenda 2000 .
I repeat , in 2002 , i.e. next year , agricultural policy as a whole will be up for review , as demanded in Berlin .
The Commission will spend 2001 analysing individual sectors in detail , so that it can then present a comprehensive , well thought out concept for the future .
We need to take our time here if we are to avoid falling prey to hurried , political posturing .
The seven point plan will not take food out of the mouths of European farmers .
It is our only chance of mitigating farmers ' loss of earnings , at least in the medium term .
The Commission cannot , unfortunately , afford to make up the loss of income in full .
Unsold beef , the lack of consumer confidence and escalating costs are a highly explosive mixture which could decimate beef-farming and agricultural policy .
Our seven point plan should allow us to remove the detonator from this ticking time-bomb .
But our plan should also ensure that beef and veal are safer than ever for consumers and that consumer confidence is restored in beef and veal .
Allow me now to outline these seven points briefly .
First , we propose to reduce the permissible stocking density for the special premium for steers and suckler cows from 2 to 1.8 livestock units .
Secondly , we want the Member States to respect the so-called 90-head limit without exception , i.e. a holding will only be paid the special beef premium for a maximum of 90 animals .
These two measures should increase the incentive for extensive farming .
Thirdly , in order to make organic farming more attractive , we propose to allow organic farmers to cultivate fodder such as clover on set-aside areas .
Fourthly , the Commission wants to set the number of rights for the special steer premium individually for each holding .
This measure will also act as an incentive to reduce intensive production .
Fifthly , our package also makes provision for a higher percentage - at least 20 % , but no more than 40 % - of animals which qualify for premiums , i.e. suckler cows , to be heifers .
This should also limit beef and veal production , which depends to a considerable degree on the number of suckler cows .
Sixthly and finally , we want to set the present ceiling for intervention outside the safety net of 350 000 tonnes for 2001 and 2002 , in order to prevent prices from falling even further and the safety net from having to be used in other countries or over a longer period of time .
Ladies and gentlemen , may I say that the measures which the Commission is proposing here today will not take full hold for a year or two .
We have no alternative .
Beef and veal production is not akin to a light-bulb factory and the agricultural Commissioner is not a foreman who can turn off the production line and watch everything grind to a halt .
In the short term , we must consider what we are going to do with the huge quantities of unsold beef .
With all due respect for the ethical aspects , with all due sympathy for those who say that it is a tragedy to destroy the cattle , we must not delude ourselves .
Hundreds of thousands of cattle have been squashed into stalls in Europe for months because farmers cannot find anyone to buy their old livestock .
The safety net has already been deployed in two Member States .
This week alone we shall probably put up to 30 000 tonnes of meat into storage .
And yet none of this is enough .
That brings me to the last point of the package of measures .
As soon as compulsory BSE tests for animals over 30 months old have been introduced in all the Member States , we want to replace the programme of safe removal with a new special buy-up programme which allows the Member States to decide if they prefer to store beef at their own expense or if they want to remove this meat from the market straight away , in which case we and the Member States will compensate farmers jointly for the value of the animal in a ratio of 30 % from the Member State and 70 % from the EU .
This measure is no more than a provisional emergency measure and should not last beyond the end of this year .
In the medium term , there is only one way forward and that is : act today in order to limit beef production tomorrow , promote less intensive production methods and encourage organic farming .
I therefore ask you to return your opinion on today 's proposal as quickly as possible .
Thank you for your attention .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his statement .
Mr President , Commissioner , it all sounds very hunky-dory , but a lot of it is cosmetic .
Why not go in for a proper reform and do away with endless quota regulations , ceilings , minimum and maximum livestock densities , slaughter premiums and fattening bonuses ?
Why not just pay the farmers and say : you decide , do you want to slaughter the calves now , irrespective of how fat or thin they are , or do you want to get out of production completely ?
Would that not be a more reasonable course of action ?
And then I ask you : are you going to operate the guillotine - will you make it a rule that holdings with more than 90 animals will not get any subsidies ?
Mr President , I would at least like to compliment the Commissioner on providing such a clear commentary .
I would mainly like to respond in my capacity as rapporteur for Budget 2001 .
My first question is as follows : what will the additional cost of these measures be in animal premiums , over a period of four to five years ?
According to provisional calculations , it will cost EUR 157 million this year and as much as EUR 1.75 billion over the years to come , and we are talking in terms of animal premiums .
My second question is does BSE have anything to do with the size of the farm ?
I was under the impression that it did not , yet you have set a 90-animal limit per farm nonetheless .
That seems to me to be in conflict with an effective programme for fighting BSE .
Nor have I heard anything about a maximum premium per hectare , for the number of animals per hectare .
Could you comment on that too ?
You are going to dispense with the 350 000 ceiling on beef taken into intervention , which is in itself a good decision .
But could you comment on what the financial implications for the European Union are expected to be over the coming year ?
Mr President , my warmest congratulations to you , Commissioner Fischler . These measures are a step in the right direction .
They remain within the system , without changing the need to review the system for the next reform and take even more audacious action .
But this package sends out the right signal .
I have just one objection : why not divide up the bull premiums over a transitional period ?
Half could be used to slaughter calves , i.e. for recovery , so it would not be Herod 's premium , and the other half could be channelled into grasslands , to get into extensification , to get out of mass meat production and to achieve middle-of-the-road production .
I also note that the figure of 90 animals applies to every holding ; holdings with more animals do not fall outside the rule , as the newspapers wrongly reported .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I promise to be much briefer .
In reply to Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's questions - and this also applies to the others - we should be clear about one thing : what we are proposing here today is not a new agricultural reform .
As I , in fact , said .
Nor are we in a position to engage in agricultural reform at the moment .
I think it would be wrong if we were to look now at the reform of the beef and veal sector in isolation .
When we talk of agricultural reform - and we shall do so in good time , I can assure you , you will be hearing from us - then we must include , for example , the question of silage corn , the question of milk quotas , the question of what to do about dairy cattle versus beef cattle .
And there really is too little time for that , especially if you want to prepare something carefully .
What we have tabled here today is nothing more - but also nothing less - than a clear concept to get us out of the current crisis .
Now to Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's question as to whether we should change over from quotas to direct payments .
There are no quotas for individual cattle fatteners under the current system .
First we need to introduce quotas for individual cattle fatteners ; what you meant , I think , is that we should deregulate the whole thing and get into rural development .
But this is precisely the sort of question which can only be resolved in the context of a general debate on agricultural reform .
I personally - and I say so quite openly - am against the guillotine .
I am against any instrument of murder and hence I am also against the guillotine .
Which is why I favour seeing this 90-head limit as a franchise , by which I mean that everyone gets a subsidy up to 90 animals .
Mr Maat felt that was a contradiction because it makes no difference if it is a small or a large holding when it comes to BSE .
I think you are quite right .
But the 90-head limit is not a measure to fight BSE , it is a measure to create incentives for more extensive beef production in the future .
We have already looked into what Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf said about early marketing premiums .
The thing is , we had this sort of premium in 1996 and in later years .
We have calculated that this premium alone cost EUR 200 000 million .
Unfortunately , the end result is somewhat questionable , because 40 % of calves are slaughtered with a low weight in any case .
That means we would pay nearly half the veal farmers a premium with absolutely no end result .
Which is why we have shunned this measure , especially in view of our limited resources .
Mr President , Commissioner , now that the Greens are finally in clover , does it not make sense to choose the much easier path through the whole complicated premium structure by going for a climate-related grassland premium and forgetting the rest ?
Secondly , Commissioner , I should like to point out that one point needs greater clarification because otherwise , I think , the internal market will fall apart .
If , as it would appear , the costs of disposing of bonemeal and material from slaughtered animals are not clarified uniformly in the Member States , and are partly taken up by government levies and partly passed on to farmers through prices , how do you intend to resolve this problem ?
Otherwise we shall not be able to keep the internal market together .
Commissioner Fischler , I agree with you when you talk about extensification , but I do not endorse the measures that you are proposing because , ultimately , they will not facilitate extensification .
If you are in favour of this approach , why do you not do the following : end subsidies for production and then pay in proportion to the least amount of animals per hectare ?
Then you will actually be bringing about the extensification of the sector because , otherwise , by maintaining aid for production , you are implementing a contradictory policy : on the one hand you are encouraging production and on the other , you are paying for it .
This system defies belief !
The second question I wish to ask you is this : given that this sector is undergoing a profound crisis and that there is an EAGGF-Guarantee , half of which is , in practice , spent on just one type of production , I should like to ask Commissioner Fischler whether it is not time to require ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioner , I have three brief questions .
My first question is that you admittedly spoke about measures on organic farming , but what do you intend to do about all the certified and approved products , which are also subjected to very strict criteria ?
My second question relates to calves . What are you doing or what do you intend to do about rearing calves with their mother , because , currently , milk given to calves that are ' battery farmed ' also presents problems that you have not considered .
Lastly , my third question is what are you going to do to avoid measures likely to penalise only small farmers without affecting large farmers ?
Mr President , first on the question of grasslands , grassland premiums or , first and foremost , general permission to use set-aside areas .
I think that we need to tread somewhat carefully here .
We must not forget that organic farms by definition produce much less and that the organic farming system automatically has a built-in brake on production so to speak .
If we generally abandon the brake on production in the cereals sector , then we no longer meet the requirements for a bluebox measure .
Which is why I think we need to tread carefully .
As far as introducing a general grassland premium in lieu of a beef premium is concerned , we discussed this in connection with Agenda 2000 .
I have no objection in principle here , but there is a feasibility problem , because you must admit one thing : a meadow in Schleswig-Holstein cannot be treated in the same way as a hectare of meadow in northern Finland or a meadow in southern Portugal .
There are huge differences in yield , quality and requirements .
But Europe does not have a system for evaluating these differences , which is why we need to consider this question at greater length .
But , as I said , I have no objection in principle , just a feasibility problem .
As far as the question of disposal costs is concerned , the fact is that very different systems are currently being applied here .
In some Member States it is done through tax measures , in other Member States the costs are simply absorbed by the national budget and in others still the farmers , or at least the agricultural sector , is left to pick up the tab .
Since these are national measures , national assistance rules apply .
And we are doing that , we have accepted that .
However , not all Member States have sent in their replies as requested , not by a long chalk .
But , hopefully , we should be in a position by the next Council to formulate a more accurate overview .
However , and I must stress this , a certain self-discrimination by the Member States within the framework of government aid cannot be prohibited under Community law .
That is also a fact of life .
But I agree with you , that it should not be allowed to go too far as , otherwise , we really shall create two types of farmholding or two types of farmer in Europe .
In reply to the question on certified products : the certification of products is set out in the provisions which we introduced on 1 September last year .
It was agreed , with Parliament 's consent , that this would be done in two stages .
The first stage is in force and the second will follow on 1 January next year .
However , this second stage must already be complied with for any meat which enters storage .
Because if we do not insist on this now , we will not be able to remove this meat from storage after 1 January 2002 because it will no longer meet labelling requirements .
Then there is also national certification .
This national certification , which is carried out by CHA in Germany or SOPEXA in France , is subject to a notification requirement .
In other words , these certifications must be notified .
Then there is also private certification .
These private certifications are governed solely by the principle of truth .
This means that the truth must be told about what is written on the outside of a product .
With products involving government aid , certain rules must be respected .
We are currently reforming this system , because we quite clearly take the view that the fact that a product comes from a particular region is no automatic guarantee of quality and that quality has to be defined .
Only if the quality is right and only if it is checked can we talk of a proper quality label .
But we have difficulties here - I freely admit - with combinations of quality and origin , when it is suggested that the quality automatically goes up if a specific product comes from a specific region .
As far as calves ' milk is concerned - and I assume that you are basically referring to milk replacer here - the relevant adaptations are being prepared .
However , they come within the remit of my colleague Commissioner Byrne .
As far as the implementation of the White Paper on food security is concerned , suitable proposals will also be forthcoming here .
Mr President , I have three short questions to ask Mr Fischler .
One of the questions I am often asked is if one case of BSE breaks out in a herd of dairy cows , why does the entire herd have to be slaughtered ?
The systems vary from country to country in Europe .
What is the Commission ' s view on this ?
Is it necessary or not , or is it just a precautionary measure ?
The way in which the tests are funded varies from country to country .
Is that good for the unity of the market and if not , is the Commission planning to do something about it ?
Thirdly , we still import large quantities of beef from outside Europe .
How does the Commission ensure that these cattle have not been fed animal meal , and are the controls adequate ?
Mr President , Commissioner , in one of your proposals you referred to the possibility of cultivating clover on fallow land , but you will understand that in the countries of the South this is not always possible and is sometimes very difficult .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , whether you could adapt this good proposal to the countries of the South , so that it would be attractive to them and would allow the viability , for example , of cultivating pulses in these conditions .
My second question , Commissioner , is how do you explain the difference between slaughter premiums which currently exist ?
There are countries whose slaughter premium is currently double that of others .
I would like you to explain , Commissioner , how this issue is calculated , in order to prevent these enormous disparities : sometimes double in one place in relation to another .
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commissioner three questions .
How soon does he think the 350 000 ceiling on beef taken into intervention will be passed and how far does he expect it to go ?
Is it not better to incinerate animals over 30 months old rather than start putting too much of this old beef into intervention ?
Finally , I do not understand the 90-animal limit because surely extensification , greening the agricultural policy is the way forward .
I can take the Commissioner to many farms in the UK where there are over 90 cattle being raised on an extensive-type regime and to smaller farms where cattle are intensively produced .
So surely it is the extensification payment that should be altered , not this 90-animal ceiling .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in reply to Mr Mulder 's question on slaughtering herds : there is no Community provision which prescribes that the herd must always be slaughtered if a case of BSE occurs in it .
Several options have been created here and a derogation should also be permitted in the future .
What is important to the Commission is that there should be a plan of what will be done if a case of BSE occurs .
This plan must be notified to the Commission and will be evaluated by the Commission 's scientific committees .
If the committees consider the plan acceptable , it is automatically approved by the Commission .
This system has worked perfectly so far .
As far as the costs of the test are concerned , may I remind you once again of what I said earlier in reply to Mr Böge 's question .
As far as massive imports of meat into Europe are concerned , I would qualify the term " massive " somewhat , because relatively little beef is imported into the European Union .
The question of removing risk material and , more importantly , the question of whether the meat is from animals which were tested and whether the country in question guarantees that the animals were not fed with feedingstuffs containing meat and bonemeal are clear and this must be implemented accordingly .
The Commission is currently working on the relevant proposals and my colleague Commissioner Byrne is working on this .
Now , I fail to see how Mr Jové Peres can say that slaughter premiums in the South are twice or several times higher .
That is news to me .
The slaughter premiums are the same everywhere .
In reply to Mr Jové Peres ' question : we do not want to incinerate meat arbitrarily ; we want to store this meat , provided that it is quality meat .
This disposal scheme is for meat which cannot be stored , which is not eligible for intervention ; because only meat from steer qualifies for intervention , not meat from old cows .
There has been a great deal of criticism here .
We had suggested disposing of the meat from old cows , but we want to take account of this criticism and we therefore now offer two options : either a Member State does as Great Britain has done over the past five years - and this has also worked perfectly in a number of other Member States - or a Member State has the option of buying this old livestock .
If it believes it can manufacture products from it , then obviously they must never go into commercial circulation , because first we cannot pay the full value of the animal and , secondly , this meat will then be competing with normal meat .
That is out of the question , but if there is additional recovery potential here and if individual Member States see such potential , then they may make use of it .
The 90-head limit does not apply to cows , only to subsidies under the special beef premium ; only stocks or rather only up to 90 animals a year are subsidised and no more .
That is the ratio .
For the rest , we also made this suggestion in connection with Agenda 2000 .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to stress that I am grateful to see Point 7 , the special purchasing programme .
It makes the position clear .
This means that tests are carried out before storage , and above all each Member State can make its own decision .
I am very grateful for that .
That creates a very acceptable basis for debate .
I have a question concerning the stocking density .
The ratio of forage area to cereal is 2.0 to 1.8 - so do I automatically increase the base area to give farmers an opportunity to further improve their living by growing cereals ?
Now for my second question .
And I would like to welcome Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf with his bow tie , maybe that is a reference to the fact that he now has clover grass , but we could also use Lucerne grass , that is just as good . Can you tell me why we do not use pulses , which we urgently need as a substitute for animal meal in these areas , and why does everything necessarily have to be organic ?
Commissioner , you said that the European Union was unable to compensate farmers for their losses .
I cannot believe that Europe would be prepared to abandon them in their plight .
How are you planning to resolve this ?
My second question is that you outlined to us a plan to unleash and rebalance the market on what consumer estimates was this based , 10 % , 20 % or 25 % less ?

My third point concerns the cultivation of protein-rich crops on set-aside land .
What impact do you expect this to have on reducing our deficit and our level of imports ?
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commissioner whether there is anything that the Commission can do to encourage the removal of the older animals from the national herd ?
It is obvious from the testing that has been taking place , at least in my own country , that all of the younger animals and animals over 30 months that have been tested are not in any way reacting positively to the test .
So it is important to remove the older animals .
Can the Commission encourage the removal of those older animals ?

Mr President , I have already pointed out why only organic farms can be considered for planting clover or clover grass . By the way , I am sure that Lucerne is also included , I see no problem with that .
It is vital to bear in mind that we should not let this measure undermine our WTO commitments , or else the whole thing will collapse and we will have achieved the exact opposite of what we want to achieve , because in that case we would not be able to help our farmers , and we would actually be harming them .
As regards growing high-protein feed in the form of field beans and field peas and so forth , we have undertaken to investigate this whole issue from the demand side as well as from the supply side .
This investigation is under way .
It is too late for the present production year anyway , because changes to the existing market regime would be needed in any case , and from a purely technical point of view it is too late to do that before these high-protein plants are planted .
So this is only achievable for the next production year , and that means that we still have time to carry out a proper investigation .
As far as imports are concerned , it is true to say that we annually import - chiefly from South America at present - around 30 million tonnes of soya and other high-protein feeds .
The shortfall which has now arisen in the form of 2.5 million tonnes of meat and bonemeal amounts to less than 10 % of that .
It is also necessary , and no final decision has been taken on this yet , to check whether this ban on feeding animal and bone meal to pigs and poultry will remain in force or whether the ban will be modified .
In this connection , my colleague Commissioner Byrne is currently having inspections carried out in all 15 Member States to establish whether there are models that already work or whether there are problems with checks everywhere .
So I cannot yet give a definitive reply on this .
Turning to Mr Hyland 's question about tests , let me make one thing crystal clear : our first goal must always be to guarantee consumer safety .
That is why we believe that it is of paramount importance for all animals over 30 months old to be tested , even if individual animals then have to be disposed of .
Why ?
Because we otherwise run the risk , if we leave this totally in the hands of the Member States or the sector itself , that there will be a kind of pre-selection between those animals that are tested and those animals that people do not want to test .
That implies certain risks which we want to avoid at all costs .
Our aim is to bring forward the date of 1 July so that all animals over 30 months old are tested in all Member States as from 1 April at the latest .
That means that the alternative I have presented to you here can also be put into practice .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for the answers you have given to all these questions .
That concludes the debate .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0007 / 2001 ) . We will examine questions to the Commission .
Mr Izquierdo Collado has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , as you know , in today 's Question Time there is a question of mine relating to widespread fraud in the flax industry , with thousands of millions of euros being gained fraudulently .
In the question I ask the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , for his opinion of the political responsibility of Mrs Loyola de Palacio following the report of the Spanish prosecutor , which confirms this fraud .
Mr President , this point of order is to ask you for express support in relation to what I am going to say . As well as finding it incredible that this question has not been considered a priority for an oral reply , I would like to tell you that , although it is reserved for a written answer , I already have in my hands a written reply , because a newspaper in my country has already stated : " In his written reply to a question put by the Socialist MEP , Juan de Dios Izquierdo , Mr Prodi has indicated that , on the basis of documents available to the Commission , he can only reaffirm his full confidence in Mrs de Palacio .
Furthermore , in response to another Socialist question on the possibility that the case may destabilise the entire executive , etc . "
Mr President , I have not yet received the written reply , as you might expect , and yet I have it here .
I do not think that it requires much imagination to know which group has been behind the scenes , applying pressure so that my question should not be given an oral reply in Parliament and so that this newspaper should already know Mr Prodi 's precise reply .
Mr President , I would ask you to investigate the situation and to protect the Members of this Parliament , because this is not an example of the transparency which Mr Prodi promised us at the beginning of his mandate .
Mr Izquierdo , I am President for this sitting , as you know , I am not the President of Parliament .
Nor is it likely that I will ever be President of Parliament .
I will communicate your speech to the President , and I can tell you that the President has received a letter from you and another one from Mr Berenguer .
I believe that you will have received a reply from the President , which has probably been sent by fax .
In it , I believe that the President - who , pursuant to Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure , is assisted by her office , which is empowered to allow and put the questions in order - replies , and I have the reply before me , by pointing out the criteria she has used to put the questions in order .
In short , I can tell you that the President and the services considered that the question was addressed to Mr Prodi , and he was not expected to attend the plenary sitting .
The President of the Commission does not usually attend this Question Time .
There are a number of Commissioners , including Mr Kinnock and Mr Byrne , who we know in advance will reply to questions .
This is communicated to the Members of the European Parliament and they therefore ask specific questions .
Furthermore , the President of Parliament has decided , as well as considering the chronological order , to select the five questions which , in her judgment , are priorities and urgent , which are the five which make up the first part and which we are going to deal with now .
That is the explanation I can give you , with complete transparency .
In any event , I take note of your comments , which will appear in the Minutes , and I regret that a newspaper from any country can make statements on written or oral replies which are yet to be given .
Mr Berenguer has the floor for a point of order .
I would ask him to be as concise as possible .
Mr President , since I have been mentioned by the presidency , I would like to say that I have in fact received a reply , which I do not agree with . I do not agree with the presidency 's interpretation of the questions made by Members of this House .
I do not agree with it because it seems that that interpretation can be seen as a way of reducing the legitimate initiatives of Members to monitor the Commission .
My question specifically asked whether the Commission - not the President , but the Commission - felt threatened by the words of a Spanish MEP , a member of the People 's Party , in which he said that , if the Socialists criticised Mrs de Palacio for her involvement in the flax scandal which took place in Spain when she was Minister for Agriculture , they would threaten to bring down the Commission .
If this is not considered by the presidency to be a priority , if this is not a question which , because it is not considered a priority , could not be answered by , for example , Vice-President Kinnock , then I am truly amazed .
In any event , and while I express my disagreement , this is not what I wanted to say .
Like my colleague , Mr Izquierdo , who was requesting support from the presidency , I wanted to say that it was unacceptable for replies addressed to Members of this House to be published in a pro-government newspaper in Spain , before the Members are made aware of that reply .
And , while strongly protesting at this anomaly , I would ask you to consider my question withdrawn .
I do not want the Commission to reply to the ABC newspaper before replying to me .
And since I do not want the Commission to go through the shame of having to notify the Spanish press of its replies before the Members to whom they are addressed , I am not going to participate in this behaviour and I withdraw my question .
Thank you very much , Mr Berenguer .
I am not thanking you for having withdrawn your question , naturally , but for having brought your speech to a close .
I cannot make any value judgment since , furthermore , I share the nationality and electoral constituency of the Members who have asked the question , on the issues raised .
I am acting as President of the sitting of the European Parliament and the support that I can offer Mr Izquierdo Collado is , of course , to communicate his comments to the President of Parliament so that she may hear them directly .
Furthermore , Mr Izquierdo Collado has whichever channels open to him that he considers appropriate to make this protest , shall we say .
Part I
Question No 45 by ( H-0014 / 01 ) :
Subject : Consequences of the use of depleted uranium bombs in Kosovo Intense concern has been caused in Europe by revelations concerning the development of leukaemia among members of the international forces who served in Bosnia and Kosovo , which has been attributed to the use of depleted uranium bombs .
In reply to one of my previous questions ( H-0429 / 99 ) the Commission indicated that ( a ) the report by the Regional Environmental Centre for Central and Eastern Europe had been forwarded to the Environment Ministers of the Member States in June 1999 and ( b ) detailed analysis of the situation regarding funding for clean-up measures had not yet been carried out .
In view of the fact that no answers to this particular issue were forthcoming at the January part-session and that the Commissioner referred to a meeting of an independent group of experts , does the Commission not consider highly alarming the implications of the report for the health of civilians and servicemen in these areas ?
Who will assume responsibility for medical examination programmes for the populations of the areas affected by depleted uranium bombs ?
What are the conclusions of the meeting of independent experts to which the Commissioner referred and what additional measures are to be taken ?
The Commission refers the honourable Member to the statement given by Commissioner Wallström to the plenary session of this House on 17 January .
Since that date the Commission has convened a meeting of the group of experts established under Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty to give an opinion on the possible health consequences of the use of depleted uranium .
The report of that group will be ready in a few weeks ' time .
The World Health Organisation will also issue a report on the subject in the near future .
The Commission will then consider appropriate action to be taken in the light of the scientific evidence produced by these activities .
In response to the particular questions of the honourable Member , the Member States of the Union have not informed the Commission of their actions taken following receipt of the Regional Environmental Centre report .
The Commission has no plans to initiate medical examination programmes .
As the honourable Member will know , it is a regrettable fact that the people of the region face a variety of threats to health from several sources and some of those threats are obviously environmental in origin .
Within the means at its disposal the Commission is working with the United Nations mission in Kosovo - Unmik - through the European Agency for Reconstruction , to eliminate these threats according to priorities for intervention .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
Although it was somewhat general , I should like to ask if the few weeks which the report from the independent committee is expected to take can be narrowed down ?
Also , in order to break the general thrust of his reply a little , can the interventions to deal with the extremely serious environmental repercussions for the people in the area be quantified and specified ?
Mr President , in response to Mr Alavanos 's first question , I am informed that the report from the expert committee that is being convened under the Euratom Treaty will be published within weeks rather than months , so it is in the relatively near future .
As regards the detailed response that is justified to the question on health problems , there is a great deal of material at the Commission and certainly I , or indeed my responsible colleagues , would be happy to give full details to the honourable Member of whatever is at their disposal .
This would be rather more useful than my trying to make a recitation in the limited time available in this House .
Mr President , Commissioner , at yesterday ' s meeting of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , we did indeed hear Mr Haavisto who prepared his report on the results of the group of experts .
On the other hand , although he spoke about depleted uranium , he made absolutely no mention of the statement made by NATO on 18 January , in which it was admitted that , in addition to depleted uranium , plutonium had also been used .
Are you planning to undertake plutonium tests in the region and do you intend to make European Union funds available in order to carry out decontamination work ?
Mr President , as I indicated in my first answer , there are certain budgetary limitations that have the effect of restricting some of the actions that we undertake in the region , not only as the Commission but also in our cooperative activities with other organisations .
I am certain that the honourable Member recognises the nature of those limitations .
It therefore means that on some occasions it is quite probable that the activities to secure decontamination and protection for public health are not as extensive as , ideally , we would like them to be .
The fact remains , however , that the Commission , acting on behalf of the Union , is probably the lead actor in all the activities to improve conditions of public health and to provide for decontamination and environmental protection .
So far as the NATO statement of last month on plutonium is concerned , I am not in a position to give a comprehensive answer at this stage .
I am certain that if the honourable Member wanted to write explicitly on the NATO statement and the possibility of the use of plutonium and its side effects in that region , either in the course of acts of war or otherwise , my colleagues in the Commission would be more than ready to provide a comprehensive reply .
I invite the honourable Member either to write directly to me on the subject - and I will certainly see it gets to the right quarters - or to take it up directly either in the committee of which he is a member or specifically with one of my fellow Commissioners .
Question No 46 by ( H-0055 / 01 ) :
Subject : Radioactive pollution of the Aegean and the Ionian Seas According to reports in the Greek press , as well as in the Turkish press , according to Le Journal du Dimanche , depleted uranium shells have been used by the Greek and the Turkish navies in exercises in the Aegean and the Ionian Seas for the last ten years .
The inhabitants of the islands and along the coastlines of these two seas , as well as the citizens of neighbouring countries , are concerned about possible radioactive pollution , because sea currents carry radioactivity beyond the area where the shells were fired .
Does the Commission intend to set up an independent commission to investigate this matter and to inform the inhabitants of these regions and all the citizens of Europe about the real state of affairs so as to prevent an ' Aegean syndrome ' taking hold , whether or not it is justified ?
Does it intend to work towards this goal with the governments concerned ?
What preventative measures does it intend to take ?
Mr President , the Commission 's attention was given to the use of depleted uranium in armour-piercing shells as long ago as 1993 .
At that time , the Commission 's reply to Parliament related to the specific issue of the test-firing of shells in coastal waters , and it offered the view that such action would not have a significant impact on the environment .
The Commission continues to hold that view on the basis of the evidence that , in the marine environment , the only exposure pathway is the slow dissolution of uranium .
It is important to note that the amount of uranium that could be dissolved is very small compared to the natural abundance of uranium in all sea-water .
The movement of uranium away from the test-firing location by tides and currents could not , therefore , be distinguished from natural background concentrations .
The Commission understands public concern about the use of depleted uranium materials for military purposes .
However , the Commission draws attention to the fact that the firing of uranium penetrators at land-based targets has implications which are different from those of firing ammunition in the marine environment , because use on land can result in the dispersion of uranium oxides which may subsequently be inhaled , whilst that is clearly not the case in the marine environment .
Commissioner , am I to conclude , from what I understood of your reply , that the Commission believes that there is no cause for concern and that it has no intention of looking into this ?
Have I understood correctly ?
Is that what you meant ?
That the citizens have no cause for concern and that there are no dangerous quantities of uranium in these seas ?
Mr President , it is not a question of the Commission in any sense being complacent , either politically - because it is responsible to the public - or indeed scientifically .
The points that I made in my earlier response related to the natural concentrations of uranium in sea-water of all descriptions and in all locations .
On the basis of that scientific reality the feeling of the Commission and all other scientifically advised persons and bodies is that the evidence of uranium deposit in sea-water is such that the firing of shells for target purposes in the marine environment does not make any significant addition to uranium concentrations .
It is only on the basis of that widely accepted and well-documented scientific evidence that the Commission takes its view .
In addition , I did draw attention in my first answer to the strong distinction that has to be made between possible consequences of the use of depleted uranium material and munitions in a land environment where the oxides can be inhaled , and in a maritime environment where the consequences of the use of depleted uranium do not have the same consequences , since obviously no inhalation can take place .
Mr President , I am amazed by the Commission 's reply and greatly fear that it may soon be contradicted , just as similar assurances on previous occasions have been contradicted .
These shells have been used in tens of thousands of military exercises and have exploded in the air , not just in the water .
That means that gases will have been carried both to the inhabited islands and to the inhabited shores of Turkey .
I am amazed at how the Commission can come here with what I can only describe as an offhand manner and assure us that , because they fall into the sea , these depleted uranium shells do not cause any problem .
In all honesty , I can find no explanation for these statements , Mr President .
What can I say ?
All that is left is for me to condemn yet another attempt to conceal a crime perpetrated not just in Yugoslavia but during NATO exercises .
And there you have it .
Can I draw the honourable Member 's attention to the title of the question he set down earlier .
The title of the question was " Radioactive pollution of the Aegean and Ionian Seas " .
The answer was given , not only now but as long ago as 1993 , based very heavily on strong scientific evidence in relation to that question .
If the honourable Member has evidence to support the contention that there has been damage as a consequence of target firing , either to the coasts of Greece or indeed of Turkey , or to islands in the Aegean or Ionian Seas , I know , that as a conscientious Member , he will want to put down questions or make representations on that specific basis .
If and when he does - and I am answering the question - I will give him the basis for a scientific view of what the consequences of the use of depleted uranium are in those circumstances .
He will understand , however , that without notice of that question I am hardly in a position to give him the detail that he would want on the specific environmental questions that he raises .
I am certain that he would not , as a responsible Member of the European Parliament , want to contest serious scientific opinion or indeed be alarmist in a way that would be upsetting to his constituents .
The honourable Member is correct in stating that the proposed amnesty law , which is still only a proposal before both the Serbian Parliament and the Parliament of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , will not cover anyone convicted of offences considered to be acts of terrorism .
The European Union has already repeatedly called for the release of all Albanian Kosovar prisoners .
The EU ministerial troika which visited Belgrade on 8 February also expressed concern at the fact that the proposed amnesty law will not cover all those convicted of political offences by the Milosevic regime .
The Commission has been fully involved in these initiatives , and the European Parliament 's ad hoc delegation , which visited from 8 to 10 February , also raised this issue in the relevant quarters .
The Serbian and federal authorities have indicated their intention to urgently re-examine the cases of those not covered by the law , particularly to ascertain whether the convictions are sound or not .
As of today , the prisoners have still , regrettably , not been released .
The EU will keep up the pressure to ensure that they are .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer and his words of encouragement , but what we have to take on board is that we are in a transitional phase at the moment , when it comes to EU aid to Serbia .
We are in the transitional phase between emergency aid and aid which is more structural in nature .
I believe we have well and truly reached a point where we can start banging the table for a while .
There is a great deal of scepticism on the part of the Albanian Kosovars towards the Kostuníca regime .
The people are getting rather desperate .
There have been hunger strikes . The people now want to see real progress .
I understand there is an adviser from the Commission amongst Mr Kostuníca ' s immediate entourage , a man who has already won his spurs amongst the President of Montenegro ' s entourage I might add .
What I would like the Commission to do is exploit this transitional period to the full by telling Serbia that we are not going to carry on delivering aid unless they solve this pressing problem .
I certainly understand the instincts of and the rationale offered by Mr Staes , and not for the first time .
I can give him the assurance that all influences and all means of representation are being employed in the most forceful possible way in order to try and secure the outcome that the Commission , the Union generally and Members of this House - including Mr Staes - want and that would be consistent with humane and just treatment .
The Commission , however , is not disposed , certainly at this juncture , to contemplate the possibility of sanctions of various kinds , including the ones suggested by the honourable Member , simply because the Commission is making its contribution and its commitment on behalf of the Union in full knowledge of the dire needs of people and organisations in that area .
We very much hope that by using the means that are currently being employed we will , without great delay , secure the outcomes which will serve the interests of humanity and be consistent with the views continually expressed by the Union , the Commission and this House .
Mr President , I believe that the legal basis on which the Commission is working is totally inadequate .
Mr Hækkerup was very clear - there is absolutely no need for an amnesty law by the Belgrade authorities , since only the UN , represented by Mr Hækkerup , can decide whether to imprison , sentence , or continue to detain these people .
The only issue to consider is their immediate release from Serbian prisons and their transfer to the UN mission in Kosovo .
There is therefore no need for the Commission to put pressure on Mr Kostuníca to pass an amnesty law or to enter into a set-up which is completely illegal in international law .

The Commission and Council must make Mr Kostuníca and Mr Djinjic comply with the orders of the international community , which is demanding the return of the 700 hostages to the UN authorities .
I would like to know what the Commission intends to do about this .
Whilst I have absolutely no reason to doubt the figure given by the honourable Member , there are different estimates .
The official estimate of the number of prisoners affected in this specific area and this specific instance is 300 , rather than 700 .
The point that we continually try to make in our representations is that regardless of the precise numbers there is a principle of humanity to be followed , and we want to see it applied without any further delay .
However , whilst I understand the argumentation over the legal base , we would be further complicating an already delicate situation if we were to seek to act in a peremptory fashion or advise others - including the United Nations - that they should do that .
Clearly there is less patience now than yesterday , and there was less yesterday than last week .
That feeling is being strongly communicated in the relevant quarters .
But it would be irresponsible and misleading of me to indicate that we are going to make any major departure from the course that we have followed and have every reason to believe we can produce a successful and humane conclusion .
Question No 48 by ( H-0069 / 01 ) :
Subject : Arrest of children in Turkey According to the Union of Human Rights , 29 children aged between 9 and 16 years of age have recently been arrested in Diyarbakir in Turkey on charges of belonging to a terrorist organisation and imprisoned .
The Union for Human Rights maintains that the children have been mistreated and need immediate psychological assistance .
They are now in danger of being tried and sentenced to lengthy prison terms .
What measures will the Commission take in response to this in connection with negotiations for the accession of Turkey with a view to securing the immediate release of these young children and convincing Turkey finally to respect the undertakings which it has made to the EU concerning the introduction of greater democracy in social and political terms ?
Mr President , the Commission is aware of the arrest of 28 children and young people in Turkey described in Mrs Zorba 's question .
According to our information , 28 children and young people were arrested by the police in a small town in south-east Turkey on 9 January .
The local security forces alleged that these children had taken part in an illegal demonstration , that they had shouted out pro-PKK slogans , and that they had protested against the Turkish military presence in northern Iraq .
Children and young people aged between 9 and 16 were arrested and taken to a prison in Diyarbakir .
According to information provided by the Turkish Union for Human Rights , these children have also been mistreated in prison .
Following protests by the parents and the Turkish Human Rights Society , 22 children and young people have now been released , but six young people aged between 14 and 17 are still in custody .
The Commission has made representations to the Turkish authorities on this matter in the strongest terms .
The Commission has called for an immediate and full explanation of the facts .
This incident is a matter of grave concern to us .
The Commission wishes to emphasise that whatever these children may be accused of , such accusations can in no way justify taking children into custody , throwing them into a prison far from their parental homes and detaining them there for several days .
This kind of behaviour is totally irreconcilable with the human rights standards prevailing in the European Union .
The Commission expects the Turkish Government to address this matter immediately .
This incident demonstrates that there is an urgent need for political reform in Turkey if that country is to move closer to the European Union and its values .
The Commission recalls that comprehensive protection of human rights is one of the political criteria that the candidate countries must meet in order to open accession negotiations with the European Union .
This is also reflected in the priorities of the Accession Partnership with Turkey presented by the Commission in November last year .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Your reply was most satisfactory .
However , given that the public prosecutor has referred the case , calling for these six children to be sentenced to up to five years ' imprisonment on the basis of the charges , I should like to know if there is something else we can do and exactly how long you intend to wait .
Mrs Zorba , unfortunately I cannot confirm that the process has started at all and that penalties have been called for as part of the process .
I know that the Turkish Government has made direct contact with the criminal prosecution authorities , but we do not know the outcome of that contact between the Turkish Government and the local authorities .
I am certainly willing , Mrs Zorba , to intervene in this matter once again at whatever level you consider appropriate .
And I believe that will be useful , because strong international pressure and intense international interest are the only things that really help in such cases .
I congratulate the Commissioner on his reply .
However , he talks about EU values and standards .
In response to questions I put about the continuation of the bombing of Iraq and sanctions on Iraq , the Commission showed no concern for the fact that 5 to 6 000 children have died because of sanctions on Iraq .
So when I hear the Commission talk about EU values and standards , in view of its support for sanctions on Iraq I wonder how sincere it is about the children in Turkey .
Mr President , I am sorry , but I fail to see the connection between the question of United Nations sanctions on Iraq and the arrest of 28 children in Turkey .
Question No 49 by ( H-0085 / 01 ) :
Subject : Safety of childcare products In Sweden in particular , criticism has been levelled against EU rules on safety requirements for childcare products .
Consumers have substantially less say in the standardisation process than industry .
Certain products with which children come into contact are not currently safe enough .
The aim should be to ensure that such products are inherently safe and do not require constant parental supervision .
What are the Commission 's views regarding the current standardisation process and the balance of power between consumers and industry , and can we expect that the objectives of the mandates for children 's articles and other products pursuant to the product safety directive will be achieved and become reality ?
Part II
Questions to Commissioner Kinnock
The Commission is fully aware of the importance of the participation of consumer representatives in the standardisation of work .
The importance of the participation of all interested parties in the process has been recognised in several resolutions and communications .
The Commission is actively supporting this through different initiatives .
In particular , the Commission gives important annual financing support , amounting to EUR 830 000 in 2001 , to the European Association for the Coordination of Consumer Representation in Standardisation - the organisation known as ANEC .
It is also important that consumer organisations identify this subject as a priority in order to allocate the necessary resources .
The Commission also encourages the Member States and the standardisation bodies to facilitate the participation of consumers in the standardisation process , at national level as well .
The general product safety directive , which aims at ensuring that products placed on the market are safe , gives a specific role to European standards .
This role is reinforced in the new version which is about to be adopted by the Council and the European Parliament .
In order to elaborate these standards the Commission will give to the European standardisation bodies standardisation mandates in which the level of safety to be achieved will be specified .
Consumer organisations will be consulted on the content of the mandates .
The Commission will verify that the standards developed comply with the requirements of the directive and the mandates , both when it comes to aspects related to safety and to the participation of consumers , before the publication of the references of the standards in the Official Journal .
The Commission will carefully check that all the standardisation mandates under the directive , in particular those relating to children 's products , are satisfactorily executed .
I would thank the Commissioner for his answer .
I have a number of questions .
The more I read about this procedure , the more it sets me thinking .
Does the Commissioner not think it a touch strange that representatives of the industry to be regulated , that is to say the industry which produces toys and other items for children , should act as chairmen of the standardisation committees whose job it is to establish rules , at national or other levels , for those products that are released onto the market ?
Does the Commissioner himself not think it strange that products with which children come into contact on the market are not tested , which is why no one can really assess their safety ?
Does the Commissioner not think it a little strange that , in the most recent cases involving , for example , chocolate eggs , toy cap pistols and non-flame-proof clothes used by children for dressing up in , the judgment has in every case turned out to be favourable to the industry instead of in accordance with children ' s interests ?
I think it is quite clear that there is a need for a new method of standardisation based on objective assessment criteria rather than upon subjective criteria that are in the interests of the industry .
Issues such as this are always kept under review .
As you are aware , the general product safety directive is the overall framework legislation that deals with this issue .
My services and I keep a very close eye on how the legislation is implemented , throughout the European Union , to ensure that consumers - and children , in particular - are protected from dangerous products .
You will be aware that there is a safety measure contained within the general product safety directive ; that was the measure used last year when we brought forward a safeguard measure relating to phthalates in children 's toys .
That is one of the measures that can be used by way of an emergency measure to protect children .
Could I briefly ask the Commissioner if he can be specific now on an issue many of us , including Mrs Hulthén , have raised with him before , that is the potential dangers of plastic inedibles which are given away with sweets and other things and which are not a foodstuff .
They are a plastic , but they are not really designated as one or the other .
Is he confident now that these substances are actually safe for children ?
I am aware , Mr Whitehead , that this is an issue in which you have a particular interest and it has been an issue which you and my services have consulted on for some time .
But it is an issue which is being dealt with by DG Enterprise and my colleague , Mr Liikanen .
The Commission has recently been questioned on the safety of associated products , often consisting in a toy accompanying the food product in a separate background .
In the light of the information collected by the Commission in cooperation with national authorities , the Emergency Committee of the General Products Safety Directive reached on 16 May 2000 the conclusion that no specific danger relating to the associated product has been identified .
Non-food items , particularly small toys , or toys containing small parts are not risk-free .
However , the risk would depend on the characteristics of the non-food product itself .
The existence of a possible risk has convinced the Emergency Committee to explore the need to reinforce the existing instruments , particularly the protection offered by Directive 88 / 378 on safety of toys and the related standard EN 71 / 1 .
The competent services of the Commission are currently working on possible improvements .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 50 , 51 and 52 will be taken together .
Question No 50 by ( H-0057 / 01 ) :
Subject : Alleged attempt by Commissioner Kinnock to gag ex-Commissioner Gradin According to reports appearing in the Swedish press on 23 January , Commissioner Kinnock wrote to ex-Commissioner Gradin and her former chef de cabinet , Christer Asp , demanding explanations concerning comments they made about shortcomings in the way the Commission operates .
After the resignation of the Santer Commission and the Buitenen affair , people thought the Commission had learnt the meaning of democratic openness and had stopped using authoritarian methods to gag its employees past and present .
Will the Commission therefore say whether it is true that Commissioner Kinnock wrote such letters ?
What steps will it take to prevent a repeat of gaffes like this ?
Question No 51 by ( H-0081 / 01 ) :
Subject : Commission 's conduct in regard to freedom of expression Former Commissioner Anita Gradin and the former head of her private office , Christer Asp , have been criticised in a letter from the Commission for having given public interviews to clarify how several million in aid intended for Bosnia under the ECHO programme could have disappeared .
In the interview , Anita Gradin stated that she stood by the decisions taken in the Commission .
Among the principal tasks of the present Commission is to shed light on the events that took place under the previous Commission and to make changes to prevent any recurrence .
Public openness is a major factor in that process .
In what way does the Commission consider that the letter to Anita Gradin contributes towards greater openness and greater public confidence in the Commission ?
Question No 52 by ( H-0122 / 01 ) :
Subject : The Commission 's actions regarding criticisms by a former Member of the Commission What is known as the ECHO scandal of 1997 , when irregularities resulted in the disappearance of huge amounts of EU aid and documents relating to the case later disappeared from the Commission 's archives , has been the focus of much attention in Sweden and Denmark .
On TV programmes in both countries , former Commissioner Anita Gradin and her former chef de cabinet have voiced criticism of the Commission 's handling of the affair .
In response to the comments they made , Commissioner Kinnock wrote to both of them arguing that they had no right to criticise the Commission as an institution .
If , contrary to expectation , there is a rule which says that they do not have a right to criticise , it would represent a dramatic step backwards for free speech in the European Union .
On what legal grounds does the Commission argue that a former Member of the Commission and her former chef de cabinet do not have a right to voice such criticism of the Commission ?
Mr President , I am very grateful to the honourable Members for their questions about my correspondence with my friend and former colleague , Mrs Anita Gradin , and her former chef de cabinet , Mr Christer Asp .
The questions enable me to report publicly and fully to this House on an issue that I know has aroused interest particularly in Sweden .
On 13 November 2000 Danish TV broadcast a documentary programme in which statements were attributed to Mrs Gradin and Mr Asp that appeared to relate to an employee of the Commission who had been unanimously acquitted of specific charges by the last Commission after due disciplinary process had been followed .
As a result of that broadcast , and as Commissioner responsible for Personnel and Administration , I was obliged to write to Mrs Gradin and Mr Asp on 22 November to request confirmation and clarification of the reported remarks , in order to enable the Commission to establish whether or not the remarks in question would require any action by the Commission .
That was the sole purpose of the letter .
It did not , either in tone or in content , demand explanations , offer criticism , seek to gag anyone or imply in any way that either Mrs Gradin , as a former Commissioner , or Mr Asp , as a former official , had no right to criticise the Commission as an institution .
In order to make that absolutely clear , I will readily provide copies of that letter and all other relevant correspondence to the honourable Members as soon as I have confirmation from Mrs Gradin that she has no objection to that course of action .
Mrs Gradin has indicated by an indirect route that she would be agreeable to such a release of correspondence but naturally , as a matter of courtesy to her , I prefer to have direct confirmation of her agreement .
Mrs Gradin replied to my 22 November letter on 29 December and I wrote a further letter to her on 25 January 2001 .
As I pointed out in that letter to Mrs Gradin , and as the House will be aware , the Staff Regulations applicable to all EU institutions make it clear that the Commission as an institution and as an employer is legally liable to assist employees in defending themselves against attack .
That obligation also means defending an acquitted person against any questioning of their innocence of the charges on which they were acquitted .
My 22 November letters to Mrs Gradin and Mr Asp therefore related entirely to such legal obligations and considerations and to absolutely nothing else .
As I made clear in my letter of 25 January to Mrs Gradin , whilst all liberties of speech are precious and must be upheld , the expression of certain opinions - for instance those that may be considered to defame others - can have legal consequences in all democratic societies , and have specific implications for the Commission as an employing European institution .
In that letter I also made clear beyond doubt that my letter of 22 November was not in any way an attempt to limit free comment or to prevent criticism of the Commission either by Mrs Gradin , or indeed by Mr Asp or anyone else .
All this will be evident to honourable Members when they have the chance to read the exchange of correspondence , as I hope they will .
That will also enable them to see that the basis for consideration of the actions of former commissioners and former officials is the Treaty and the Staff Regulations .
Mrs Gradin has obviously always taken her duty of discretion provided for in the Treaty seriously as a responsible and reputable person .
I am sure that will continue .
Well , that really takes the biscuit !
That is probably one of the most ridiculously evasive answers I have heard in a very long time .
Mr Kinnock says that we would have known what the letter contained if we had been able to study it .
Marvellous , if we only get to see it after the debate !
I applied to Mr Kinnock ' s office so as to be able to study the letter before the debate , but I was told that I could possibly get to examine it after the debate .
That only goes to show that Mr Kinnock has not understood in the slightest what openness really means .
Mr Kinnock appears not to have learned anything from the scandal involving the Commission to which he previously belonged - the Santer Commission , which fell because it did not understand the link between transparency , on the one hand , and corruption and fraud , on the other .
If Mr Kinnock had learned anything from the Commission to which he then belonged , he would have understood .
I refer to the type of threatening letter which he obviously wrote and which Mrs Gradin understood as such , to judge from the statements she made to the Swedish press .
Mrs Gradin must surely have read the letter before she made her statement .
In the same way , Mr Asp must surely have read the letter before he made his statement .
They no doubt knew , in any case , what the letter contained , and they obviously perceived it as a threat .
It does in fact dishonour Parliament and is an insult to this House to turn tail and evade responsibility , as Mr Kinnock is now doing .
I would ask Members to take account of the fact that they are allowed to ask supplementary questions .
This is not an opportunity for you to give a lesson to the Commissioner in the reply , but of asking the questions which you consider to be appropriate .
I have no way of knowing previously whether you are going to ask a question , but I would ask you to obey the Rules of Procedure .
I would thank the Commissioner for his answer and should like to ask a question : where does Commissioner Kinnock believe that criticism ought to be directed ?
Should it be directed at the fact that some millions of euros which should have gone in aid have disappeared and that taxpayers ' money has been mismanaged ; or should it be directed against those who express their disappointment at the fact that these issues have not been successfully clarified ?
I think the answer should be simple , and I believe that the people of Europe also think the answer is obvious .
My second question concerns the fact that , if the Commission wrote a letter to former Commissioner Gradin , it must have believed that she had in some way attacked an individual .
I myself saw the TV programme and I am able to say that she did not do so .
She was completely loyal to the decisions taken in the Commission .
How could you believe that former Commissioner Gradin had directed criticism against individuals ?
You must obviously have thought she had done so , because you wrote the letter .
Thank you for your answer .
Mr Kinnock refers to the letter to Mrs Gradin and Mr Asp .
We have not of course read it directly , but a copy of the letter to Mr Asp - which I assume has been correctly reproduced - has now been published in the Swedish media which , after referring to the television programme , state that Mr Kinnock wrote in the following terms to Mr Asp : " As you perhaps know , this statement has , fairly or unfairly , been interpreted as criticism of the Commission as an institution .

Because you were formerly employed at the Commission , your statement raises the question of what kind of obligations you have because , as an employee , you have to comply with various terms of employment and Staff Regulations " .
Clearly , this can hardly be interpreted as anything other than an insinuation that Mr Asp did something he ought not to have done and that he might perhaps even deserve a reprimand .
My question , therefore , is as follows : what legal basis is there for this letter ?
What kind of legal regulations are there to say that former chefs de cabinet or Commissioners do not have the right to criticise the Commission as an institution , and on what legal basis are such people even to be reminded of Staff Regulations and their various terms of employment ?

Mr President , I would like first of all to say to Mr Färm by that if he examines the Staff Regulations to which Mr Asp is subject , then he will see the basis on which he was written to by his former employing authority and he will see that what was said in that letter was entirely in keeping with the regulations and the requirements of communication - no more , no less .
Mr Andersson may have his own view about the case that was referred to in the TV documentary .
That is not what this question is about and it is not what my letter to Mrs Gradin was about , but he is a democrat and he will understand .
In Sweden , as in any other Member State , or democratic society , caution must be exercised in making a declaration about anyone who has been acquitted of a particular charge that could imply defamation of that person .
That is a general rule that is understood and upheld by democrats everywhere , but in the case of the Commission as an employing institution , as I pointed out earlier , there is an additional implication that if a Commission official is attacked and if it is a Commission official in a specific case who has been acquitted under due process of a charge , than that official can make claims upon the Commission and therefore on taxpayers ' money under Article 24 of the Staff Regulations in order to fight that case of alleged defamation .
The point that I made to Mrs Gradin , which I am sure she completely understands - especially since I explained in full in my most recent letter , simply relates to that legal reality and the proper discharge of the functions of the Commission as a legally constituted organisation with obligations set down in law in the form of the Staff Regulations .
Mr Andersson may have his own views about the particular cases referred to in the TV documentary .
He is entitled to those views whether they are right , wrong , substantiated or otherwise , but he will understand , I am certain , that all the actions taken in relation to people named in that television documentary , and one in particular , relate to the legal questions - as I emphasised in my letter to Mrs Gradin and in my earlier reply - and not to wider judgments which may be a matter entirely for Mr Andersson 's view and his own conscience .
I will not say or do anything at any point which could result in unfair and unjustified charges on the Commission , the European Union and on the taxpayers ' money , when there are other means of ensuring that the law is upheld so far as individuals are concerned .
I say to Mr Gahrton that the problem is not one of transparency in this case , it is of the deficiencies either of his hearing or his understanding .
What I said was not ridiculous .
I will send him a copy of my reply and when I have the agreement of Mrs Gradin for the release of the letters that we exchanged , including my personal letter to her of 25 January , written in an official capacity , he can see it .
But I am sure that he will understand , as someone who observes the courtesies and recognises the basis on which a personal letter is written , that it is not for me to release a letter which I wrote to Mrs Gradin .
If Mrs Gradin wants to release it or gives me permission to release it , that is absolutely fine with me and , as I said , she has indicated by an indirect route that she would be agreeable to that .
I am not surprised at that - I know Anita Gradin very well - but until I have formal confirmation I cannot release the letter .
It is not in any way a secret .
I simply hope that Mr Gahrton 's powers of comprehension will advance greatly by the time that he reads the letter because he did not show much evidence in the course of his contribution of having any more than the most rudimentary understanding .
I have a supplementary question concerning the Commission ' s Information Office in Stockholm and its former head , Linda Steneberg .
As the Commissioner must know , a criminal investigation is under way concerning financial irregularities at the Commission ' s Office in Stockholm .
The Swedish police have begun questioning a number of the employees and wish to question Mrs Steneberg , who has now been promoted and works for the Commission in Brussels .
Mrs Steneberg is refusing to cooperate with the Swedish police and to travel to Stockholm for questioning .
Is it not reasonable for you , as the people with responsibility , to call upon your employees , or even order them , to appear for questioning so that financial crime that has taken place within the Commission ' s area of responsibility might be investigated ?
This question has absolutely nothing whatsoever to do with the question on the order paper .
I will , however , respond to it in the interests of transparency .
The person named by the honourable Member , who is a Commission official , has indicated total readiness to respond to all enquiries from the Swedish prosecutor .
That will take place in due course .
Question No 53 by ( H-0083 / 01 ) :
Subject : Candidates for Director-General posts The Commission 's memorandum on ' Targets for the Recruitment and Appointment of Women 2000 ' states that the proportion of women in A1 and A2 posts is to increase by 20 % by 2005 .
According to the latest information in my possession , there are still only 3 women among the Commission 's 49 Directors-General .
It is , therefore , surprising that the Commission has again appointed a man as Director-General for aid and development despite the fact that there was a very well qualified female candidate .
The selection board consisted of 8 men .
How is equality of opportunity safeguarded in the appointment of the Commission 's Directors-General ?
The Commission is very conscious of the need to increase the proportion of women in A1 and A2 grades .
It is for that reason that , since 1995 , annual targets are set for the appointment of women to these and to other management posts .
The Commission 's overall target , as announced at the beginning of our term of office in 1999 , is to double the number of women in these two grades during its term in office , thereby raising the number of women in A1 and A2 posts to 44 or about 20 % by 2005 .
To achieve this , the annual targets are set on the basis of anticipated turnover in the grades each year .
In 2000 the target for the appointment of women to A1 was two appointments and the target for A2 was five appointments .
These targets were exceeded with three new appointments being made to the A1 grade and seven new appointments to the A2 grade .
As a result , the current number of women at A1 level is four out of 54 and the number of women at A2 level is 21 out of 178 .
The Commission intends to continue its practice of setting annual targets because it has evidently assisted improvement in the gender balance , although patently not enough .
The Commission will adopt the annual target for 2001 next month .
In addition to the policy of target setting , the members of selection boards are reminded of the principles of equal opportunities to be taken into consideration in the selection of candidates .
The Commission seeks to appoint the most suitable candidate for a post and , where there are equal merits relating to the relevant post , to give priority to the female candidate .
The outcome must arise from objective assessment by the appropriate authority of each individual situation and is not therefore automatic for persons of either gender .
In the case referred to by the honourable Member , the advisory committee on appointments shortlisted a female candidate with good qualifications .
The Commission considered that the candidate chosen had a profile more particularly related to the tasks of the post in question .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Unfortunately , we women come up against a glass ceiling within the EU ' s institutions , too .
I am grateful for , and pleased with , the action plan with practical objectives you have taken as your starting point , but a timetable also needs to be established .
It is extremely gratifying that you should want to work to end discrimination but , since the Commission has now once again appointed a man to the post of Director-General - this time as the Development Directorate-General - I wonder if the Commission ' s objectives were just so much rhetoric .
The eight men on the selection board had to choose between a woman with wide political and administrative experience at a high level and solid experience abroad , and a man with no political background , less administrative experience and no experience abroad .
I can only draw the conclusion that the male candidate was appointed on a quota basis .
In Sweden , successful appeals are made to the Labour Market Court in cases involving considerably less flagrant discrimination than this one .
Is the Commission prepared to tear up its decision and give this post to the most competent candidate , or must an appeal be made to the European Court of Justice in this case ?
Is the Commission prepared in future to have at least 50 per cent women on its selection boards and not 100 per cent men ?
As the honourable Member underlines , the system that we are seeking to develop in the European Commission does not yet bear any comparison with arrangements that have existed in Sweden , and indeed in some other Member States , for some years .
We can do nothing more in the circumstances than continue to strive to meet the best standards which we heartily recommend to others throughout the European Union .
These are standards which I , and my colleagues in the current Commission , sincerely want to meet .
If I could respond to the specific issues raised by the honourable Member : there is not enough representation of women at any level , including the managerial ranks , in any of the European Union institutions .
We are , as the honourable Member was good enough to acknowledge , making a serious effort to improve upon that in the European Commission .
But in the European Parliament , for instance , I think I am right in saying that out of the ten directors only one is a woman .
The position in the Council , if anything , is not even as good as that .
So in each of the institutions , including the others like the Court of Justice and the Court of Auditors , there is patently need for very substantial improvement and I am very happy to have the opportunity at this Question Time in Parliament to underline that very forcibly yet again .
I believe we will reach the targets by 2005 .
They are not over-ambitious targets .
Indeed , several of us would argue in the current Commission that they are over-modest .
They are however realistic given our starting point .
What we hope will be the case is that by securing that at least 20 % of senior management jobs are in the hands of women by the end of this Commission , it will provide the incoming Commission with a much firmer and higher base from which to work towards genuine gender balance across the Commission , particularly in managerial roles .
I take the point that the honourable Member made about the single-sex nature of the selection board .
It is not in fact a selection board .
It is an advisory committee on appointments .
The final selection of candidates is made by the portfolio Commissioner , by myself as the Commissioner for Personnel Administration , and the President .
The basis on which the selection was made , as I said earlier , involved no criticism of , or disrespect for , the high qualifications of the woman candidate who came before us ; it related , as I said , to the fact that the candidate chosen had a profile more particularly suited to the tasks of the post in question .
No preference on gender grounds was shown towards a man .
Mr President , following on the discussion , would Mr Kinnock like to confirm to the House that career development based on performance and merit is going to be the foundation of the reforms that we approved in this House last year ?
Will he also take the opportunity to tell us what progress he is making in introducing structured performance appraisal throughout the Commission and in his moves towards a linear career structure .
Mr President , this question , as Mr Harbour will be aware , has direct relevance to the question raised by Mrs Theorin because we believe that amongst the many other justifications for making changes , as regards appraisal and the advance towards a more linear career structure , will be to give fairer treatment to women officials , and indeed to make the Commission more attractive for the employment of women , particularly women who have family obligations .
So far as progress is concerned , on 28 February 2001 the Commission will give consideration to a series of eight detailed draft proposals which will then be submitted for consultation to all the staff , and for formal negotiations to the staff representatives , as well as to two orientation papers , one of which relates to pay and pensions and the other to the more linear career system .
We are therefore at the point - on the linear career system , on systematic appraisal and on a host of complementary activities - of making formal proposals , and of beginning detailed consultations on them .
This is with a view , by the summer break , to compiling finalised proposals either for Commission decisions - which have the force of law - or proposals to this House and the Council where amendments to the Staff Regulations are required .
The support and interest of this House is invaluable in all of these reform activities , both those relating to improvement in the gender balance and , much more widely , those seeking to ensure improvements in the efficiency of Commission staff and in professional support for them .
I hope that this support and understanding will continue .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would be interested to know whether the country of origin is in fact also a criterion applied in selecting women .
Mr President , the Commission seeks to fulfil its obligations to maintain a reasonable gender balance , not only in managerial roles but right throughout the staff of the Commission .
The reason we do this is because this is a unique multinational and multilingual Union , and it is essential that the executive administration of the Union reflects the diversity of cultures and languages in the staffing of the Commission .
The same applies to trying to secure a much improved gender balance .
I can honestly say to the honourable gentleman that no preference is given on the basis of the sex of a person or the flag that they happen to be born under or the passport that they carry .
Consequently we will strive to maximise the premium allocated to merit , whilst trying at the same time , by a variety of practical means , to maintain an improved gender balance and also to sustain a regional geographical balance as befits our multinational organisation .
Questions to Commissioner Byrne
Question No 54 by ( H-0011 / 01 ) :
Subject : Decisions concerning BSE Will the Commission describe the position in the various Member States following the December 2000 decisions on action against BSE ?
How have the decisions been implemented in the individual countries and how is the Commission verifying proper compliance with them ?
What monitoring facilities have been set up ?
How is the Commission verifying that animal or bonemeal is not present in feedingstuffs in the individual Member States ?
Have all Member States got adequate residual capacity and full registration of livestock so that any infection can be traced ?
How many animals have accumulated in the individual countries ?
How much offal has accumulated for destruction and how is it being stored ?
The Commission has recently received information from the Member States on their implementation of BSE control measures , and in particular on the new measures on animal feed and the testing of animals for BSE .
The information was provided in response to a questionnaire sent to Member States on 5 January 2001 .
This questionnaire has enabled the Commission to obtain a reasonably complete picture of the way in which the measures are being implemented , and this seems broadly satisfactory .
A working document which summarises the responses of the Member States to this questionnaire was also circulated for discussion at the Agriculture Council on 29 January .
Member States are responsible for the implementation of these measures .
In the case of the feed ban , implementation includes regular microscopic examination of feedstuffs and inspection of feedstuff plants .
This in turn is audited by the personnel of the Food and Veterinary Office who have already visited a number of the Member States to this end since December 2000 , and intend to visit the rest early in 2001 .
The reports on these inspection visits will be made available to Parliament and published on the Internet in the usual manner .
Legislation on the identification and registration of bovine animals specifies that each Member State must set up a national database for bovine animals and that the computerised databases should become fully operational no later than 31 December 1999 .
The fully operational character of the national databases for bovine animals has been verified by the Commission for Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Finland , Luxembourg , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom as regards Northern Ireland .
Portugal , France and Germany have requested the recognition of the fully operational character of their national databases and the Commission is in the process of studying these requests .
The Commission does not have exact figures for the amount of processed animal protein that has accumulated in Member States .
It is aware that the disposal of this material poses a problem for some Member States and that those States are actively seeking a solution .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
I am very glad that we are to be told the result of the questionnaire at the next meeting of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I nonetheless sense from your answer that there is a very big difference between the status of the individual Member States , as we knew there was before 1 December .
Only a very short time has , of course , elapsed .
In view of the health situation , a particularly long period ought not to be allowed to elapse , out of consideration for both consumers and farmers .
This is also because , right now , there is distortion of competition between farmers in the individual Member States , because the compensation offered is very different from one country to another .
I hope it will not be the slowest , but the fastest , countries which set the pace , for I am completely convinced that it is in that way that we shall achieve a result in which all the current 15 EU countries have implemented these BSE decisions .
I am very concerned to ensure that we have Community measures in relation to all of these issues and that all Member States apply the Community law in the same way .
This was not necessarily the case earlier last year and towards the end of last year , but I see some signs that it might be achieved following the Community measures that have now been brought forward .
I have every hope that any differences that arise in Member States will soon be a thing of the past .
Question No 55 by ( H-0019 / 01 ) :
Subject : BSE What follow-up measures have been taken by the Commission and in the Member States in respect of Parliament 's 1997 report on BSE ? What measures is the Commission taking to ensure compliance with the Community legislation in force on prevention of this disease in the Member States ?
The Commission replied in its final consolidated report to Parliament 's report on BSE of 1997 by setting an ambitious work programme .
In two more biannual follow-up reports to Parliament it gave a broad overview of the emergency measures taken to combat BSE , to increase the safety of animal feed and to implement the new approach in the fields of scientific advice , risk analysis and inspection .
The Commission services have since been restructured to assure the independence and transparency of the scientific committees , the reinforcement of the inspectorate and the separation of consumer protection from the markets .
A solid body of legislative measures has been introduced on which the Commission has regularly reported to Parliament .
These measures include , for example , the requirement to remove and destroy specified risk materials , to pressure-cook animal waste and to actively survey the animal populations for the presence of TSEs .
The Commission has also made use of the new legal provision of the Treaty of Amsterdam to propose regulations under the codecision procedure on the prevention and control of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies and on the processing of animal by-products .
These regulations will bring together in a single substantive legal text a wide range of measures which are currently based on safeguard provisions of Community veterinary legislation .
If the negotiations run their course as expected , the regulation on TSEs should be adopted next month .
The proposed regulation on animal by-products is expected to be voted on by Parliament shortly .
In the meantime , the Commission continues to monitor the situation on the spot , requesting scientific advice and taking legal measures whenever needed .
The evidence resulting from the very regular visits of the Food and Veterinary Office and the scientific opinions of the Scientific Steering Committee has become the basis for the consumer protection policy of the Commission .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his reply and I take note of the fact that , from a legislative point of view , the Commission has made considerable progress since 1997 .
I would like to ask a supplementary question , as a result of the perplexity expressed by my constituents at the horrendous errors and contradictions of the Spanish authorities .
Specifically , a regional Agricultural Minister has ordered that dead cows be deposited in an open mine .
There have been statements from one minister saying one thing while another minister says the opposite .
At least in Germany ministers have resigned .
My question is : apart from legislative measures , does the Commission intend to take executive measures in relation to the Member States ?
Will the Commission exercise a greater presence in our States in order to offer the citizens guarantees ?
Has the Commission at any point considered employing infringement proceedings , by means of a letter of infringement , so that the Community citizens may realise that the Commission it truly fighting for their safety and health ?
The implementation by Member States of safety measures put in place at Community level is of crucial importance .
There is little point in passing legislation at Community level if it is not fully and rigorously implemented by the Member States .
There are a number of responses available to the Commission in the event that there is a persistent failure by any Member State to properly implement these safety laws .
These are , for instance , the initiation of infringement proceedings against that Member State or , alternatively , by taking Community measures which can be understood to mean the putting in place of safety provisions which would prevent the Member State in question from exporting its product .
In this instance I assume that when you are talking about these issues you are talking about beef .
These are obviously very powerful measures .
They are required to be brought into effect in circumstances where there is a failure by Member States to implement the safety provisions .
It is appropriate to bring these measures into place , however , only in circumstances where the breach has been persistent .
There has to be a pattern of behaviour by a Member State of ignoring the law .
One or two incidents would not trigger the infringement proceedings nor require the taking of Community measures .
This is an issue which is kept constantly under review by my services and myself to ensure that there is full compliance and to ensure that the consumers are properly and fully protected , both by the laws and the implementation of the laws .
Mr President , I am not going to spend or waste part of my time responding to or criticising any of the Member States who are or are not complying with the legislation , but I would like to ask the Commissioner a series of specific question on the issue of harmonisation .
If the Member States are required , and I am in agreement with this , Commissioner , to comply with the rules that are dictated from here , those rules need to be clear and the same for everybody .
What level of compliance can be demanded when we are talking about applying tests ?
A period of 30 months is imposed on the Member States and they agree to it , but there are , however , some Member States that already apply a period of 24 months .
What guarantees are being offered to consumers ?
Do you not think that this issue causes considerable alarm and insecurity among consumers ?
The same could be said about the issue of removing the vertebral column , on the subject of risk materials .
There is only talk of removing the vertebral column for two Member States and for animals of more than 30 months .
There are exceptions for some Member States , but what are they ?
And what is the reason for them ?
Why , on 7 February of this year , did the Standing Veterinary Committee carry out the evaluation for removing the vertebral column from animals of more than 12 months ?
Where is the harmonisation ?
It is very difficult , Commissioner , for safety assurances to be given to consumers with regard to beef when there is legislative dysfunction .
It is important to understand what we are talking about .
I understand that the honourable Member is asking me about the measure that was introduced last week at the SVC for the removal of the vertebral column as distinct from the spinal cord .
The spinal cord has been designated as a specified risk material ( SRM ) for a long time and has been removed in many Member States as such for a long time ; it has been removed now as a matter of law in the European Union by all Member States since 1 October 2000 .
If you are referring to the vertebral column , I will deal with that aspect of your question by saying that the proposal that I put before SVC for their decision last week was firmly based on the advice of the Scientific Steering Committee .
The situation is that something over 95 % of the infectivity is located in the SRM in an infected animal .
The removal of the vertebral column is regarded by the scientists to account for an additional couple of percentage points so that , in the context of the whole question of the removal of specific risk material , this is an ultra-precautionary measure .
In advising whether this should be done , the Scientific Steering Committee examined the available evidence from Member States and came to the conclusion that it was appropriate to remove the vertebral column in circumstances where Member States did not have a substantially BSE-free regime or did not have control measures in place which would be equivalent to very low BSE-incidence .
Bearing in mind that advice , a conclusion was reached that it was appropriate to grant waivers to the five Member States that you are referring to , two of them because they had very rigorous control measures in place , and the other three because they were in category 2 of the geographical risk assessment that was published last July , thereby identifying those Member States as being at very low risk .
Accordingly , the waivers were granted in those circumstances .
It is a Community-wide measure .
It applies to all Member States .
However , in circumstances where it is appropriate , in the individual circumstances of an individual Member State , and strictly on the advice of scientists who advise me , it was considered appropriate to allow for derogations .
Not only did the Scientific Steering Committee give advice on which that decision was based , but the Standing Veterinary Committee came to the same conclusion , as did the Commission .
This was a justifiable response .
There are many Member States which take the view that I went too far .
There are Member States that take the view that I did not go far enough .
Proportionate responses in these circumstances are what we tried to achieve .
With regard to the 24 months , I assume that you are referring to the fact that there is a requirement to test animals above the age of 30 months .
There is one Member State that has reduced that on its own territory to 24 months , but that has absolutely no trade implications between that State and other Member States ; that Member State has presumably concluded that it would be worthwhile reducing it to 24 months having regard to the age profile of a couple of positives that they have found .
I substantially agree with the basis of your question , which is that it is better to have Community measures right across the board rather than have individual measures , but sometimes individual Member States or a particular measure that is somewhat different from the Community measure can be justified in circumstances where a particularly unique situation is obtained in a Member State .
Question No 56 by ( H-0021 / 01 ) :
Subject : BSE and consumption of cattle bones The Spanish Minister for Health recently aroused concern among consumers in Spain when she advised ' housewives ' not to buy ' cheap meat ' and not to use cattle bones when making stock .
Does the Commission consider that any link exists between the price of meat on the market and consumer guarantees ?
Does the Commission believe that cattle bones present risks and have to be banned ?
Is their sale outlawed in any Member State ?
If so , does the ban operate across the board , or does it affect only a particular type of bone ?
Community hygiene legislation applies to all meat or meat products irrespective of their price , ensuring the same high level of consumer protection .
It is not acceptable that cheap meat should be less safe than dearer meat .
The Commission is very carefully following all issues relating to material which could present risks as regards transmissible spongiform encephalopathies .
In this context , it gave a prominent mandate to the Scientific Steering Committee to review the current list of so-called specified risk material if new scientific evidence becomes available in this field .
In June 2000 the Commission adopted Decision 2000 / 418 / EC which requires the removal of a series of bovine , ovine and caprine tissues from food and feed chains .
In particular it provides that bones of the skull from cattle over 12 months of age have to be banned in all Member States .
In addition , it extends the list of specified risk material to the vertebral column of bovine animals over 30 months of age in the United Kingdom and Portugal .
Following further opinions of the Scientific Steering Committee , the Commission presented a proposal at the Standing Veterinary Committee meeting of 7 February , which designated the vertebral column as a specified risk material to be removed and destroyed for cattle over the age of 12 months .
This proposal was accepted by the Standing Veterinary Committee and , when it is formally adopted , Member States will be required to ensure removal of the vertebral column .
This may take place at the point of sale , that is in the butchers ' shops , from 31 March 2001 .
The proposal included provisions for derogations from the obligation to remove the vertebral column , on the basis of scientific committee opinions , for five Member States - Austria , Finland , Portugal , Sweden and the United Kingdom .
This derogation is conditional on continued and improved surveillance for the presence of BSE in those Member States , with increased testing of certain categories of animals required .
The derogations will be reviewed if necessary in the light of the results of these tests and further scientific advice .
Mr President , I think that Mrs Redondo expressed it very well in her speech and that , indeed , in this BSE crisis there are Member States who are advantaged pupils , who prepare for the examinations months in advance , and others , such as ours , the government of my country , who are at the bottom of the class , prepare for the examinations five minutes before and when they fail , blame the teacher .
And this teacher is you , Commissioner .
The Spanish Government became aware of the first case of BSE in October , although it kept it a secret until December .
The lack of transparency and the improvisation with which my country ' s government is acting with regard to the crisis are , in my opinion , the reason for the massive drop in consumption in Spain , for which the cattle farming sector is paying . This is especially the case for my region , Galicia , where cows are an element of social cohesion and , more importantly , are - as a well-known and admired writer says - a totem .
I therefore ask you : can the Commissioner give assurances to consumers that in Spain the measures adopted by the European Union are now being fully complied with ?
Are there any future measures for which we should be preparing ourselves ?
As I said in response to an earlier question , I firmly believe that the implementation of the safety measures is of critical importance and that this implementation must be rigorously applied in all Member States .
I have written to Member States , I am regularly in contact with Member States , I discuss this issue in the Agriculture Council quite regularly , and the importance of the implementation of laws is something that the Ministers for Agriculture and the governments in Member States are fully aware of .
I agree with you in the event that there is a failure in the implementation of the laws which we have put into place , that this can result in a falling-off in consumer confidence .
If consumers feel that the laws that have been put in place for their benefit are not fully implemented , then they see themselves as being at risk .
I believe that all Member States now fully understand the importance of this .
There may have been some laxity in some Member States in the past but I am quite convinced now , from my observation of the situation and from hearing the observations of , in particular , Ministers for Agriculture and Health in the various Councils , that there is a full and complete appreciation of the need to fully implement the legislation .
There are renewed efforts in all Member States to achieve this for the benefit of consumer health .
Commissioner , are you aware of , and do you agree with , the fact that in Spain the Guardia Civil is the new authority responsible for ensuring food safety for European citizens , that it is responsible for ensuring food safety with regard to BSE ?
Are you aware that the Guardia Civil does not reveal the identity of some of those arrested for meat meal fraud ?
Do you agree with this ?
Are you aware that this afternoon Mr Fischler said to us in this House that it is not necessary to sacrifice all the animals on a farm where only one case has been declared ?
And are you aware that the Spanish Minister for Agriculture - they do not allow the Minister for Health to talk - is saying that we absolutely have to slaughter all the animals ?
Is this not a contradiction ?
Are you aware that what citizens are receiving is this contradictory and chaotic information ?
What do you say about the issue of the Guardia Civil ?
Answer me please .
Mr President , I imagine that the involvement of the Guardia Civil in these circumstances probably relates to what you identified yourself : in circumstances where there is a failure to comply with the law by some meat plant or somebody else who has a responsibility to handle meat , a criminal offence may very well have taken place and in such circumstances it is probably appropriate that there is a criminal investigation .
The specifics of the involvement of the Guardia Civil in this particular issue is something that I have not got any detailed information on but I assume that the involvement is in the way that I have identified .
In response to your question about the culling of animals in circumstances where there is a positive finding relating to a herd , at present it is a decision for the Member State involved to determine whether it is appropriate to cull the entire herd or not .
It is a matter for the Member State to decide .
Some Member States do that .
Other Member States choose to kill all cohorts which is obviously a different defence or protection measure and there are those who take the view that it is at least as good and may even be better .
As I stated , it is a matter for each Member State to decide how to respond in these circumstances .
I also wish to draw your attention to the fact that the TSE regulation is now passing through the legislative process , as I mentioned in answer to an earlier question .
That regulation provides for the culling of the herd and the killing of cohorts and it also provides for other measures that a Member State notifies to the Commission which the Commission , through its scientific advisers , is satisfied provides at least the same degree of protection for consumer health .
That other measure can be allowed in those circumstances .
In reply to your question on the culling of the entire herd , that is a matter entirely within the competence of the Member State to decide .
Mr President , can I ask the Commissioner specifically : are bones for soup stock other than the vertebrae and skull perfectly safe and all right to use ?
Is osso buco , which I think is made from the shank of cattle , all right to eat and is oxtail , which is actually I suppose an extension of the vertebrae , all right to eat ?
As I indicated in the earlier part of my answer , the bones that are identified as being required to be removed are those that are specified risk material .
Any other material from an animal which does not fall within the definition of specified risk material is fit for human consumption .
Mr Carnero González has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I will try to be precise and quick in expressing my surprise that 8 questions , from various Members , on the same subject , the Western Sahara , have been included on the agenda in the third block of this sitting , and it is therefore impossible for the Commission to answer .

I would like the President of Parliament to explain what criteria are used to make such decisions , because , quite simply , I find them very hard to understand .
Mr Carnero , when Question Time began , I pointed out the criteria , which are in the Rules of Procedure and the directives annexed to the Rules of Procedure and in the letters that the President of Parliament - not of the sitting - sends to Members .
The problem is then of exactly defining the criteria .
In any case , I am certainly taking note of this matter , which I will of course pass on to the President of Parliament .
As the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 59 to 118 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Deliberate release of GMOs into the environment
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms .

Mr President , I congratulate Mr Bowe on the report and on the positions assumed which , given the thorny nature of the issue of genetically modified organisms , is genuinely well-balanced .
What is the conclusion ?
The conclusion is that rules and monitoring are necessary .
I am sure that we will be able to find some point of contention - for example , the issues of traceability and labelling remain unresolved - but given the crucial need for regulation , I feel that this task has been more than adequately performed .
It must also be remembered that there are many things at stake in this complex matter of genetically modified organisms : it could even be said that , from many points of view , the role of the European Union itself is at stake with regard to many of its forthcoming commitments , such as the World Trade Organisation reforms , the research programme we are about to launch , the development and employment programmes , the relations which will ensue from the creation of new markets , and the globalisation processes which will lead to the redefinition of economic processes .
So , as far as GMOs are concerned , we must not forget that the situations in many different countries are different .
I would mention , at random , China , South Africa and Mexico , which already grow genetically modified organisms , and other countries such as Cuba which we know are preparing to do so ; then there are other countries again , such as Nigeria , Thailand and the Philippines , which are extremely interested in the potential offered by biotechnologies .

So the question is this : what role does the Union intend to play in a future which has already become present reality ?
I feel that the answer which is most relevant to the European Parliament 's role can only be to set a course and establish a strategy which reflect a position of total involvement .
This does not mean either accepting or rejecting , and still less bringing forward or extending the time frames .
Above all , it means giving a sort of green light to all studies , applications or patents relating to biotechnologies .
The Bowe report has more than succeeded in achieving this result .
Mr President , the result of the conciliation that we have before us is a substantial improvement upon the rules for the release of GMOs into the environment .
We are to obtain more stringent risk assessment requirements .
The long-term effects of the many authorisations are also to be looked into .
We are to have better monitoring , and we are to see time limits placed upon individual authorisations .
I think that all this together will make an important contribution to the protection of the environment and the protection of public health .
However , I have a couple of questions for the Commission about a number of matters I think it is important to have clarified today , for there are , of course , still a number of deficiencies in this area .
Firstly , I would ask the Commission to give an assurance today that , whenever we devise vertical legislation in different areas concerned with GMO crops , we also make sure that this vertical legislation respects the general directive we are now adopting on releases into the environment .
My second question concerns labelling and traceability , for I really find it worrying that the Commission has not by now been in a position to submit a proposal on labelling .
On this matter too , however , I would ask that we be given a more detailed explanation of the letter sent by Commissioner Byrne and Commissioner Wallström to the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and stating the desire to provide citizens with better information on GMOs .
I do not think that the word " better " is enough .
It is important for full information to be given and for there not , therefore , to be a system provided in which there are still a whole lot of gaps in the information given to consumers about GMOs .
We are not interested in buying a pig in a poke .
It is important that we obtain real consumer choice and that short measure is not given in this area . I therefore hope that we can obtain a statement on this issue today .
I could also do with an assurance from the Commission that , as has been mentioned , the way to new authorisations will not be opened until the new rules have come into force in 2002 .
The desire to insert conditions corresponding to the new rules in any authorisations given before the law comes into force is , of course , very commendable . However , if the law has not come into force , then it will not , of course , be possible to enforce these rules if the authorised businesses contravene them .
I am therefore definitely of the view that one ought to respect the fact that the legislation must come into force before a start is made on issuing authorisations under the new rules .
That is the only way we can be sure that it will , in actual fact , also be possible to enforce the rules .
Mr President , rapporteur Bowe concluded that the conciliation procedure concerning the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms had a satisfactory outcome overall .
The Liberal Group would agree with this , although naturally there is still room for improvement , for example regarding the protection of biodiversity , but these are matters to be revisited at a later date .
The primary objective of the new directive is the safety of the environment and public health .
It follows logically from this that although it may be acceptable to use GMOs , there must always be systematic , independent and in-depth research prior to the release , into the potential risks to the environment and to public health .
What is important in this respect is that the directive introduces mandatory monitoring after the placing on the market of GMO products and a mandatory time limitation of maximum ten years for first-time consent .
This will enable us to encourage research into and use of GMOs on the one hand , whilst still being able to monitor the situation .
Comprehensive information promotes the consumer ' s freedom of choice .
The consumer must be able to have absolute certainty as to whether a particular product does or does not contain GMOs .
The only way to do this is through labelling which is the very model of clarity .
So we are pleased to hear that the Commission is planning to produce proposals along these lines in the very near future .
Lastly , I am delighted that the Commission has pledged to bring forward proposals for supplementary liability provisions for the various types of environmental damage in all areas of the European Union , before the end of this year .
It is still extremely important to keep a close eye on all the risks of damage to the environment and public health , and to restrict them using all possible means .
Mr President , Commissioner , the matter before us today is to determine whether or not tomorrow ' s vote will result in the lifting of the moratorium on authorisations for the cultivation and placing on the market of GMOs .
The answer is , quite clearly , no , it will not .
We must pursue the moratorium since the revised 90 / 220 Directive does not meet all the requirements that we stipulated at the beginning .
While there has been some improvement , amongst other things , in the biological monitoring of future affected areas , inasmuch as it is possible to actually identify such areas , this will , however , be at the discretion of the relevant authorities .
The final compromise does not respond to consumer concerns , since consumers would like to see guarantees of food safety and to see proper assessment of the risks of releasing GMOs into the environment being carried out .
The BSE crisis could have been avoided , had more courageous decisions been taken as soon as the first warning signs emerged .
We must not make the same mistake twice .
I hope that the Commission will shortly outline proposals to guarantee the complete traceability of GMOs and to establish a reliable labelling system for all GMO-derived products .
Only then will we be able to authorise the release of GMOs into the environment .
Mr President , the rapporteur , Mr Bowe , was right when he said this afternoon that not only his work but also the work of Parliament has moved this directive forward a great deal in terms of standards and restrictive use .
However , I would like to point out the concerns that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and Parliament had at first and second reading .
I do not think that we can talk about all of them now , in the time that we have , but I will mention the use of antibiotic-resistant marker genes , the need to respect the Cartagena commitment ( the international agreement ) , the civil responsibility clause , preventing this cultivation from being extended to other plants , the public register of plantations and the localisation of genetically modified organisms and the very serious subject of exports with initial consent and agreement .
Some of these concerns were taken up during the conciliation procedure , but there are others that are still a commitment and some others that may require long periods of time , for example the disappearance of the use of antibiotic-resistant marker genes .
In our opinion there are currently public health problems related to resistance to antibiotics , and there are infections that used to be cured with common antibiotics which cannot now be cured , not only naturally , but due to genetically modified products , due to the presence of other antibiotics , for example in livestock .
However , the time-scales are long and the problem is already there .
We think that there are other promises , which are only promises , that can be fulfilled , that perhaps the Commission is fulfilling , but we think that the moratorium should continue until all of this legislation is in force , Mr President .
I will finish by saying that this afternoon there was a speech from Mr Fischler in which he spoke about the economic catastrophe that BSE represents for Europe .
Let us not fall into this error again , that is , let us not take measures in a hurry , taking into account economic interests , if this carries risks for food safety and could later be an economic catastrophe as well as a food catastrophe .
Mr President , over the last few years we have seen a completely new development : the conversion of pharmaceutical companies into biotechnology companies , an explosion in the number of companies specialising in the development of genetically modified organisms , a steady increase in the allocation of public and private funds to support research in the field of genetics , the legal race to patent GMO seeds and even to patent the manipulation of the human genome , the truly astonishing speed of mergers and break-ups between biotech companies and even the emergence of new political frontiers and a new debate on ethics , agriculture , public health , the environment , hunger and poverty .
In short , biotechnology is bringing about a real revolution in science , economics and politics .
A revolution that brings hope but which also involves risks .
Therefore , the ' yes , because I say so ' or ' no , because I say so ' forms of fundamentalism will get us nowhere .
The answer lies in a fair balance between the freedom to conduct research and the need to protect public health and the environment .
I feel that this revision of the directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms respects this balance because , on the one hand , it does not impose restrictions on research or experiments and on the other , it lays down clearer and more restrictive rules on the release of GMOs into the environment , thereby protecting consumers and biodiversity .
Nevertheless , the revision of this directive will only be complete when the Commission goes ahead with legislative initiatives that implement , in a way that leaves no room for doubt , the principles that are now being declared on imposing responsibility for the environment and for the labelling and traceability of products containing GMOs .
Mr President , we have already talked a great deal about genetic modification here in Parliament .
Some of us believe that biotechnology has a glorious future ahead , whilst others are sceptical and point to the dangers , the risks and the scientific uncertainty .
Parliament has three tasks when it comes to the issues surrounding GMOs , the first being to create a vision .
A vision that points the way and is broadly based .
That is precisely what Parliament has had such a struggle with .
The parliamentary majority swings back and forth between the position of NGOs and that of the business community .
Given the polarisation of opinion , sound admission procedures are a must , i.e. procedures that guarantee safety , afford the consumer and the environment protection and uphold the precautionary principle .
The review of Directive 90 / 220 strikes a good balance , the best in the world in fact .
I think that we , together with the rapporteur , can be proud of the negotiated outcome .
Our second task is to take decisions and to foster decision making .
We must put an end to all the legal uncertainty within the industry .
A tricky situation has arisen within the industry in recent years .
There is a de facto moratorium but no decision has ever been taken to this effect .
We must make a breakthrough here , but this will only be possible if there are sufficient safeguards for consumers and if we can offer them legal certainty .
Consumers must have a choice and the Commission must provide guarantees to this effect .
Parliament ' s third task is to take responsibility .
If we want to give the go-ahead , then we must also be prepared to take the responsibility that goes with it .
Why not give ourselves some encouragement by pointing out that the old situation was worse and that it will be possible for there to be a moratorium in the new situation .
But as I see it , we must also have the courage to say that with this directive , we have incorporated sufficient safeguards to give biotechnology a chance in Europe .
Each product must be examined in order to ascertain whether it satisfies requirements , but our responsibility goes further than that .
Parliament must continue to press for a form of monitoring of the social implications of biotechnology .
The assessment must not be restricted to matters of safety alone .
The usefulness to society of biotechnological inventions must form part of the assessment carried out by governments and the business community , so that we can go a step beyond the safety aspect .
This will benefit consumers all over the world , as well as industry .
Mr President , I would point out a paradox : the transgenic plant multinationals say that they are already ready to replace antibiotic-resistant marker genes with alternatives , but if that is so , why are they asking to be able to continue to use these markers until 2004 , until 2008 for laboratory use ?
And is the fact that they are planning to replace them not the same as admitting that they are dangerous , contrary to what they have always maintained hitherto ?
So let us not lose sight of the fact that all those transgenic plants which it is intended to release into the environment and onto the markets carry these markers , which means that there are two conflicting truths , and where there are two conflicting truths , one is always a lie .
I am in no way opposed to science , but I am against reckless scientists whose thoughts are often of the gold mine of patents rather than the advance of knowledge .
Moreover , remember BSE .
Mr President , it will only become apparent in the distant future as to whether genetic modification is a blessing to humanity or a curse .
It was human beings that brought a plague of rabbits to America and Australian muskrats that undermine the Dutch dykes .
Subsequently , human beings saddled the world with chemical waste dumps and dumping sites for radioactive waste .
Recently , we have let an AIDS epidemic run riot and we have allowed mad cow disease to develop .
This has all come about owing to a combination of ignorance , impatience , laziness and pursuit of profit .
If we had known then what we know now , I am sure we would have done things differently .
If , before long , people start getting ill from consuming new products , existing plants and animals are supplanted by other species , and existing living beings are no longer resistant to new diseases , then we will know that we have made another big mistake .
So we have every reason to restrict our activities to scientific research for the time being , and to isolate all new products that emerge from this .
Unfortunately , we are now giving way to the pressure exerted by industry to permit commercial applications .
This is undoubtedly highly lucrative for these companies , but it will cost society as a whole enormously in the longer term .
It seems that the choice with regard to genetic modification is now between maintaining the old regulation , which is poor , but which does at least include a moratorium , and a new regulation , which is somewhat better but will abolish the moratorium .
I have noted that the actual choice cannot be made on the basis of this document .
Mr President , questions such as the presence of GMOs in our food and uncertainty about their effects on humans and on the environment are now in the public domain , and that is for the best .
In France , the press gave a great deal of coverage to the European Parliament vote on this directive at second reading .
French and European citizens alike are expecting the Members they elected to have a clear standpoint - the scandals involving contaminated blood and mad cow disease should give them a right to this , as if any justification were necessary .
Along with other Members , I believe that the findings of the Conciliation Committee fall far short of alleviating the concerns voiced by European society .
The notorious lack of any requirement for traceability is a source of provocation to all the people who wish , quite legitimately , to be kept informed .
Yet , the right to information is not always acknowledged .
The proposed regulations must guarantee the reliable labelling and traceability of GMOs and derived products .
In addition , we must ensure that those who produce and release GMOs are held responsible .
We must denounce the lobbying by unscrupulous laboratories and the multinational companies who represent them .
To sum up , I would like to take the opportunity afforded by the final reading of the directive in order to highlight the responsibility of the Council , which failed to adopt all Parliament ' s amendments after first reading which went in this direction and which would have produced a quite different text .
What is going to be adopted as the definitive text is in danger of completely invalidating the moratorium of June 1999 , whereas the precautionary principle would instead put the lives and health of men and women before any other considerations , especially financial considerations .
Mr President , I would like first to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bowe , and the members of the committee for their excellent and flexible cooperation during conciliation on such a complex piece of legislation .
We are now nearing the end of a long debate which started as long ago as December 1996 when the Commission presented the report on the review of Directive 90 / 220 concerning GMOs .
During that period the European public has become increasingly aware of the application of new technologies and has raised genuine and rightful concerns , in particular , with respect to the different ways that biotechnology can affect everyday life .
The Commission has no doubt that this piece of legislation responds to these concerns in a transparent and responsible manner and constitutes an important first milestone towards restoring public and market confidence .
During the debate , several Members of Parliament reminded the Commission of its intention to present appropriate proposals concerning traceability and labelling of GMOs and products derived from them .
The process has already started and I can confirm that the interservice consultation within the Commission on a draft proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation concerning traceability and labelling of GMOs was launched yesterday and will be decided in the Commission at the beginning of March .
This proposal will , among other things , ensure that each consumer product which contains a GMO will be marked as such on the label .
It will also ensure that GMOs can be identified at all stages of the production chain .
It will allow control measures for withdrawal from the market in case of unforeseen events after placing on the market and appropriate labelling .
By June 2001 the Commission will present labelling proposals which are designed to give consumers more information about food derived from GMOs .
We are in particular considering moving away from the present approach of the DNA-protein criterion .
Such an approach will give consumers maximum choice between genetically modified and conventional products .
These proposals will include processed food in the labelling systems .
Finally , I will again reaffirm the Commission 's intention to present before the end of the year , a proposal for a directive on environmental liability which will include GMOs .
As I said before , we are now approaching the end of a long debate concerning the revision of Directive 90 / 220 .
This text already includes general legal obligations concerning traceability and labelling .
It will set the basic rules for an overall legislative framework in biotechnology .
It is therefore of the utmost importance that this directive is adopted now , paving the way towards a strict , transparent , efficient and predictable authorisation system for GMOs .
Mr President , after three years ' work on this report it is difficult not to be a little emotional .
Having heard what has been said by my colleagues tonight , I want first of all to say how much I appreciate the kind words about the work I have done in the last three years and how delighted I am with the final outcome : a set of legislation which will provide the toughest laws on GMOs in the world .
There is no question that this House and the other European institutions will be taking their responsibilities to the people of Europe seriously when they approve this legislation tomorrow .
There is one point of confusion which I wish to clear up .
Many speakers have spoken about the problem of a moratorium .
This is an informal gentleman 's agreement , as it is called , between the Commission and the Council .
Approving our legislation tomorrow will do nothing to lift this moratorium or change the situation with regard to the moratorium .
That is a decision that has to be taken between the Member States and the Commission .
What they do will decide what happens to the moratorium , not what we do tomorrow .
What we must do tomorrow is support this piece of legislation because without it we do not go forward , we go backwards .
Without it , we do not go forward into a strong regime of legislative control , we go backwards to the old directive , the discredited directive , which is of no use to any of us .
It has caused the Commission and the Council to halt the approval of GMOs and has caused this Parliament to work for nearly three years on replacing it .
We know very well that this is just the first step in the process .
There is other legislation under way .
We had the privilege - and I thank the Commission for this - of seeing its draft legislation , the regulation which has already today been passed for consultation within the Commission .
At first appearance , this document seems to be an important and very good step in the right direction and I am sure it is going to join the 92 / 20 revised directive within months as part of the legislative framework to control GMOs .
I can only say to the House that we must accept our responsibilities .
We must do what we have to do for the people of Europe and that is to support this piece of legislation tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Community Eco-Management and Audit Scheme ( EMAS )
The next item is the report ( A5-0033 / 2001 ) by Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council regulation allowing voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco ­ management and audit scheme ( EMAS ) [ C5-0661 - 1998 / 0303 ( COD ) ] .
, rapporteur . ( ES ) Mr President , almost eight years have gone by since the appearance , in June 1993 , of the Community regulation allowing voluntary participation by companies in a Community eco-management and audit scheme .
This regulation , known by its acronym EMAS , opened up the use of market mechanisms in order for organisations to make a voluntary commitment to adopting a more pro-active approach to improving their environmental performance .
Its success depended largely on the concept thriving that the environment can and should be part of business strategies as another factor which , as well as environmental safety , provides added value for the business itself .
It represents a considerable change in mentality for the business world to consider respect for the environment more as a factor of competitiveness and progress , rather than as an annoying legal obligation , in many cases at heavy financial cost and with a questionable degree of appreciation of the effort on the part of consumers .
This revised and updated regulation makes an important contribution to a modern environmental policy , in accordance with the principles of sustainable development , important for real improvement in the environmental behaviour of companies and also for the recognition of this improvement by others , particularly by consumers .
During these eight years of practical application we have learnt various lessons .
The first is its use as a market tool .
Almost 3 100 industrial establishments across Europe have participated in this system , which is growing in numbers at a pace of nearly 50 % per year .
Despite this significant development , there is still potential for progress .
The new regulation therefore incorporates several considerations facilitating participation by European companies in this environmental improvement system .
It is worth highlighting the extension of the scope of application to all types of organisations , including the service sector , and the possibility of incorporating public administration , establishing incentives and special consideration by public administrations for certified companies when awarding public contracts , encouraging participation among small- and medium-sized enterprises , coordination between the European system and other international environmental certification systems .
In this last aspect there has been considerable simplification and unification of nomenclature and requirements , which will provide significant clarification of the role that EMAS should play in the European context .
Another of the lessons that we have learnt is the need to maintain and even increase the credibility of the system .
This text has stepped up measures to ensure its quality and credibility , as well as public access to information .
The role of the environmental statement is increasing , as is the work of the environmental verifiers , who have to check that organisations are complying with the requirements of this regulation .
These requirements have also been strengthened by Parliament ' s amendments , of which the following stand out : the obligation to comply with environmental legislation by participating companies , establishing more demanding standards for the qualification and training of the environmental verifiers who accredit the companies , public reports on the environmental performance of companies , with absolute credibility for third parties , greater involvement of the interested parties in the process of monitoring the environmental performance of companies and , in particular , of employees and users , extension of environmental responsibility , which goes beyond the company ' s facilities , to include indicators of the performance of products and services , in line with the approach of the new environmental directives , and also an increase in the role of the coordinating bodies with the aim of facilitating the homogenous application of the system in the various Member States .
In order to arrive at the results that I have just mentioned , I have to say that the conciliation procedure was extremely positive and interesting .
We arrived at it with 24 amendments , of which only 4 were accepted without change and 3 were withdrawn in the course of the negotiations .
20 amendments were accepted on the basis of compromise formulations , which gives an idea of the intensity and the success of the negotiations .
I would therefore like to thank the experts from Parliament , the Commission and the Council for the work that they did during that period , and the members of the Conciliation Committee for being willing to make a decided effort to strengthen this directive .
I think that the European Parliament can consider the final result of the conciliation to be very satisfactory , given that the large majority of its amendments have been incorporated fully or in revised form into the joint text , and I therefore propose that it be approved tomorrow in Parliament at third reading .
Mr President , the rapporteur has already explained that the European Parliament helped to get EMAS II , as it is referred to , framed more strictly and not watered down too much ; she also explained that the Conciliation Committee refused to give ground and did not deviate from the fundamental requirements for this voluntary eco-audit system .
It is precisely because this is a voluntary eco-audit system that we need to give it credibility and we have succeeded in achieving this in our dealings with the Council .
I believe a basic requirement of EMAS II is to ensure that existing environmental legislation is respected .
It would have been a disgrace if this principle had been dropped at third reading .
We have also succeeded in achieving greater transparency , that is improved information for the public and other stakeholders .
My group also thought it was very important for employees and their representatives to be actively involved in the organisation .
There has been a great deal of discussion about this request , and it is evident that the somewhat more complicated wording now found in the text is more to the liking of those representing the Council than the very clear requirement which the European Parliament had originally formulated .
My group is nevertheless satisfied , and on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists I would like to emphasise once again that both legal compliance and the involvement of employees and those representing them are important for EMAS , and I await the Commission 's assessment with bated breath .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur on producing a result that is good for Parliament .
I also think it very important that the whole basis for working has been the notion that first we have to endorse current legislation and then these voluntary agreements can be made in addition .
In fact , working on this basis we could imagine too that in the future new agreements could be made with companies .
We must clearly define those areas in which we should try to achieve important goals as far as the environment is concerned faster and perhaps more effectively , within the framework of legislation .
This proposal is now extending the system that has been in force since 1993 by including various organisations having environmental impacts .
We are no longer just speaking about industrial companies , which is good .
Pro-active participation in matters of the environment is important not only for the environment but also for businesses themselves .
The present-day consumer is laying ever greater emphasis on the environmental impact of products when they make spending decisions .
It has been quite rightly said that for this system to be implemented effectively it will take commitment on the part of staff to common values .
This in turn will require employees to be properly informed , but they must also be given the opportunity to make their own contribution to the development of environmentally friendly action .
It is inevitable that joining an eco-management scheme will require a commitment to making regular environment-related declarations and reports , substantiated by independent experts , and to making them public .
I believe that we are all very pleased that the EMAS regulation which the Commission proposed in October 1998 is now entering the final stage of its adoption .
The EMAS regulation which you are considering will set up a solid environmental management system capable of allowing organisations in many activity sectors to have a better environmental performance .
It will provide an appropriate answer to the necessity of making both private and public sectors aware of their responsibilities towards our environment on which their activities have an impact .
Last , but not least , the EMAS regulation will lead to the disclosure of reliable environmental information and provide for interaction between different interest groups .
This will be an important step in helping to build a bridge between economic operators and public authorities on the one hand , and citizens on the other .
It is therefore with great pleasure that I welcome the agreement on a joint text reached on 22 November 2000 by the Conciliation Committee .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo , as well as all the members of the parliamentary delegation and the Conciliation Committee .
Allow me also to hope that European institutions will set an example to contribute to the development of EMAS by applying it themselves .
This will be good for the environment and beneficial to the credibility of the European institutions .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Food supplements
The next item is the report ( A5-0025 / 2001 ) by Mrs Müller , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to food supplements [ COM ( 2000 ) 222 - C5-0234 / 2000 - 2000 / 0080 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , I would ask permission to speak regarding the Rules of Procedure .
The proposal for a directive which is being debated ought to be rejected pursuant to Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure which specifies that , at the beginning of the debate on a specific item on the agenda , its inadmissibility may formally be moved .
I am making such a proposal , and the reason why I think the proposal for a directive ought to be considered inadmissible is that it is , in my view , contrary to the Treaty .
It is contrary to Article 152 of the Treaty , relating to public health , and there is no doubt that this proposal for a directive is entirely motivated by a concern to protect public health .
Article 152 specifies that incentive measures may be taken , but excluding any harmonisation of the laws and regulations of the Member States .
The proposal in question provides for a particularly intensive harmonisation of the laws and regulations of the Member States and is therefore contrary to Article 152 .
I searched the Commission ' s proposal and Mrs Müller ' s report in vain for a discussion of this question of where authority lies .
I think the debate should be considered inadmissible until it has been clarified that the problem of authority is in order , and I would request that a vote be taken .
Does anyone wish to speak for the motion ?
Mr President , I should like to speak in favour of the proposal , for it must stand to reason that Parliament has to keep to the basis of the Treaty .
If there is the slightest suspicion that Parliament is not complying with the basis of the Treaty , then negotiations should be suspended until the matter has been clarified .
Does anyone wish to speak against the motion to consider the report unacceptable ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when the Commission presents a proposal for a directive to us , I naturally assume that it is legally in order .
That is one of the reasons why I was appointed rapporteur .
I believe that there can be no question of our not voting on this directive .
We have heard one speech for the motion and one against .
For the sake of clarity : if you vote for this motion , you consider this report unacceptable .
If you vote against the motion , you consider it acceptable and we will therefore proceed to the debate .
Mr President , with an issue of this importance it is necessary that we indicate to those still on the premises that a vote is taking place .
It is very unusual for a vote to be called in this way with about 12 Members in the House .
Many others outside are completely unaware - as are those of us who are here who happen to wish to speak in this debate - that this issue is being considered .
If there is a way in which you can alert those on the premises of Parliament to that fact that there is a vote and adjourn until they are present , maybe we will get a more representative result .
Mr President , it is highly irregular that people are behaving so undemocratically as to continue to make comments during the vote , and secondly , we have now voted .
It is for you to announce the result of the vote , and then we will simply carry on with the debate .
I believe that is the only way , and the best way , to deal with a topic that we have already spoken about on so many occasions before .
( Parliament rejected the motion )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when we talk about food supplements , we chiefly mean vitamins , minerals , fatty acids , amino acids and certain other substances .
So we are not talking about enriched food , nor about food additives .
We are talking about concentrated sources of nutrients supplied either individually or combined in the form of capsules , tablets , powder or similar presentations .
Vitamins and minerals are involved in many biochemical processes in the human body .
An optimal supply of these substances is vital for human health and performance .
I regard it as being very positive that we can enrich our daily intake of food with vitamins and minerals .
This directive on food supplements provides for the approximation of the laws of the Member States .
Some Member States currently classify food supplements as food , and others as medicines .
The directive clearly classifies them as food products , which creates a level playing field for manufacturers and also removes existing barriers to trade within the single market .
At the same time , we are establishing legal certainty for European consumers .
The Commission ' s proposal is therefore basically to be welcomed .
However , discussions in Parliament have made it clear that certain parts of the proposal need to be modified .
I particularly wish to highlight the area of application .
The Commission 's proposal for a directive adopts a rather narrow approach as regards the substances it covers .
This applies firstly to permitted minerals and their compounds .
Some important minerals are not covered by the Commission proposal , despite their being used in many EU countries .
These minerals should be accepted as a matter of principle .
Of course chemical compounds still need to be submitted to scientific tests .
This needs to be done before the directive enters into force , in order to avoid important food supplements having to be withdrawn from the market .
In addition to vitamins and minerals , there are also other substances covered by the term " food supplements " .
But we should not overreach ourselves and try to regulate everything in one go as regards food supplements on the market .
There is a consensus that other substances besides vitamins and minerals need to be subjected to scientific tests before they are covered by the directive .
Nevertheless , defining these additional substances using the heading " physiological " brings with it new problems as regards classification as medicinal products or drugs , and would totally confuse the market situation , which is quite contrary to the aim of the directive .
Blurring the dividing line between medicines and food supplements would lead to a lack of clarity as regards health-related claims , which have not so far been regulated .
Surely none of this can be the objective of this directive on food supplements .
As regards dosage and thus consumers ' health , the system of safe maximum amounts is to be welcomed .
Nevertheless , we also need to ensure that consumers do not run the risk of substantially exceeding the daily requirement of food supplements when they take a daily vitamin tablet .
With vitamins A , D , and B6 , for example , there would be a health risk .
The Commission proposal clearly covers this .
I totally support this .
With regard to food supplement labelling , the proposal for a directive provides for clear consumer information .
Labelling should tell consumers how to use vitamin and mineral products correctly .
Products are required to meet the highest purity and quality standards .
Both individual substances and the final product have to be produced in accordance with good manufacturing practice .
A compulsory notification procedure is essential in order to guarantee minimum levels of official control .
Above all , notification is only meaningful if a uniform procedure applies to all Member States .
This directive will provide European consumers with a common legal framework which places great value on product safety and helpful labelling without limiting the range of products on the shelves . In other words , it provides a legal framework guaranteeing the free movement of goods whilst simultaneously ensuring a high level of protection .
Finally , I would like to very warmly thank the shadow rapporteur for working with me in such a cooperative way .
Many thanks , Mrs Corbey .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Müller , on this report , and I am full of admiration for the very open way in which she has conducted her work and consulted with everyone .
So I do not understand why Mr Bonde , Mr Blokland and friends , are now trying surreptitiously - because she also consulted with the EDD Group - to postpone this debate without reference to the rapporteur .
This is unacceptable by the moral code of this House .
I also have respect for the expert way in which the rapporteur has mastered the technical ins and outs of the dossier .
We have Mrs Müller to thank for the fact that the text of this directive has been extended and improved .
Food supplements are used , indeed consumers often need them , but the industry varies a great deal from Member State to Member State . In addition , you can order everything from the Internet nowadays , all the products are freely available everywhere , and special firms have been set up , which makes it all the more necessary to create a single market for consumers .
This means harmonisation , harmonisation for the consumer .
The consumer must be given sound information and must know what is permissible and what is feasible , that is necessary .
But it is also necessary for the industry because the industry is now being given the opportunity to supply the whole European market , and Mrs Müller has extended the directive in several ways which will please not only the consumer but industry too .
A discussion has now got underway on the physiological function .
What occurred to me , and I have said the same to the industry today , is that when you visited the industry the first time round , you had no problem with this aspect , and at the end of the saga the members of the industry told me that they understood that they were allowed to maintain it in those countries where it is now , but that they were also very keen for us to go that extra mile .
Mrs Müller has made an excellent job of presenting this proposal , which can be extended at a later date , and I would like to thank her cordially for this .
Mr President , we are discussing a very important directive today .
The market for food supplements is developing apace .
This has to do with people ' s lifestyles and eating habits .
It also has to do with consumers ' insecurity about their own health .
People ' s health is a matter of the utmost concern .
Food supplements can be an aid to health , so those who can afford it will gladly buy themselves good health .
But we must also be aware that it is easy to talk people who are insecure into feeling that they must buy themselves good health , and that quality is not always guaranteed .
We must therefore separate the wheat from the chaff .
The consumer is entitled to safe products and sound information .
There are major industrial interests at stake when it comes to food supplements .
There is no internal market but there are numerous rules at national level .
This is inconvenient , but as the PSE Group sees it , consumer protection must take precedence at the end of the day .
Divergent national provisions , uncertainty as to the safety of products and a growing market clearly demonstrate the urgent need for a European directive on food supplements .
That is why the Commission 's proposal is so important .
The Commission has established a clear basis for determining safe upper limits of vitamins and minerals .
I am pleased to compliment Mrs Müller on her consistent , professional and serious approach .
On behalf of the PSE Group , I would like to broach three subjects .
Firstly , the scope of the directive .
The Commission has proposed that only vitamins and minerals should be brought within the scope of application of the proposal .
That is understandable but it fails to take into account how the industry has grown .
Herbal extracts , amino acids , and essential fatty acids are used in food supplements too .
I personally think it is important to define the scope as broadly as possible , thus including substances with a nutritional and a physiological function alike .
The advantage of this broad definition is that it creates legal certainty for producers and gives consumers a wide choice of safe products .
The second point I would like to address is the need for scientific testing .
Far and away the most important aspect of this proposal is the principle that only ingredients that have been scientifically tested are permissible .
The maximum permitted quantities are determined according to the basic principles laid down in Article 5 .
That is the basis for consumer confidence .
Naturally , any country may decide for itself whether or not to permit untested ingredients .
The directive does not detract from this in any way . But it is unacceptable , to my mind , for them to enter into circulation in the internal market without so much as a by your leave .
Scientific research and approval are required for that to happen .
Lastly , a few words about labelling .
It is very important for the information to be correct and to include a warning about exceeding the dosage .
A good diet is crucial and is an aid to good health .
No consumer should be put to great expense as a result of misrepresentation and no consumer should feel obliged to buy good health .
All in all , I think it is a marvellous proposal .
Once again , my sincere thanks to the rapporteur .
We support this report wholeheartedly , subject to guarantees that ingredients are scientifically tested .
Mr President , in 1999 , the turnover in the European Union for vitamins and minerals alone was over EUR 1 600 million , even without taking other food supplements into account .
That just shows how fashionable these products have become , which is quite natural , when all is said and done .
The wish to be and to stay healthy is probably the most widely shared one .
Every day , then , millions of European citizens take thousands of pills , capsules and tablets .
It also shows how urgent is the need for regulation of this market in Europe , a market which is expanding rapidly , lacks transparency , and , above all , varies greatly from one Member State to another , as has been noted .
The differences are sometimes quite considerable and concern areas such as product composition , dosage , and criteria relating to purity , labelling or the required approval procedure .
We must , therefore , fill these gaps so that we can protect consumers , so that they are extremely well briefed and as clearly informed as is possible , while enabling the free movement of goods within the European Union , as , I am sure , everyone will agree .
When voting on Mrs Müller ' s excellent report , on which we must congratulate her , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy included vitamins and minerals in the definition of food supplements , as well as other substances listed in the annexes .
We welcome this contribution .
Our aim was to ensure that , in the long term , the directive would cover all the food supplements already on the European market , so that European consumers can enjoy the same safety guarantees .
In the same spirit , our group tabled three additional amendments , Amendments Nos 33 , 34 and 35 . Amendments with the same effect were also tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists , seeking to ensure that the scope of the directive includes substances that have physiological effects , i.e. non-nutritional substances which are nonetheless vital to a person ' s well-being .
Fibre , which is known to aid digestion , in the same way as plant extracts , is included .
I would like to point out that this proposal was already included in the text of the French Presidency and is currently in that of the Swedish Presidency .
The very reason that we are here today is to create a legal framework in order to harmonise the sale of these food supplements .
We should not create a legal void in Europe with regard to ingredients which have physiological functions .
There are millions of consumers who would find that incomprehensible .
Mr President , I very much welcome the guiding principles of this directive , namely the safety of the consumer and the single market .
The basic underlying food-safety legislation is that safety should be established on the basis of scientific risk assessment and that consumers should be able to purchase products of their choice provided that they are safe .
It is important that safety criteria form the basis of the directive , rather than arbitrary recommended daily allowances which would be unnecessarily restrictive and not related to safety .
In the UK and Ireland we indeed have a liberal regime and consumers there do not want their rights restricted .
Most vitamins and minerals have a clear nutritional function ; other ingredients commonly included in supplements are not nutrients and do not therefore have a nutritional function but do have physiological function .
The definition of a food supplement in the directive should reflect all supplements .
If products are now excluded from the general definition , there is a danger that such products will in the future fall outside the scope of the legislation and remain unregulated .
I very much recommend that you take on board the physiological function which unfortunately the rapporteur - and I do not agree with her - asked to be excluded from the report .
Mr President , in connection with Parliament ' s debate on the proposal for a directive on the approximation of the laws relating to food supplements , I have received hundreds of approaches in the form of approximately 500 signatures by way of protest and a long list of detailed e-mails and letters from ordinary , concerned Danes and from professionals who are nervous that their access to food supplements might be limited .
I assume that it is not only Danish consumers who are expressing this great interest in the directive .
Those who have approached me have all pointed out that a number of experts have placed many question marks over those investigations showing that vitamins C , E and A in particular may be dangerous in too high doses , and that alternative investigations seem specifically to show that high doses of these vitamins have had positive effects free from side effects .
Claim and counter-claim , then .
Because the need for vitamins depends upon a long list of factors which differ from one Member State to another , such as climate and which vitamins are present in the traditional food , the question arises of whether this area is at all suited to EU harmonisation .
Ole Krarup also sowed the seeds of doubt about the legal basis .
When these differences are taken into account and the major interest of consumers taken seriously , my conclusion is that a vote against the proposal for a directive is called for .
Laws governing food supplements ought to be established at national level where both the individual consumer and the non-governmental organisations have a much greater opportunity to have their views heard and considered and where , therefore , the legislators also have a better opportunity to assess the different positions .
Mr President , I am sorry that most of those who sought to stop this debate did not bother to stay to hear it .
I compliment the rapporteur on her report and all the work she has put in .
Food supplements can be a tonic or a health aid .
In rare cases the nature of the supplement or the nature of an individual mean that too great a dosage could be harmful , and so , for generations , we and other countries have set safe upper limits .
With these and with proper labelling the consumer can exercise a safe , free and informed choice .
In Britain , Ireland and elsewhere we have not gone down the route of some of our fellow Member States , which is to take the recommended minimum daily allowance that was set by the American Government in 1943 to ensure that GIs serving in Europe did not suffer from scurvy and beri beri , and to treat that as the basis for maximum intake before classification as a pharmaceutical .
We fear that route leads to higher costs to consumers or an incentive to use unregulated foreign suppliers .
Our belief is that the two systems can coexist .
That is the purpose of Amendment No 50 , in my name and that of Mrs Doyle and others .
It allows the RDA to be taken into account when it is close to the upper safety limit .
I believe that the positive list , as it stands , is far too limited .
We should at the very least expand it by the amendments to this effect .
Labelling must allow for accurate health messages , such as for folic acid .
Lastly , I support the reinstatement of the word " physiological " alongside " nutritional " , as otherwise a significant number of items on sale and acceptable today could risk being banned .
It was a word included , I believe , at the behest of the Council 's working party of experts .
Folic acid is an example .
These are not just my views and those of my delegation .
They are the views of the British Labour Government and , more importantly , the views of the new UK Food Standards Agency .
Mr President , I am glad to be able to follow someone who has so vigorously supported the Labour Government , as Mr Bowis just did .
I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur after the sometimes stormy passage of her report and the mini-ambush which she almost suffered tonight .
In the UK we are the largest manufacturer - and indeed consumer - of health supplements of one kind or another , vitamin and mineral supplements to the diet .
We have been stringent in ensuring that false claims are never made for them , and that is why in the UK they have never been marketed as medicines .
But they do bring benefits to millions who would accept that they are a supplement to , but not a substitute for , a balanced diet .
We believe that the upper safe levels are sufficient to make the difference between foods and medicines even clearer .
Obviously the situation is different in some other Member States , and any attempt to regularise the position makes sense in the general context of emergent food law .
I support the rapporteur 's view that all substances which have been validly in use in the Member States , according to the laws of those countries , should continue until such time as they can be tested and perhaps found wanting .
I rather doubt if many will be , and I do not think that the annexes themselves contain anything like the number of exceptions that we should see .
With every day that passes , we hear of other substances which are causing concern because they may be excluded .
That is why the word physiological - and I would beg the rapporteur to think again even at this late hour - is important in terms of people who are genuine sufferers and who derive great benefit from these products .
We ought to hear from the Commissioner tonight that there will be measured progress towards effective analysis by the requisite deadline , be that 2004 or later .
Effective labelling , so that the consumers can choose both the context and the regularity of what they are getting , is the best way forward .
That will help many consumers and worry none .
Mr President , I would like to support my colleague Nuala Ahern 's comments that physiological products should of course also be included .
However , I welcome the fact that vitamins and minerals are classified as food products , as I believe that we should give responsible consumers the option of using them .
But I also believe that the Commission should be asking why food products are losing so much of their vitamin content , for example why broccoli has lost 80 % of its vitamin content over the last 10 years .
I would like to make a particular appeal for labelling not just of ingredients but also of production methods .
There are vitamins which if naturally produced are more effective then when they are synthetically produced .
I believe that consumers also have the right to know whether or not they have been produced using genetic engineering .
I would like to pick up one last point relating to what Mrs Sandbæk said .
I particularly wish to call on the Commission to make sure that this report is not misused to support " functional " foods , because I agree with Mrs Sandbæk that traditional foods should not be artificially enriched with added vitamins .
But I wish to stress that we welcome consumers being given the option of taking additional vitamins .
Mr President , in the UK there are no specific laws controlling the sale of supplements sold as food .
As a consequence , the UK consumers enjoy access to a relatively wide-range of products with minimal restrictions and competitive prices .
No one is forced to buy these products and those that do buy them tend to be well informed about their purchases .
Thus , for the Commission to suggest that we approximate our laws on food supplements is in fact to propose creating laws that do not exist at present in the UK .
The reason the UK Government has not created them is that there has been no need for them .
By and large the market regulates itself and where false claims are made , unsound or potentially dangerous products are marketed , the existing legal structures have proven adequate .
Nor in the market where there is considerable international trade have any particular difficulties been experienced with the movement of goods and a healthy trade on the Internet has developed and is expanding .
There would seem to be scope for the admirable dictum : " if it ain 't broke , don 't fix it " .
Apart from keeping the technocrats busy with yet more interference in other people 's lives , there is no need for additional law in this sphere .
The Commission should not be attempting to make it .
We would be better off without it .
Mr President , I would like to heartily congratulate Mrs Emilia Müller on the extremely well-balanced report she has produced .
Indeed , as a research scientist , I cannot fail to appreciate the scientific rigour with which such a sensitive subject , where there are so many sometimes conflicting positions , has been treated .
I would like to thank the Commission for accepting the amendment I tabled on the need for good manufacturing practice to be followed in the preparation of the different vitamin and mineral supplements , for that is the greatest guarantee of quality in terms of consumer protection .
Similarly , an excessively permissive position was not adopted on the doses to be used , and rightly so ; indeed , the framework of the recommended daily intake was used in specifying doses , thus avoiding encouraging the idea that the greater the dose the greater the effect .
As a pharmacologist , I must point out that , both in terms of pharmacokinetics and in terms of pharmacodynamics and toxicology , for example , excessive doses can have the opposite effects to those desired or can even , if taken over long periods , harm major organs and systems of the body , which means that there is absolutely no need to increase the doses of mineral vitamins to the maximum level tolerated .
In conclusion , Mr President , in my opinion , Parliament can adopt once and for all the document adopted by the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to join in congratulating Mrs Emilia Franziska Müller on her excellent work on this directive .
There are two principles that govern Community food legislation on which , fortunately , this directive is also based : food safety and the guarantee that the label provides adequate and correct information .
It is essential that we remove any risk to the health of consumers caused by free choice , and ensure that they can make their choice based on accurate and clear information that does not lead to confusion or deception .
Consumers must have access to clear instructions on the dosage and use of the product .
In many cases , as had already been said , it has been found that ingesting some food supplements in excessive doses causes serious health problems .
This is not acceptable , and we need to ensure , through Community legislation , that there is good , consistent information across all the Member States .
Focusing on Article 2 , both the work of Mrs Emilia Franziska Müller and that of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy as a whole provide a legal concept of a balanced food supplement .
The scope of application is neither too limited nor so wide that it enables products that do not comply with what a food supplement is to come under the definition .
With regard to Annex I , I think that , finally , the proposal from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , which has been successively extended with compromise amendments , is correct and should be adopted by this House .
With regard to Article 5 , which sets out the maximum quantities of vitamins and minerals in food supplements , according to letters a ) , b ) and c ) of paragraph 1 , I think it is necessary to keep these sections , as the approach that we should take in Europe should be strict , maintaining control of the maximum level of vitamins and minerals based on the maximum safe intake levels .
On this point , I would support the idea that a European approach should opt for greater defence of consumers as opposed to an option of greater deregulation .
In this respect I welcome the fact that we are 16 against 15 .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Emilia Franziska Müller for her patience with me for making her job a lot more difficult than it might otherwise have been .
Quite truthfully , a lot of what Mr Titford said resonated very strongly with me .
I took some persuading that a directive such as this was necessary at all .
I finally accept that , for example , in relation to oil-soluble vitamins there is a case to be made in terms of safety .
But having scoured medical literature and asked colleagues to point out to me the scientific and medical evidence , I cannot find examples of people who have overdosed or killed themselves with vitamin C and various others .
Commissioner , as one of the busiest commissioners it is a matter of some fascination to me that this particular directive should come out of the pile , given the workload you have .
I cannot understand the priority it has been given , but I accept that there is a general need to have harmonisation at upper safe levels .
Basically we must be driven by informed consumer choice and safety .
We must assume that the intelligence quotient of the average European citizen is reasonable .
We must desist from getting into the ' nanny state ' frame of mind .
Dare I suggest that the next directive - seeing as you are in this mode at the moment , Commissioner - should be a directive on bedtime .
When we get up in the morning can we go to bed at night ?
There seems to be a need to direct our lives , to minimise risks and to tell us what to do .
Please do not take me seriously but I really am frustrated with the way we are headed .
Points made in relation to the physiological effects must be reinstated .
I appeal through the President to my colleague to look at this again .
I am quite upset at the way the oral amendment was bounced .
I do not want to be told that I cannot take fibre , garlic , cranberry juice or folic acid , if I happen to be pregnant .
I do not want my life regulated to that extent .
It brings the Commission and the European project into disrepute with citizens who are otherwise not Eurosceptic at all .
I appeal to you to get the balance right .
It is most important .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would also like to join in congratulating the rapporteur , who I think has done an excellent job , and the rest of the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , who have also worked hard .
One of the objectives of this directive is to harmonise , and the directive has been drawn up - the Commission says so - to eliminate barriers to internal trade .
But it does not fully harmonise , as there may be differences between the Member States in the way that they deal with the declarations on the products .
Ladies and gentlemen , the internal market does not work .
At the end of 2000 the number of violation proceedings initiated by the Commission associated with this problem was 27 .
According to the Commission , this diversity of regulations has created barriers to Community trade , and the principle of mutual recognition has not solved the problems .
Harmonisation is therefore necessary .
I am going to refer specifically to Amendment No 51 , which is tabled by a group of us who have a series of problems , as the situation of lack of definition that the legislation of eight Member States is currently in could result in the production and sale of these food supplements , which are not included in this directive , being banned , once it is transposed .
Meanwhile , the national legislation of the other Member States that regulate these food supplements would allow them to be produced and , as a result of the rules of the internal market , to be sold across the European Union .
Commissioner , this is not harmonisation .
We need to allow the production and sale of such substances in the countries where there is no national legislation , as long as their composition is identical to the substances that are already sold in one or various Member States , while Community rules , through its scientific committees , extend the scope of application of this directive .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Two or three-wheel motor vehicles
The next item is the report ( A5-0015 / 2001 ) by Mr Lange , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 97 / 24 / EC on certain components and characteristics of two or three-wheel motor vehicles [ COM ( 2000 ) 314 - C5-0334 / 2000 - 2000 / 0136 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , motorised two and three-wheel vehicles , that is motorcycles and scooters , are mainly used in two areas .
Firstly , to respond to the need for mobility in urban areas and , secondly , for leisure purposes , particularly in sensitive areas of countryside with many attractive bends .
In both areas , and I say this as a motorcycle enthusiast , the drivers of these vehicles have a special responsibility , because two-wheel vehicles should not have a greater impact on urban areas or sensitive areas of the countryside than motor cars have .
It is therefore both legitimate and essential for us to ensure that motorised two and three-wheel vehicles should have the same level of emissions as motor cars .
The European Parliament has set a very successful example through its input into legislation reducing emissions from motor cars , with the introduction of EURO III and IV , and also emissions from both light and heavy commercial vehicles , with a view to improving air quality in Europe 's cities and sensitive environmental areas .
We cannot therefore make an exception for motorcycles and scooters .
Hence this proposal that there should also be a two-stage approach for motorcycles and scooters , with the first reduction stage being introduced in 2003 and a second reduction stage , and this is the important thing , coming into force in 2006 .
Industry naturally needs time to develop new engines and new exhaust emissions cleaning systems .
We must give industry this time , and that is why the second stage in 2006 is important .
The Commission 's proposal for 2003 is essentially the current state of the art - vehicles complying with these limit values are generally speaking already on our roads .
There is already a list of registrations which indicates that over 80 vehicles already comply with the 2003 values .
We do not want to tinker about with that - what we want is a second binding stage for 2006 , applying the EURO III 2000 motor car levels to motorised two-wheel vehicles .
However , we want to see one thing start in 2003 that already applies to cars and to light and heavy commercial vehicles . I have in mind concentration on the sustainability of emissions-related parts .
Of course , it does not make much sense if a two-wheel vehicle achieves marvellous emission limit values on the test bench if in practice , after just a few thousand kilometres , these limit values are history .
That is why we want to see a start made on sustainability for motorised two-wheel vehicles in 2003 and why we also want to create a situation whereby if there is a serious suspicion that particular models are not complying with emission limit values on a long-term basis , the authorities are empowered to check this using in-service surveys to ensure in-use compliance .
I have been told that it is not yet possible to do anything as regards 2006 , because we do not yet have a new motorcycle test cycle , and because the test cycle needs to be revised before we can do anything .
I do not agree with that .
As with heavy commercial vehicles , we have said that it would be good if we had a worldwide cycle , but we want to stick to our objective .
That objective is that by 2006 we should achieve a level corresponding to the motor car level for 2000 , allowing a little more time for motorcycles , but they must reach that level by then .
If there is no other test cycle by then , we will just have to use the same cycle that applies to cars .
Mr Goodwill and I have built in a slightly longer lead time for certain smaller manufacturers who would have particular problems in converting their production lines . I think that is appropriate and does not affect the overall result .
I believe that that if we accept the proposals of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and enter into the conciliation procedure with the Council , motorcycle riders will in future be able to exercise both their responsibility and their freedom , and that should be our common objective .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Climate Summit held recently in The Hague dealt with the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol , to notoriously meagre effect .
This forces us to confront the seriousness of the situation that the motorised transport sector is currently facing .
Transport accounts for a huge proportion of CO2 and NOx emissions , road transport being the worst culprit .
It is true that two and three-wheel motor vehicles only constitute a very small percentage of total road traffic volume .
It is therefore all the more striking that their contribution to emissions is relatively high .
According to the forecasts of the Auto Oil Programme II , unless there is a change in policy , this proportion will only increase .
The current generation of two and three-wheel vehicles still satisfies the requirements placed on other older vehicles .
However , these categories are regularly confronted with more stringent emission standards .
In order to allow two and three-wheel vehicles to perform to optimum effect , it is desirable to adapt emission standards on a continuous basis .
Therefore , I personally am content with the line proposed by the rapporteur .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , I am pleased that the rapporteur has advocated a longer period , although not as long as our committee would have liked , for the smaller manufacturers of two and three-wheel vehicles .
Mr President , all in all I am delighted with Mr Lange ' s report .
The implementation thereof should mean a step in the direction of a sustainable transport system , and , of course , that is what Parliament wants .
Mr President , this amendment to the directive is part of the process of tidying up the loose ends not covered by the Auto / Oil Programme .
I cannot wait for the other directives coming along on small pleasure craft and the small spark ignition engine which will complete the story .
Motorcycles constitute a very small percentage of traffic volume .
Advances in engine technology for cars and trucks coupled with a 6 % rise in motorcycle mileage in the 1990s have meant that the proportion of pollution from bikes is increasing .
I therefore welcome this proposal but with certain reservations .
My major concern is the short time between 2003 when the new standards will apply to new models and the date when that is extended to all new motorcycles .
This will put tremendous pressure on the smaller European manufacturers , like Triumph and CCM in the United Kingdom .
Although these modifications are technically feasible , small companies do not have the resources to do the work in only 12 months and the development costs would have to be recovered from a smaller volume of vehicles .
This would put European manufacturers at a competitive disadvantage as compared with the big boys from the Far East .
I am pleased , therefore , that the rapporteur has recognised this by extending this transition phase to two years .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur by leading by example by converting his own classic Harley Davidson motorcycle with a retro-fitted catalytic converter .
It is not a case of saying one thing and doing another from that side of the House .
I have some reservations regarding on-board diagnostics and in-service testing .
Regarding on-board diagnostics , a motorcycle is often the first vehicle that a young person buys with limited resources and therefore this will make the vehicle more expensive .
Secondly , I am rather cynical about what the owner of the bike will do when that little green light comes on saying that the exhaust system is not performing to standard .
I suspect he may be tempted just to take the bulb out .
Maybe at this stage of the game we should keep these two balls in play and see how the game progresses towards second reading and possible conciliation .
Lastly , on the subject of fiscal measures .
Whilst I support market solutions like tax incentives , these should be applied by Member States according to national criteria if they so wish .
This proposal is to be made under Article 95 , that is to say qualified majority voting , and despite the 28 vetoes given up by Tony Blair at Nice , the UK has not yet given up its right to determine its own taxes , and therefore this should not be within the scope of this directive .
Subsidiarity is something that should be protected .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive upon which we are about to vote is a substantial step forward in the Union 's intention to pursue ambitious goals in the field of the restriction of air pollution .
We are currently in a paradoxical situation : although motorcycles represent only 2-3 % of the total volume of transport , motorcycle emissions account for an increasingly high proportion of the total emissions .
The amendments tabled by Mr Lange , like almost all those adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , enhance the Commission 's proposal .
In particular , the insistence on the development of Europe-wide test cycles specifically for motor vehicles , but also the call to make type approval subject to confirmation of the effectiveness of the anti-pollution measures are indications of the European Parliament 's will to take firm action in such a sensitive area as this .
In this regard , it would appear important to stress that the majority of these objectives are widely endorsed by the sector 's businesses .
This means both that Mr Lange 's negotiations with them have been successful and that awareness is growing among producers too of the need to contribute to improving our environmental conditions .
Therefore , the decision to fix , as of now , not only the date for revising the initial limits set - 2006 - but also the limits for the second stage , is an indication of Parliament 's decision to apply continual pressure to industry to make progress .
Moreover , the introduction of the opportunity to revise these limits in line with the hoped-for technological developments is evidence of the will to continue the dialogue with manufacturers in the future as well .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Lange for producing another excellent report on an important issue , that of atmospheric pollution and ozone smog .
Several hundred thousand motor cycles cause just as much atmospheric pollution in my country , the Netherlands , as all the six and a half million cars put together .
We cannot have a situation where new cars have to become exceptionally clean in 2005 , but motor cycles get off scot-free .
Nor is it acceptable that new lorries produced after 2007 will become exceptionally clean , whilst motor cycles remain unaffected .
So I hope that when it comes to tomorrow ' s vote , all delegates will vote in favour of equipping new motor cycles with a catalytic converter in 2006 .
Finally , I have a question for the Commission .
I believe it is now high time we abolished the exemption for diesel motors , i.e. for trains from 1978 .
Trains too , must , and could , be far cleaner .
I hope the Commission is prepared to respond on this point .
Mr President , Commissioner , the high number of motorcycles on the roads and in the cities of the European Union is a clear reality , particularly in the Mediterranean Member States , which enjoy good weather throughout the year .
Mr Lange ' s report , whose environmental concern our group shares , constantly compares 2- and 3-wheel vehicles with 4-wheel vehicles .
However , their ease of use , the fluidity that they give to traffic in cities , their simplicity for parking and the low cost of purchasing and maintaining them should be more than sufficient reason for the necessary anti-pollution measures not to decrease their use .
The European industry needs more time to apply the proposed measures .
I therefore ask that the Commission , in cooperation with the manufacturers , evaluate the applicability and the cost-efficiency relationship of these measures and essentially of the periods proposed , as we run the risk of indirectly favouring the large companies in the sector , which are precisely not the European ones .
We need tax incentives to facilitate the sale and use of less-polluting vehicles that are easy to use , improve traffic and are more integrated into our cities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lange , because he has once again spearheaded a very important debate here .
I believe that two and three-wheel motor vehicles are particularly fashionable and in vogue at present and we should therefore make a point of ensuring that they comply with the latest exhaust emission standards .
There has been great progress in research in this field , and it is now up to us to implement this research .
The inventory of emissions drawn up by the Commission demonstrates very clearly the progress that has been made with NOx emissions : up to 80 % for four-stroke engines as against a maximum of 70 % for two-strokes .
These values really look quite respectable .
That is why I am in favour of staged reductions which , if they are reasonable , will certainly mean great benefits for motorcycle drivers and others using these engines .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the European Parliament , and Mr Lange , for their lively debate on this issue .
The rapporteur recommends the adoption of the Commission ' s proposal on limit values to be implemented as from 2003 .
The rapporteur , however , is suggesting a second stage for mandatory limit values to apply from 2006 .
This stage would be based on a test cycle for passenger cars .
The Commission acknowledges the need for this second stage .
We shall be putting forward a separate proposal for this by the end of 2002 .
The forthcoming proposal will be based on additional research into the technical performance and economic viability of equipment that is more advanced with regard to reducing emissions .
In this next stage , emissions will have to be measured in relation to an improved test cycle .
The situation will thus be made to match the real driving dynamics of motorcycles .
The Commission has not included mandatory limits to apply from 2006 in its proposal , as it does not yet have access to the information that would give the right sort of scientifically persuasive support to the introduction of test cycles .
The Commission actively supports the development of a worldwide , harmonised test cycle for motorcycles .
The work was started in 1999 , and in May of 2000 the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe extended an official mandate for this , having the support of the Member States of the EU , Japan and the United States .
The work programme is progressing according to schedule .
For that reason , we believe that the new cycle will be introduced in sufficient time for it to start being applied in 2006 .
This is in line with Mr Lange ' s views .
Consequently , the Commission cannot support the amendments proposing that a decision be now made to start the mandatory second stage in 2006 .
The relevant amendments are Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 10 , 11 , 23 , 24 and 25 .
However , the Commission is obviously prepared to take part in formulating a general Interinstitutional Agreement as soon as possible .
The rapporteur mentions several measures to ensure more reliably that emission control equipment functions efficiently throughout a vehicle ' s lifetime .
The Commission recognises the importance of these if we want to make sure that there is a genuine reduction in emissions whilst driving .
A motorcycle , however , is a very different product from a car in technical terms .
In applying requirements for motorcycles attention has to be paid to the consequences , meaning there has to be a careful appraisal made of technical feasibility and cost-effectiveness .
I might reply to the question put by Mr de Roo regarding rail transport that the matter is also being looked into but no proposal has yet been made .
The Commission in principle accepts the amendments in which the Commission is urged to examine the points of view mentioned earlier .
However , we reject the amendments which propose dates for the mandatory application of requirements , or provisions that take no account of the final results of research .
This is a reference to Amendments Nos 6 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 20 and 22 .
The Commission adopts the same position with regard to Amendments Nos 8 and 17 , dealing with carbon dioxide emissions from motorcycles .
The report contains several amendments the Commission would be able to support , such as Amendments Nos 4 and 12 , if Member States were given the opportunity to encourage the retrofitting of emission control equipment and parts in older motor vehicles .
The same holds true for Amendment No 1 and the latter part of Amendment No 9 , in which it is proposed that a year-long exemption be granted for the special class of trial motorcycles , and the first part of Amendment No 9 , which recommends application to present models to start , not from January , but from July , 2004 .
The Commission nevertheless rejects Amendment No 26 , which would delay application to present models by a whole year .
In principle , the Commission also supports Amendments Nos 7 and 16 on requirements for defeat devices and by-pass arrangements , and believes it is able to include such requirements in its current proposal .
The Commission can thus accept Amendments Nos 4 , 9 , 12 and 18 , and , in principle , Amendments Nos 2 , 7 , 8 , 16 and 21 , and , in part , Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 19 , 20 and 22 .
The Commission cannot , however , accept Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 6 , 10 , 11 , 13 , 15 , 17 , 23 , 24 , 25 or 26 .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Vehicles with more than eight seats
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0039 / 2001 ) by Mr Miller , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and the Council relating to special provisions for vehicles used for the carriage of persons comprising more than eight seats in addition to the driver 's seat , and amending Directives 70 / 156 / EEC and 97 / 27 / EC [ 9012 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0456 / 2000 - 1997 / 0176 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , earlier today we heard in the context of the copyright and GMO legislation how it has taken three years for Parliament to reach the point of being in a position to approve it .
Can I say that this report has been under negotiation for nine years and it is only now coming to fruition .
Since I took over the rapporteurship of this report I have tried to involve all the interested parties from the manufacturing side right through to the user side .
On the manufacturing side , I have had several meetings with the European constructors ' association as well as individual bus companies .
All of these organisations are happy with the common position and the amendments .
In fact , they welcome the clarification it brings to the market .
I have listened to the users carefully and I have consulted widely .
It is only after these consultations that I have put forward the amendments that you have in front of you tonight .
I would also pay tribute to the shadow rapporteurs who worked with me closely throughout the compiling of this report .
Unfortunately not all of them were able to persuade their groups to follow the line .
Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 5 are specific detailed technical amendments designed to assist the manufacturers and relate to gangway slopes of 12.5 % on existing class I and II buses .
These amendments have to be taken in conjunction with Amendment No 7 .
In Amendment No 6 I am seeking to replace that with Amendment No 10 which refers to the ISO standard and not to separate Member State standards which I had initially put in Amendment No 6 .
Amendment No 4 sets out in more detail the user groups that this report is trying to assist .
This list is , however , neither exhaustive nor prescriptive .
It was never intended to be and leaves plenty of scope for the inclusion of others .
Amendment No 8 opens up access to public transport to all those groups referred to in the aforementioned Amendment No 4 .
For the first time , we are making public transport accessible to all those people with reduced mobility .
This will be done by providing a kneeling system with either a lift or ramp but it also takes into account infrastructure improvements which have been carried out as well .
Maybe I should declare an interest at this point .
Just before Christmas my mother unexpectedly lost her sight .
As a son I obviously wish to help her , as I wish to help all visually impaired people within the European Union .
It is what I was elected to do and I am sure it is what the vast majority of people in this Parliament were elected to do .
These citizens are important users of public transport and they depend on us in the European Parliament to get it right .
We have that chance tomorrow by voting for those amendments .
I must , however , also mention Amendment No 9 which was submitted later by the PPE-DE Group .
When this came up at the Legal Affairs Committee it went through unanimously but then , all of a sudden , we heard that the PPE-DE Group wishes to reject the common position .
I am sorry and disappointed that their amendment rejects the common position .
That would set back accessibility for those citizens I mentioned earlier by several years .
I understand that one of the reasons that they are proposing rejection of the common position is because it will shackle the industry .
It will tie up the industry in red tape .
Can I ask those in the PPE-DE who are intending to speak on this how they would feel if they were shackled to a wheelchair or to sticks or to having to have a guide dog ?
That is shackling , not what we are trying to do with the industry .
I would be ashamed if their Amendment No 9 is carried .
I would be ashamed for every Member of this Parliament who puts their hand up or presses a button to vote for that amendment .
I therefore urge you to vote against Amendment No 9 but support the other amendments .
Mr President , it has been , as always , a pleasure to work with my friend Bill Miller on these technical directives and I believe that we will have made a significant improvement to this directive if it is approved .
So I will not go through the amendments .
He has done a good job on that .
I just want to address the question of why we on this side have chosen to propose a motion of rejection .
It relates to the whole issue of whether Parliament should be handling technical directives .
I recall that in a speech not long ago in this Parliament Commissioner Liikanen talked about some of the problems he is facing on potential pedestrian protection legislation for cars .
He presented us with at least 60 pages of complex technical mathematical calculations and he challenged us : is this the sort of thing this Parliament should be considering ?
This directive is 150 pages long and it has it own share of technical calculations , graphs , charts and other detailed technical provisions .
The same arguments apply .
I want to pick up on a point made by Bill Miller .
He is right to challenge us on the question about disabled access , but he said and I quote him , " It will make public transport accessible to all users " .
Regrettably that is not the case .
If it were , we would support it .
This piece of paper includes provision to make buses more accessible for disabled users , but it does not address the whole question of operating regulations for public transport systems across the European Union .
The issues which our colleague Mr Howitt quite rightly says we should be putting in here : changing the infrastructure to make buses more accessible for disabled users .
What have we actually achieved after nine years ?
Do we really have mutual recognition of technical standards between countries ?
Have we really achieved the sort of significant advances in safety that we want ?
I had a look through these 150 pages .
I may be wrong - Commissioner , you may be able to tell me this - but I could not find in here any provision for mandatory fitting of seat belts .
Why is that not in here if we are serious about the Council saying to us in this document that it has come up with a practicable solution with a high level of safety and user-friendliness .
If we really had achieved that , then we should be proud of it .
There are provisions , certainly , for things like strength of superstructure but the worrying thing here - and I ask the Commissioner to address this - is that this is not all .
At the end there is a list of things that the Commission and Council want to bring back to us .
It does not address school buses .
It does not address the latest developing technology of buses .
There are going to be new provisions for superstructures .
When is all this going to end ?
When are we going have realistic and sensible measures and the sort of technical committee structure that this Parliament asked you to introduce at first reading in 1997 and which is simply dismissed here ?
I quote in conclusion : " The Commission was unable to support the approach and in consequence did not amend its original proposal . "
Not a single word of explanation .
That is why my group will be recommending that this is rejected tomorrow .
Mr President , there is much in the text to promote access to buses by disabled people - passenger handrails , non-slip surfaces , standards for wheelchairs and a wide definition of reduced mobility to include all disabled people .
However , the key to tonight 's debate is Amendment No 8 : a guarantee of level access to all new buses in urban areas for persons with reduced mobility .
To achieve this requires a boarding aid , a lift or a ramp , because a low-floor bus on its own is not enough .
Our failure to agree this crucial part of the text would leave disabled people quite literally falling through the crack , a crack for which we would ourselves be responsible .
The rapporteur - to whom I offer my heartfelt thanks - has forged a compromise which seeks to share responsibility for access between bus manufacturers , operators , local planning and transport authorities .
But as we negotiate the final outcome I say to Parliament and the Commission that even a raised kerb at every bus stop can never be the full access solution .
Bad parking or obstacles on the pavement can still prevent boarding , whilst a simple manual swing-over ramp , built into the floor of each new bus , is cheap and will work time after time .
Yet nine years after this directive was first discussed , when the disability movement for a generation has put accessible public transport at the heart of its demands , those on the opposite side of the House threaten to vote , not simply against the amendment , but to destroy the whole directive .
Do they do so on grounds of cost ?
No .
The study of accessible buses commissioned by my own government shows low operating costs outweighing the marginal extra capital costs , while a 14 % increase in passengers brought in extra revenue .
Do they do so because of objections from manufacturers ?
No .
A check today , again in my own Member State , shows that British bus manufacturers and British bus operators are unanimous in their view that they want the directive to go through .
Do they do so because of a genuine difficulty at all ?
No .
Because the parliamentary committee that scrutinised these proposals in detail voted for them unanimously .
Mr President , my only conclusion , as we have heard tonight , is that those who oppose do so because they share the prejudice that disability access is an unnecessary technical detail .
They are wrong .
For a disabled person it means the freedom to travel or the restriction to stay at home .
Tonight we have the chance to grant that freedom to vote for accessible public transport .
We must and we will .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have before us today the standard European bus directive , on which we adopted a position at first reading .
The rapporteur then was Mr Murphy .
Murphy 's Law is of course famous , but I have to say that Mr Murphy did a first-rate job , because he recognised that this directive involves implementing a number of important political principles , namely access for the elderly , children and the disabled .
We are fully in agreement with that .
We need to do something for those groups : buses and public transport must be accessible to them and we want to put all our combined energies into achieving that objective .
So why are we rejecting this directive ?
Because at first reading the Commission brought forward a proposal comprising over 100 pages of detailed regulations , and during the first reading debate all the groups agreed to reject the directive for reasons of principle .
Now the Commission and the Council have come back with their common position , which is not 100 pages long , but 150 pages .
At first reading we said that we could imagine at most three pages covering the key political principles .
This directive contains some really choice passages of a kind you very rarely find .
For example , on page 17 we have Figure 17 , which is about permissible configurations for rear corner seats , and shows a plan view of the prescribed seat area , with both rear corner seats , in relation to Annex I Section 7.7.8.6.3.4 , and as with aircraft design a maximum radius of 150 mm is prescribed .
I know that we in the European Union have set the radius of curvature for bananas and cucumbers and goodness knows what else , but I find it hard to imagine that we now need to set a radius of curvature for the standard European bus .
The directive also contains a formula that must even be hard for engineers to understand .
I have to say that this document is not a suitable basis for political decision making .
So the position is that designers , bus purchasers , consumer protection organisations and also disabled persons ' organisations are in agreement with this directive , but are all very unhappy .
They all say that we want to achieve the objective of using disabled-accessible buses in Europe .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats want a new approach here , which quite simply means limiting ourselves to key policy aspects .
First of all , that means standards for access for the elderly , for children and for disabled persons .
This is extremely important and needs to be guaranteed .
Secondly , we want safety standards for drivers and passengers .
Thirdly , we want the principle of mutual recognition .
The reason this principle of mutual recognition is so important is that a bus obviously needs to be different if it operates in a small poor village in Sicily , where it is very hot , as compared with a bus which has to cope with London 's rush hour , with millions of passengers and where quite different demands are made of the bus . A bus operating in northern Finland , in conditions of extreme cold and covering great distances would again have to be very different .
That is why the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats is calling for the rejection of the common position and is requesting a vote .
We believe that it is important for us not to make everything in Europe the same .
The European public is also opposed to this desire towards sameness .
We wish to see mutual recognition .
I have confidence in British , French and German buses , and that is how things should remain .
Mr President , at first reading of this directive , Parliament indicated very clearly to the Council and the Commission that it wished to replace the detailed legislation with general guidelines and to allow a technical committee to prescribe the detailed specifications .
However , the Council ' s common position rides roughshod over Parliament .
The Council has not in any way taken account of Parliament ' s firm repudiation of detailed legislation .
The report is about more than just buses .
It is about the way in which the EU is to legislate .
I am not of course opposed to making sure that people with disabilities can use European buses .
What I am opposed to is the mode of procedure .
I find it quite unreasonable that , as a politician , I should have to take decisions about how many millimetres bus door handles and luggage racks should measure .
In my own country , the EU is often made into a laughing-stock for meddling and for regulating in too much detail .
People quite rightly question an EU that is in many ways unwieldy and bent on regulating .
MEPs ' credibility is brought into question if we take decisions about things we do not know anything about .
An example is Annex V of the Council ' s common position .
I am not ashamed to say that I do not understand the formula according to which the closing power of automatic doors is to be calculated .
I do not want to contribute to making ourselves and the EU into laughing-stocks .
Despite the fact that I was not involved in the first reading in 1988 , I would remind this Parliament that it voted 485 to 1 in favour of the general guidelines rather than the detailed legislation .
Why should Parliament change its mind now ?
For the Swedish Conservative Party , this was an important issue in the 1999 elections .
I was elected on a mandate to combat politicians ' inability to leave things alone .
I cannot therefore vote in favour of the Council ' s common position .
I would therefore call upon the whole Parliament to vote in favour of Amendment No 9 , tabled by my colleague Mr Lehne and rejecting the Council ' s common position .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Miller , as well as the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , whose work has enabled this case to be brought to a successful conclusion .
As you no doubt recall , this proposal for a directive on the construction of buses and coaches gave rise to lengthy and involved debates at first reading .
This draft has been before us for three years already . We have come a long way since then .
A consensus has been reached between the Council , Parliament and Commission . As well as the institutions , the various parties involved such as bus and coach manufacturers , public transport operators and user groups , including those which represent passengers with reduced mobility , have also arrived at a consensus .
That is why we welcome the work of the rapporteur , who succeeded in bringing together some often divergent interests .
It is now possible for the proposal to be adopted quickly , which will allow the safety of buses and their passengers to be improved .
The Commission can accept the eight amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , either in full or in principle .
Amendments Nos 1 , 7 and 8 are acceptable as they stand .
Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 5 , which relate to the permissible slope of the bus ' s floor area , are acceptable in principle , but may , of course , be reviewed at the drafting stage .
Amendment No 4 , which gives a list of people with reduced mobility , will most probably be challenged by Member States , as it introduces the risk of excluding some categories of users .
Would it not be better retain the general definition , which is , for that very reason , more comprehensive ?
Finally , Amendment No 6 , which seeks to change the figure of the wheelchair , is acceptable in principle , but not in the form proposed in the report .
The reference to an ISO standard or to an authorised diagram , as the rapporteur proposes in Amendment No 10 , would be preferable , bearing in mind , however , that we must ensure that size , shape and weight of the wheelchair , together with its occupant , are compatible with the physical characteristics of access areas .
On the other hand , the Commission does not wish to repeat the debate held at first reading on the regulatory approach to vehicles .
We do not , therefore , endorse the idea of challenging the timeliness of a directive , by which I am referring to Amendment No 9 .
To sum up , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 10 in principle and can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 7 and 8 .
I want to reply to Mr Harbour on this question of principle .
Since Lisbon , when we discussed new proposals , we must consider alternatives .
For instance , we are talking about disabilities at the moment .
I have had a lot of discussion about design standards for the disabled in the information society to try to find ways to make all the tools for the information society available for people with different kinds of disabilities .
We should try to analyse when a new approach directive can be used vis-à-vis old approach directives .
We must see what type of regulatory reforms we can have which serve this purpose in an easier way .
I do not want to have this debate now because we have opened it for the future proposal .
This has progressed so far that the Commission proposes to accept it in the way I have presented .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Community incentive measures in employment
The next item is the report ( A5-0018 / 2001 ) by Mrs Jensen , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision on Community incentive measures in the field of employment [ COM ( 2000 ) 459 - C5-0384 / 2000 - 2000 / 0195 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the shadow rapporteurs from the other parties for cooperating so well on this report .
I think it is to be welcomed that we can muster a broad majority for a proposal that extends Parliament ' s earlier decisions .
By means of this proposal , we are establishing the framework for the EU ' s employment policy over the next five years .
Employment policy is based , of course , upon what we call open coordination which , most recently at the Lisbon Summit , has been highlighted as a method that may be used within many other areas of policy .
Open coordination means that countries may use different methods of achieving common goals .
And the common goal in this case is higher employment .
What we have here are recommended guidelines for the policies of the Member States .
Countries must report on what they are doing to make the unemployed better able to meet the demands of the labour market .
Encouragement must be given to the spirit of enterprise and to flexibility in the labour market , and countries must work to promote a better relationship between work and family life .
This reporting , carried out by the Member States every year , therefore forms the point of departure for the Commission ' s annual report on employment in the EU which , together with the Commission ' s analyses and statistics concerning development , forms the basis for the Council ' s recommendation to the individual countries .
The process is open .
There is a free choice of policy , and if a country goes down a markedly different path than the one recommended , it can be criticised , but nothing more .
Is the process too informal , then ?
A whole lot of reports , meetings and conferences and a whole lot of words , but no certainty that the objectives will be achieved .
On the surface of it , the process is indeed perhaps not formal enough . However , this policy whereby countries measure their efforts against each other and exchange experiences - benchmarking and employment of best practices , to use the modern terminology - means that a broader public gets to see which countries are doing well and which less well .
To a large extent , open coordination works by becoming a subject in the public and national debate about employment policy .
In those countries where youth unemployment is high , the public is bound to ask how it can be that their politicians are not achieving the same good results as politicians in other countries .
Is there anything we can learn from the efforts of other countries ?
Transparency , understood as openness to the public , is in actual fact a very important agent in this process .
We therefore want to see more focus upon providing information to the public at large and upon involving the parties in the labour market , together with local and regional authorities , to a much greater extent than is contemplated in the Commission ' s proposal .
Article 129 provides , of course , for the possibility of introducing pilot projects .
We want an exchange of information about the ways and means of involvement at local level .
This could be a pilot project .
There is no question of our having new projects which mimic practices with which the Social Fund has familiarised us .
It is about developing analyses , knowledge and information about the whys and wherefores of local and regional involvement in employment policy .
By means of its communication concerning the role of local and regional authorities , the Commission has already made a start upon work of this kind .
In this year ' s Budget , Parliament too has introduced a new budget line for preparative initiatives to promote local participation in employment policy .
We have done this precisely to promote a broader knowledge of European employment strategy .
By including in this proposal the role of local and regional authorities in employment policy , we ensure that there is a legal basis for this initiative .
When , in this way , we ask the Commission to do more work than is contemplated in the Commission ' s own proposal , then appropriations must of course follow , and my report therefore proposes an increase in appropriations to EUR 65 million in contrast to the Commission ' s proposal of EUR 55 million .
To put it briefly , the open coordination method must be open in two senses .
It must be open in the sense that countries retain the freedom to organise their own policies and that there must be a number of ways to achieve the same objectives .
However , it must also be open in the sense that the general public is involved far more than it is at present .
The policy on employment , or Luxembourg process , is to be commended , but why does it have to be a matter of such secrecy ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning President Prodi reported that over a million new jobs were created in Europe last year , and that two-thirds of these were for women .
This demonstrates that employment programmes and work in this area can have very positive effects .
I also believe that the method adopted by the Commission is the right one , that is a combination of benchmarking and promoting best practice with a view to making Europe the world leader in the knowledge-based society .
The Commission has also applied its funding very carefully .
Expenditure was only 50 % of commitments .
So a great deal has been achieved with very limited means , which is particularly commendable .
And perhaps it will also be possible to trim administrative expenditure further in future .
The potential is certainly there .
On the other hand , we should do everything in our power to improve and extend this programme in future .
The relevant committee has made appropriate proposals to this effect , and the European Parliament would be proud if the positive achievements of the past year could be carried forward .
In the field of information technology alone - the information society - we will be unable to fill around a million jobs by 2004 because of inadequate training .
I believe that it is a great challenge for us to create new , interesting and good jobs in this area and also in the field of biotechnology , where we need research to solve the problems associated with BSE . In short , we specifically need to invest in these new areas .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission proposal has the basic objective of encouraging cooperation between the Member States in terms of analysis , research and monitoring of employment policy , determining best practices and promoting the exchange and transfer of information and experiences .
Thus , based on the need to support and develop the European Employment Strategy , the Commission is proposing a series of measures , which include analysis , research and cooperation between Member States on employment , which will be very helpful for achieving the new strategic objective established in Lisbon , which is to make Europe the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , with more and better jobs and with greater social cohesion .
We therefore fully support the Commission proposal , although I feel that it could be improved on some points which , broadly speaking , are as follows : firstly , and with regard to the planned Community measures , one of them supports a more strategic approach to employment in the Union , through analysis and evaluation of the factors that explain employment tendencies , the general political framework , etc .
On this point the Commission proposal does not envisage that the analysis and evaluation will be conducted in a specific way , for men and for women , something that I consider to be essential if we take into account that unemployment in Europe is largely among women .
It is not excessive to say that , if employment among women were not taken into account , in some regions of the Union there would even be full employment .
With this in mind , and given that employment incentive measures must be one of the key tools for developing equal opportunities , we need to consider what women ' s employment needs are .
We therefore need to consider which are the studies aimed at offering more childcare and social assistance in the home .
In this respect , we need to ensure that there is sufficient supply of quality services , particularly when dealing with dependants , which in the majority of cases are the responsibility of women .
We therefore need to encourage the incorporation of women into the labour market and encourage them to remain in it , with an equal distribution of family responsibilities between men and women .
We need to take into account the reinsertion of women and , without any doubt , differentiating between the studies by sex would help us to understand the problems that this raises .

Mr President , this evening , we have returned to the European Parliament , at 11.40 p.m. , to discuss the document on the Community incentive measures in employment , an extremely important document which calls not only for our presence here but also for that of Commissioner Diamantopoulou , who is thus demonstrating a certain concern for employment issues .

Moreover , since 14 February , Valentine 's Day is only a quarter of an hour away , I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate all lovers : I hope that there are some in this rough , tough , severe Parliament as well .
With regard to the document under consideration , I have tabled an amendment on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party calling for the scope of the directive to include an analysis of policy developments from the viewpoints of certain categories of people such as the elderly , the disabled and other vulnerable groups .
Mr President , this programme appropriates EUR 55 million over five years , chiefly to statistics and the drawing up of documentation on the employment strategy ; we are talking mainly about aid to the Member States to achieve the above statistics .
A small proportion of the amount , which I feel should be increased , is for pilot projects intended to identify new forms of employment and work .
In my opinion , these should certainly include - as Commissioner Diamantopoulou said in her first speech - the new activity of caring for the ever-increasing number of elderly and disabled people carried out by young workers who are able to find work in this field and , at the same time , make life easier for the elderly .
I have already tabled this amendment in committee , Mr President , but I am afraid that the left-wing section of Parliament , the socialists that is , rejected it .
I am tabling it again in the Chamber in the hope that , this time , the request for the scope of the directive to be extended to include this activity as well will be accepted by that section of Parliament which professes always to be sensitive to the problems of elderly and disabled people , that is the left side , and that Mrs Jensen 's central section will vote for this amendment too .
Tomorrow morning , I shall request a vote by name on this amendment , although I am sure that this will not be necessary and that it will be accepted unanimously .
I truly hope that Europe will concern itself , at last , with elderly and disabled people in the field of employment .
Mr President , first of all I want to say to the previous speaker , Mr Fatuzzo , that I am sorry that we in the Group of the Party of European Socialists are unable to support his amendments , for they simply do not fit into this context .
Back to the report , however .
First of all , I want to congratulate the rapporteur .
There is reason for doing so , for this is Mrs Jensen ' s first report , and it is also a very good piece of work she has done .
As we all know , the report was , of course , adopted by a very large majority of the committee .
That is gratifying , for this is a very important piece of work .
This decision must ensure that the employment policy we talk so much about is not just a matter of fine words , but that these are in actual fact backed by vigorous action .
Nor must there be any doubt that we in the Group of the Party of European Socialists support open coordination whenever this is the most effective tool for achieving the desired objectives .
Employment policy is so important because it is the test run for the open coordination method , and it is of the very greatest importance to show that this method is being taken seriously and is producing the desired results .
Employment policy will simply be a model for many of the other areas - which are already part of the ambitious plan adopted in Lisbon last spring - in which we should also like to use the open coordination method .
And in the next few weeks , when Heads of State and Government take the Commission ' s telling-off seriously and give some impetus to the many outstanding initiatives in the wake of the Lisbon Summit , we shall hopefully also have it confirmed that the open coordination method can be used .
The incentive measures must support employment policy , and that is why the incentive measures are important .
I am therefore very pleased that we in the committees were able to reach agreement on a series of amendments and improvements to the Commission ' s proposal .
These amendments relate to five different points .
First of all , information must be provided about employment policy .
Secondly , the parties in the labour market , together with the relevant local and regional authorities , must be involved .
Thirdly , the focus must be placed upon equal opportunities for men and women , in which connection I should like to thank the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities .
Fourthly , an assessment and revision of the open coordination method must be set in motion . And fifthly , the programme must be extended to include pilot projects as well .
What , in other words , we are concerned with here is a quite extensive alteration to the incentive measures which , in a way , were good enough originally .
In this way , we have extended their area of application , and I therefore also hope that , together , we can increase the financial resources we have for implementing the measures so that it will not in any case be possible to accuse Parliament of only producing fine words and not backing them up with genuine action .
I hope that the Commission and the Council are ready to demonstrate the same drive that we have tried to demonstrate here in Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am speaking on behalf of the Italian radicals .
Despite Mrs Jensen 's fine work , I feel that this report is not of great significance .
I know that there is effectively a need to do what the Commission , through its proposal , and the Treaties themselves call for , namely to combine best practices with all speed , to promote innovative processes and approaches and to assess the results .
I do not feel , however , that , in order to do this , there is still a need in the Europe of today to invest EUR 55 million over a small number of years in order to produce more detailed analyses , to attempt to find links between the experiences of the different countries and to promote cooperation - although it is not clear what this means in terms of employment - between the individual countries .
Do we really believe that , in order to carry out benchmarking , today , we need to perform once again yet more studies , to sprinkle euro dust on a thousand small more or less nepotistic channels - some to the trade unions , some to the different business organisations , some to the non-governmental organisations - to finance new studies which will end up , covered in dust , taking up space on the shelves of libraries ?
Mr President , I really do not think we need this .
There may be a need to coordinate the recording of statistics or to consolidate and update the Eurostat comparison methods - I can see that - but I do not feel that we need to be spending money on further studies and analyses , on information exchange , on pilot projects which , when all is said and done , artificially create jobs subsidised by European , State or local public finances and will continue to do so in the future , but which will serve no practical purpose .
We waste time , we confuse the European unemployed , but we do not carry out those reforms which are truly necessary and with which we are all familiar .
A few minutes ago , in this Chamber , we were talking about groups of people who are disadvantaged in terms of employment .
In my country , Italy , thanks to a few reforms - extremely minor reforms opposed by the trade unions - liberalising the labour market , we created hundreds of thousands of new jobs last year , mainly in the disadvantaged areas of the South , for women and young people , but we did this through structural measures , which is what is needed , and not , I regret to say , thanks to new , enormously expensive studies .
Mr President , I disagree with the previous speaker so first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Jensen , on this comprehensive report .
Indeed , there is much that we can support in this report , in particular the emphasis given to the proposed Community-level / local-level mixed approach to employment policy .
In the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities we emphasise that the analysis and evaluation of this action in the field of employment should be carried out on a gender-specific basis , given that women are bearing the brunt of unemployment in Europe .
Commissioner , the Lisbon objectives of bringing up the employment rates for women , a target for 2010 of 60 % can already be considered too ambitious .
In the Kingdom of Spain where the employment rate of women is probably the lowest in the European Union , it hardly reaches 30 % of the active population .
That is why the Committee on Women 's Rights asked for an analysis of the causes of this tremendous gap : part-time working , pregnancy , parental leave , household responsibilities , etc .
That is why we , Euskal Herritarok , ask all the Members of this House to back all the amendments proposed by the Committee on Women 's Rights and of course the actual report by Mrs Jensen .
Mr President , after the abortive Nice Summit , we would do well to remember an event that gave the EU a great boost : the Luxembourg Employment Summit .
That summit succeeded in convincing the Member States actively to do more to improve employability and adaptability , to establish a new entrepreneurial spirit and to enhance equal opportunities .
Since then , model measures in the Member States have been a central plank of Europe 's employment strategy .
A thorough assessment and evaluation of what these have achieved is to take place : reintegration into working life , activities to promote equality of opportunities , elimination of exclusion , and targeted measures to create a suitable environment for setting up small and medium-sized businesses .
Are we right in our view that European added value can be created if actions in the Member States are interlinked with Community initiatives and with Community education , training and further education programmes ?
We want to involve local and regional stakeholders more actively by means of pilot projects and therefore call on the Commission to top up the funding it has proposed .
I believe that a priority here is improved coordination of employment and economic policy , which are , after all , two sides of the same coin .
We now need to have the courage to make more of our potential and not only be consulted when the employment policy guidelines are being drawn up - that is not enough .
As a European Parliament we need to get involved on a more consistent basis in the employment week in Brussels in November , whilst here in Strasbourg we should at long last find time to devote a whole day to a debate on the creation of jobs of the future and the implementation of national action plans .
As part of this , proper attention needs to be paid to the achievements of the social partners and the experiences of employees hit by unemployment and assisted by job creation measures .
Mr President , that would be our contribution towards a good campaign on Europe 's employment strategy .
Mr President , a job - work - is the most important means of preventing exclusion .
The European Union is little able to tackle the question of employment directly .
The Luxembourg process , as it is known , with its yearly reports on employment and its approach to best practices and learning by example , is an excellent attempt to reinforce cooperation among Member States and encourage success and transparency .
A big step forward will be the subsequent Luxembourg process , which invests in new technology and uses it to put Europe on the path to growth .
Action to bolster employment must focus too on where best to obtain added value , in other words , education and training , research , the adoption of new technology as a tool of growth and , in particular , as one of sustainable growth .
We shall have equality by attending to the matter of public social services , which also make it possible for women to be fully represented in the labour market .
Mr President , I wish , first of all , to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Jensen , on the timeliness and the quality of her rapport .
One of the Union ' s objectives is to promote a high level of employment .
Therefore , within the framework of the Luxembourg process , the Member States have been cooperating in the field of employment policy , and are responsible for selecting specific measures for its implementation . In fact , it could not be otherwise .
More recently , the Lisbon European Council set the Union the strategic objective of becoming the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , capable of sustainable economic growth generating more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
This report seeks to make a contribution towards meeting this new challenge set in Lisbon , covering equal opportunities for men and women in the field of employment , an important pillar in the European Employment Strategy .
The report aims to foster cooperation between Member States in analysis , research and monitoring of labour market policy , identifying best practices and promoting exchanges and transfers of information and experience . All of this will be flanked by an active information policy , so that Europe ' s citizens can easily see what the strategic objectives in the field of employment are .
We must ensure that the social partners and relevant local and regional authorities are involved in this effort , which must be a communal effort .
Furthermore , it is equally crucial that a study should be made of infrastructures that help men and women to gain employment and to remain employed , such as crèche places and home help , a point that is made clear in the opinion of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities .
The European Parliament is already a key player within the consultation process in defining the annual employment guidelines and must now also participate in a quantitative and qualitative evaluation of the effects of the European Employment Strategy in general .
I wish to say a final word about the allocation of resources for employment incentive measures .
The use of public funds must be dealt with in a balanced and extremely rigorous way .
An increased budgetary appropriation in this domain would therefore appear to be something that is essential and to be welcomed .
It must also be emphasised that the allocation of resources must meet real , specific needs and take account of the implementation of the budget for each heading .
Mr President , I too would like to join my colleagues in thanking Mrs Jensen for her report and congratulating her on it .
In the limited time that is available it is important that , as a number of speakers have already touched upon a number of disadvantaged groups or groups who are not doing so well in employment areas , we consider a number of aspects , the three most important ones being : equality of opportunity , equality of access and equality of training .
Equality of opportunity must mean that all jobs , all services that are available , are open to all equally .
Equality of access means that there should be no physical impediment towards people accessing training or employment opportunities .
Equality of education means that people must have the skills that are required for the jobs that are going to be available .
We have moved from a time when there was heavy industrialised and intensive labour areas of industry , to other smaller networks , smaller cooperation .
We need to look more towards giving the skills and training to young people , middle-aged people , elderly people and those living in urban and rural areas to guarantee that they have equality of access to that training and new jobs .
The national action plans on employment , under the Luxembourg process , are very useful to us in ensuring that we use the carrot and stick with the Member States .
We can give extra resources where they are providing good jobs and meeting their targets and we can take them back when they are not doing it .
Mr President , as it is now after midnight , I say to you , Mr President and to you , Commissioner , happy Valentine 's day !
This is a very good report .
I say that without surprise as it is by Mrs Jensen , so of course it is a good report .
However , it was a slightly better report before the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs ' improved it ' .
Some of the amendments that have come through have not made it a better document .
I refer to just two aspects .
The first aspect - taking my life in my hands - refers to some of the amendments of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
I strongly support women 's rights .
I strongly support the rights of young people , of old people , of disabled people and many other minorities .
But only the women have their own committee to speak up for them .
At times , perhaps , their voice drowns out some of the other groups , in my judgment .
I take as an example Article 3.1 ( 1 ) where the original text said : " To the maximum possible extent analysis will be gender-specific " .
I agree with that .
It should be gender-specific to the maximum possible extent .
But the Women 's Committee has taken out the words " to the maximum possible extent " .
Apparently " maximum possible " is not quite maximum enough .
I believe it was fine as it was .
I use that as an example , but I am still supportive of women 's rights .
I have my tomato-proof suit on just in case you were thinking of doing something .
The second point concerns the budget .
I believe the Committee on Budgets made a reference to the budget increasing from EUR 50 million to EUR 55 million , but on the basis that this should be proportionate to the implementation .
Last year 's budget was EUR 50 million .
Only two-thirds of that was spent ; 25 % of that was eaten up by administrative costs .
To go up from EUR 55 million to 65 million - which is the latest amendment - is , in my view , disproportionate .
It is a reflection of the enthusiasm of the committee for this particular project .
Sometimes it is all too common that in order to signify the importance of a subject more money is offered to it .
I should like to hope that , increasingly , colleagues could recognise that money is not just a reflection of importance , and that it is possible to vote strongly for a report without increasing the money .
I fear I may have to wait a long time to see that .
Given my advancing years it may be my successors who see that approach first .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12.20 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
Yesterday ' s Minutes have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I refer to the comments made in this Chamber on Monday afternoon with respect to the anti-nuclear demonstration at the Faslane nuclear submarine base in Scotland .
As you are aware , I took part in that demonstration , and I would like to thank all those Members who expressed support for the action that I took when I participated in the largest-ever blockade of the base and was arrested , ironically enough , for committing a breach of the peace .
I just want to say a word to those Members who implied that my actions were somehow irresponsible or inappropriate .
Firstly , nuclear weapons are not only immoral and inhumane , they are also illegal .
The International Court of Justice in The Hague ruled that the possession of nuclear weapons is contrary to international law , and this was reaffirmed by a Scottish court in 1999 .
My action on Monday was therefore upholding the law , not breaking it .
Secondly , I believe nuclear weapons pose such a threat to all of us that it is legitimate and indeed essential to use all peaceful avenues open to us to try to rid our countries of them .
Of course there are parliamentary channels to use to do that , and I use them , but I also believe it is legitimate and essential to use extra-parliamentary channels as well .
It is our responsibility to use them .
A democratic state is not just a gift and right , it is a responsibility .
If citizens do not responsibly demonstrate against the operation of inhumane acts by their governments , the governments become increasingly irresponsive and corrupt .
Finally , it is the right and duty of every citizen , elected or not , to use all peaceful avenues to try to uphold international law .
My action on Monday was one further small step in trying to achieve that .
Mr President , in welcoming my brave and gallant colleague , Mrs Lucas , back to the House , I would like to draw to my colleagues ' attention that today we will also be visited by the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland ; who will be received by the President this evening .

In that connection I would like to repeat Mrs Lucas ' point that it was implied in this House on Monday that only irresponsible hotheads took part in the protest at Faslane .
I ask Members to note that the leader of the Scottish national church , whom we will welcome here tonight , also took a leading part in that protest .
Leading an ecumenical service , he drew attention to the Church 's principled rejection of states ' reliance on weapons of mass destruction .
Profound opposition to nuclear weapons on both legal and moral grounds is a common position among responsible leaders of opinion , both religious and non-religious , throughout Scotland and throughout this great Union .
Mr President , to pick up on the points that Mrs Lucas has raised , I support the sentiments which she has outlined .
However , I would ask if she could prevail upon her colleagues to desist from claiming some sort of parliamentary immunity every time she gets arrested at Faslane .
Long before Mrs Lucas became involved , I had been involved in Faslane for many years and have been arrested there .
I have never once called for parliamentary immunity .
I had my day in court and I had my trial .
I will not go down the road to parliamentary immunity because I want my day in court and I want to make my point and not hide behind some smokescreen .
Mr President , can I just establish for yesterday 's Minutes a correction to my vote .
I intended to vote yes on the Rübig Report .
Mr President , my point also relates to the Minutes .
I wonder if it might be recorded on page 11 in the English version of the Minutes , at Item 8 where we talk about voting time , that the votes commenced at 12.12 p.m.
They were advertised on the screen as commencing at 12.15 p.m. and for that reason some of us missed some of the early votes .
Mr President , regretfully we have learnt that exactly one month after an earthquake devastated El Salvador a similar tremor struck this Central American country again yesterday .
I am sure that our Delegation for Relations with the Countries of Central America and Mexico will set all the machinery in motion to urge the Community authorities , starting with the Commission , to renew their efforts of solidarity with this country .
We will look into this matter .
If you are right , the Minutes will , of course , be corrected , as you say .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , very briefly , as a member of the Delegation for Relations with the Countries of Central America and Mexico , I should also like to express our concern that the people of El Salvador have once more been afflicted by a natural disaster , and to urge that aid should arrive as soon as possible so that what happened after Mitch does not happen again , because if aid takes a long time to arrive it is the population that suffers .
Thank you , Mr Carnero González . I believe that the House would join you in hoping this .
Accession partnership with Turkey
The next item is the report ( A5-0024 / 2001 ) by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council regulation on assistance to Turkey in the framework of the pre-accession strategy , and in particular on the establishment of an Accession Partnership [ COM ( 2000 ) 502 - C5-0468 / 2000 - 2000 / 0205 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , after lengthy pronouncements and promises , the European Union - or to be more precise , the Helsinki European Council - has formally recognised Turkey as a candidate for membership of the European Union .
And the purpose of our debate and vote today is also to bring Turkey closer to this membership , or , more precisely , to the possibility of opening negotiations .
If , as I would hope , we adopt my report here today and the Council reaches a decision along similar lines , the ball will be well and truly in the Turkish half of the pitch .
Turkey will then have to act .
The time for reaction - as has happened all too often with Turkey - will have passed , and Turkey will have to take the crucial steps .
For it must be clear , ladies and gentlemen - and I include our colleagues from Turkey who may be following this debate today - that the Copenhagen criteria must be fulfilled prior to the opening of negotiations .
We have not negotiated with any candidate before the political criteria were fulfilled .
So in this sense , we are demanding that Turkey meet the same conditions as all the other candidates .
Turkey is neither privileged nor disadvantaged .
That is the essence of my report , and it is also the essence of those paragraphs - which , however , have apparently now been called into question - which aim to ensure that Turkey has the same status as all the other candidates .
After all , it makes little sense to talk about equal treatment for Turkey , and impose the same obligations on Turkey , if we are not prepared to grant it the same rights as well .
And of course it will be a very difficult path - in Turkey , and for Turkey - to fulfil the criteria .

There are at least three significant trends in Turkey : those who are pro-Europe because they support democracy , transparency and respect for human and minority rights ; those who are pro-Europe but have substantial doubts about adopting European values and fundamental rights ; and those who are fundamentally opposed to Europe , largely because they are sceptical about the adoption of the basic rights and values to which we in Europe are committed .
But it is up to Turkey to take the domestic policy decisions .
Certainly , I believe that we - this Parliament - should send out a clear signal that the forces in Turkey which want to follow the path towards Europe and full democracy have our support .
And that is the essence of my report as well .
We hope that Turkey will make substantial progress in the coming years .
Some people harbour the illusion that negotiations could begin in one or two years ' time .
I don 't want to discourage or disappoint anyone , but it will take several years .
But one thing must also be clear , in my view : if it genuinely proves impossible to open negotiations within a specific period - which in my personal opinion should be around five years - because the political criteria have not been fulfilled , the European Union and Turkey must consider another form of partnership .
For we are Turkey 's partners anyway , and we must be good partners .
Firstly - I would not wish to deny this - Turkey is a key economic factor .
And indeed , we should not deny this .
Secondly , Europe has a significant interest in ensuring that there is at least one stable major country in this crisis-torn region .
Thirdly , we have no interest in abandoning Turkey to the Islamic fundamentalists , for we are opposed to all religious or other forms of fundamentalism on principle .
Fourthly , there are regional problems to be resolved : improving relations with Greece , and especially the Cyprus issue .
I should like to come back to this point in a moment .
Turkey must understand that we demand every candidate country 's absolute willingness to maintain good relations with its neighbours .
A key element of the preparations for negotiations with Turkey is that it regulates its relations with Greece in a positive way and contributes significantly to the resolution of the Cyprus issue .
It is a difficult issue .
All sides , and everyone concerned , must play their part in settling the Cyprus issue ; this naturally includes the representatives of the Turkish community and especially Turkey itself .
Let me conclude with two further brief comments .
Firstly , on the Kurdish issue : it goes without saying that resolving the problems with the Kurdish community in Turkey also features on the agenda .
We have stated quite clearly that the use of the Kurdish language - also in the media - and the fostering of , and the opportunity to express , Kurdish identity are key factors in changing the political conditions in Turkey as well .
As far as the Armenia issue is concerned , I personally am opposed to the notion that foreign parliaments should seek to judge history and events which took place a hundred years ago .
But I am also opposed to the exploitation of this issue for nationalist purposes in Turkey .
A more relaxed and , above all , a more active role in the Armenia issue would be helpful .
If Turkey were to take steps to invite its own historians and those from Armenia and third countries to come together to discuss this issue , this would also be a step forward towards a sensible debate about this question .
In this spirit , ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you to adopt my proposal in order to give Turkey the opportunity to prove that it wishes to follow the path towards Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the draftsman of the Committee on Budgets ' opinion on the Swoboda report concerning the establishment of an Accession Partnership with Turkey , I fully support the document as it stands .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has taken account of all the amendments proposed by the Committee on Budgets .
The following points were important for the Committee on Budgets .
The first appeared to be a budgetary matter , but it is actually a political issue .
The Committee on Budgets called for the appropriations for Turkey to be switched from Heading 4 of the Financial Perspective , i.e. external action , to Heading 7 , i.e. Pre-accession Aid , in order to reflect Turkey 's status as a candidate for accession .
In a further proposed amendment , the Committee on Budgets made it clear that the volume of Community assistance should be determined annually by the budgetary authority , i.e. the Council and Parliament , as part of the budgetary procedure .
Two further proposed amendments concerned the need for consultation with Parliament as part of the cooperation with Turkey , firstly when the principles , priorities , intermediate objectives and conditions contained in the Accession Partnership are decided , and , secondly , when appropriate steps are agreed in the event that commitments are not respected by Turkey .
As all the points put forward by the Committee on Budgets have been taken up by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , we are quite satisfied from a budgetary point of view .
Indeed , as far as the financial aspects are concerned , the Committee on Foreign Affairs actually went even further , for example with its proposed amendment on Turkey 's inclusion in the other financial instruments .

Let me make one last comment : in the coming years , we will all have to push hard for real new money to be made available to Turkey , which is now a candidate country - and indeed to the other candidates for accession - rather than merely bundling the existing programmes together . Without new money , the candidates for accession will be unable to fulfil the criteria which we have established for them .
Mr President , first of all , I have a great deal of respect for Mr Swoboda ' s report , which , in particular , deals expertly with a number of technical points relating to Turkey , but , of course , this goes beyond the technical .
We all know that there is a difference between Turkey , a candidate country which is not in a position to engage in accession negotiations yet because the political Copenhagen criteria have not been fulfilled yet , and other candidate countries that are involved in the negotiation process leading to EU membership .
This distinction has been drawn on sensible political grounds .
It will also be reflected in our financial dealings with Turkey , as compared with our dealings with other candidate countries .
I would therefore like to make the point that whilst in general , the positive attitude towards Turkey expressed in the report certainly appeals to our group , we have the feeling it goes a little too far on one particular point , and I would specifically like to hear the Commission ' s opinion on this .
I am referring to Amendment No 1 , which states that Turkey should be included in the ISPA and SAPARD financial instruments in order to ensure that all candidate countries are treated equally .
I do not think that such a step constitutes equal treatment in the real sense .
In the past , if the political situation was not to our liking , or if we felt it left something to be desired in certain countries , then we have said that we would take this into account on all kinds of different points .
We would then draw a distinction on the point in question , irrespective as to whether it was a large country or a small one that we had certain political objections to .
Only yesterday , I had a detailed discussion with the excellent Turkish Ambassador about these matters .
It comes down to the question of what has to change in a country for it to become a fully-fledged candidate country involved in accession negotiations .
If ISPA and SAPARD are already being discussed - and these instruments were not intended for Turkey hitherto - then Amendment No 1 would mean money being taken out of the budgets intended for the candidate countries currently engaged in accession negotiations .
In other words , we are talking about those countries that have fulfilled the Copenhagen criteria , for example .
I have a feeling this would have a demoralising effect .
I would specifically like to know from the Commission to what extent this would actually have financial implications .
How would Amendment No 1 actually affect the other candidate countries ?
Would it mean a cut in the budget for the other candidate countries we are negotiating with , for Turkey ' s benefit ?
What exactly is the situation ?
If that were so , I would find it most strange .
Or is it perhaps the case that the Financial Perspective could be extended , allowing Amendment No 1 to be implemented without adversely affecting the other candidate countries ?
I think that technically speaking , it would be extremely difficult to effect this budgetary change .
So on this one point , I would very much like a clear answer from the Commission as to the impact that Amendment No 1 will have .
Because the fact is that our group has some major doubts about accepting something that will have such a negative impact , particularly on the other candidate countries , with whom negotiations are proceeding well .
That does not seem to us to be fair , and so we should rethink the situation .
If we want to do something for Turkey then there is always the Customs Union .
We are neglecting this at the moment .
I fully understand people ' s irritation over this , also in the financial sense .
We must bring these matters to a sound conclusion .
I could not agree more .
If we can do all these things better , technically speaking , by amalgamating instruments for example , then this is what we must do .
But taking budgets away from candidate countries that we are negotiating with over accession , for the benefit of a candidate country that has not yet reached this stage , seems to me to be a very sore point .
On behalf of my group , I would be grateful if the Commission could tell us just exactly what the score is .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Turkey has been offered a partnership agreement and , from a procedural point of view , it is right that we should now give this partnership agreement a legal basis , even though Turkey has not yet presented a national programme which will allow us to judge just how far it is prepared to assimilate the various points of the partnership agreement .
However , Mr Swoboda 's report is not a standard procedural report , because the country which is the subject of the report is not a standard candidate country .
It is a large country and it is very different from the other candidate countries .
This difference provokes certain general comments .
Turkey 's candidacy puts not just Turkey , but the European Union to the test .
It is not just Turkey , ladies and gentlemen , which is sitting exams in order to become a member .
In this particular case , the European Union is also sitting exams , in numerous subjects .
First of all , in the subject of religious tolerance .
The opinion which , I think , prevails among most European citizens , is that a different religion should not be an obstacle to the accession of a new member .
In democratic Europe , we are proud of our religious tolerance , but we have never been asked to put it to the test as we are now .
It is a crucial test of the sincerity of our declarations and we must not flunk it .
The second exam which we are sitting is in powers of persuasion , i.e. our ability to persuade Turkey of the value of substantive acceptance of our democratic institutions .
I stress substantive acceptance because Turkey has not refused to accept democracy formally ; hardly anyone in the world today does .
However , there is a wide body of opinion which believes that a democratic state starts and ends with a multi-party system and regular elections .
Obviously that will not suffice .
It is here , with the substantive acceptance of democracy , that Turkey 's development post-Helsinki gives rise to serious questions .
Turkey creates the impression , following the European Council 's gesture in December 1999 , which was welcomed joyfully by the Turkish people , that it is moving away from - rather than towards - a substantive democracy .
The amnesty law passed freed many a criminal ; but it did not free people sentenced for daring to express an opinion or talk their own language .
Leyla Zana , the European Parliament Sakharov prizewinner , is still in jail .
The state of emergency persists in south-eastern Turkey and cadres of the legal Kurdish party HADEP have disappeared in the region and been declared missing .
The tragedy provoked when the security forces stormed the jails caused public outrage .
We expect to see Turkey move forward ; instead all we see is it moving backwards .
We are also sitting exams in our ability to persuade Turkey of the value of peaceful relations between former enemies .
Here Turkey 's conduct shows a regressive trend .
We expect words of reconciliation on Cyprus ; instead all we hear is the clang of arms .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the Middle Ages , Turkey and its army came knocking on Europe 's door in Vienna .
The door remained closed .
Today Turkey is again knocking on our door , this time in peace , because over the intervening centuries , the real power has passed not to the advocates of military force but to the powers of liberty , democracy , rationalism and science .
Herein lies the power of Great Europe and anyone who wants to share in Europe 's greatness must truly espouse its principles ; otherwise the door to Europe will remain firmly closed .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Swoboda for his speech and also the report .
My group supports the regulation , not only because of its technical and financial value to Turkey , but also for the political message it sends .
The regulation is a confidence-building measure .
It shows we treat Turkey 's candidacy for European membership with the respect that it surely deserves .
It squares Turkey 's candidacy with that of the other states , sending a signal that we will be fair and straightforward with Turkey and setting an example of the political consistency that we expect and require from the Turks .
The regulation will trigger a raft of reforms .
It is certain that the quality and pace of reform in Turkey will be driven by the developing relationship with the European Union .
The next step must be the national plan , published quickly and fully responding to the Accession Partnership programme .
We need this national plan to ensure that the momentum that supports European integration in Turkey does not diminish .
We in the Liberal Group will assess this national programme for reform critically but fairly .
Mr President , the Council ' s proposed regulation is a logical successor to the Helsinki decisions .
If a country is a candidate country then a clear strategy and a clear financing package are required , just as they are for other candidate countries .
It is a sound proposal and Mr Swoboda ' s amendments improve on it .
What is currently more interesting to my mind , is the question as to whether Turkey and the European Union have drawn closer together since the Helsinki decisions .
My own group is still facing the same dilemma on that level .
As you all know , we were , and still are , highly critical of the Turkish Government ' s record as regards human rights , the position of the Kurds and the dominant position of the army .
The crucial question then , and now , is what can , and must , the EU do to improve the situation ?
The answer then , and now , is that the only way to achieve this is through dialogue , in the context of enlargement and membership .
This is also because the forces we are in touch with , the progressive forces , regard Europe ' s support as something that will help them on their way to change .
The question now is does this strategy work ?
I fear it is too early to say because the picture is extremely mixed .
Let me cite the prisoners ' riot by way of example .
Of course it was a step in the right direction to propose that , henceforth , there should no longer be thirty prisoners to one large cell , rather there should be single occupancy , or only a few people to a cell .
Naturally , that is the kind of improvement we have always pushed for .
However , the picture is greatly obscured by the fact that the regime in prisons is exactly as it always was .
And this regime goes hand in hand with acts of torture , which are now said to be easier to perpetrate because of the individual cells .
My group 's response is that we must continue to pursue this strategy , but - and Mr Swoboda has also reminded us of this - there is absolutely no guarantee of success .
The price of accession is high , high for the army and for the supporters of the monolithic unified state .
Can we compel , or perhaps entice them to pay this price ?
It is the European Union ' s responsibility to ask this question and have a crack at it .
With that in mind , and as I said before , the regulation is a positive step and the amendments represent an improvement .
However , it is up to Turkey - and that , I think , is what needs to emerge from this debate - to see whether these overtures towards the European Union are sincerely meant , because my group ' s motto still holds good : no radical reforms without the prospect of membership , but without radical reforms , no prospect of membership .
Mr President , Mr Swoboda 's proposals for the Council regulation are appropriate , in my view .
I think they would enhance the regulation . I would also like to thank him very much for his explanations .
I do not want to repeat the criticism of the situation in Turkey which has already been expressed by Mr Swoboda , Mr Lagendijk and Mr Oostlander .
The situation has certainly not improved in recent weeks and months .
Our parliamentary group recently sent a delegation to Turkey ; it came back with devastating reports from people affected , which we would gladly make available to the Commission , the Council Presidency or our parliamentary colleagues .
But I do not want to go into that here .
Mr Swoboda , you said that the ball is now well and truly in the Turkish half of the pitch .
What would be the result of this Austrian footballing analogy , I wonder ? Which side will score ?
And if it is at the EU 's end , is it an own goal ?
What we need , as I am sure you will agree , is for this process to set the ball rolling towards democracy , human rights , and the fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria .
But I believe that in Turkey , the ball - which really is in the Turkish half of the pitch - is viewed in a completely different way .
I believe that what has happened recently has been provocation .
It is not an attempt to pursue the application for EU membership towards its proper goal ; it is an end in itself , in order to secure financial resources , to utilise the benefits conferred by the Customs Union , or even to ensure that the criticism of the situation in Turkey is toned down .
This brings me to the real issue which I would like to raise .
Alongside the necessary and very candid criticism of the situation in Turkey , should we not be examining our own policies very critically as well ?
Since Helsinki - and , indeed , in Helsinki - it seems as if the Council and Commission have been the victims of their own propaganda , increasingly having to justify the fact that progress has been made .
Mr Verheugen , you informed us here on 14 November that we have , and I quote , " good cause to hope that we will achieve precisely what we set out to achieve , i.e. that our policy will help the forces of reform in Turkey give new impetus to the reform process and press on with reform ... " .
I would claim that the reality is very different .
I realise that diplomacy often has to work very cautiously , but we should not be taken in by our own propaganda , or Turkey 's . We should approach the debate honestly and strengthen the forces of reform , thus opening the way for Turkey into the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our position on Turkey ' s accession to the European Union is well known .
We clearly expressed this position in Parliament ' s part-session last November during the debate on the report on the progress of Turkey ' s preparations for accession .
We have nothing against the great Turkish nation or against its close relationship with the European Union .
In fact , the opposite is true . We simply feel that the traditional cautiousness that has characterised our attitude to Turkey ' s candidature has been changed without any coherent political debate on the matter .
Can the reasons for our cautiousness have disappeared or become less pressing ?
First of all , there is the geographical problem : do we no longer think that just a small portion of Turkey ' s territory is actually part of the European continent ?
What new doctrine on the shape of Europe allows us to frame this new concept of external borders that would result from Turkey ' s inclusion in the Union ?
Must Europe gain a new border , one that is not only outside Europe but which is riven with war and conflict ?
We only have to think of the possibility of being surrounded by countries such as Iran , Iraq or Syria .
What can we say about the contrast with the democratic model shared by all Europeans , brought about by the countless restrictions that are , unfortunately , still being imposed in Turkey on the exercise of fundamental rights ?
How can we reconcile Turkey ' s accession to the Union with its ongoing military conflict with Greece over Cyprus ?
What about the Kurdish question , which is making no progress ?
And what of the military ' s influence over the regime which is still powerful ?
Lastly , does no one question the impact that the size of Turkey ' s population will have on the social and economic cohesion of an enlarged Europe ?
Have all these issues changed or become significantly less serious ?
We do not think so .
We even think that we are not alone in holding this opinion .
The more optimistic among you will say that we are the ones who are failing to see the good progress that has been made to date .
Is this the case ?
Let us see what the Commission ' s latest report on the Turkish situation has to say .
It does indeed acknowledge considerable progress in the field of macro-economic stability and in improving the most striking imbalances in Turkey ' s economy . We are not naïve and realise that this is probably what counts .
Turkey ' s economic importance for the European Union today is considerable .
In 2000 , for example , the European Union was responsible for 52.9 % of Turkey ' s imports and 53.1 % of its exports . Obviously , we cannot ignore this fact .
Nevertheless , we strongly recommend reading this report in the light of respect for freedom of expression and of association , which the Commission has stated are being limited .
The report should be read in the light of the situation in the field of economic , social and cultural rights , which the document says have not changed since 1999 , in the light of the judicial system , whose functioning has still not been improved , and of corruption , which is still taking place at worrying levels . The report deals with the military dimension of the regime , torture and abuse , which are far from being totally eradicated and which lead the Commission to conclude that , and I quote , ' with regard to the previous year ' - 1999 - ' the situation on the ground has not improved and Turkey is not systematically fulfilling the Copenhagen political criteria ' .
Mr President , the proposal for a Council regulation that we are going to vote on tomorrow creates a legal framework which will enable Turkey to benefit from a pre-accession strategy , just like the other candidate countries .
This strategy provides for a kind of suspensive clause , which will be triggered specifically if there is insufficient progress towards fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria .
Parliament wants to be involved in this evaluation process , which is all well and good .
In the meantime , however , given the real framework drawn up by the Commission itself , we need to ask whether this suspensive clause will be anything more than an example of political hypocrisy .
Otherwise , we will only be able to conclude that what the Commission is proposing for Turkey gives partnership for accession with one hand and , with the other , suspends it indefinitely .
Mr President , in December 1999 , the Helsinki European Council accorded Turkey EU candidate country status ; a radical decision given the distinctly tricky mutual relations of previous decades .
At any rate , it was a step too far for our taste .
After all , the political and cultural divide between the two parties is far too wide .
Ongoing tensions bear this out .
Consider for example the current diplomatic clash between Paris and Ankara over the historical interpretation of the dreadful fate of the Armenian minority within the Osman Empire in 1915 .
However , awarding Turkey candidate country status means that Europe now has certain obligations .
The Commission , and not least the rapporteur , are approaching this in a fair and reasonable way , and so we will support Mr Swoboda ' s report .

Two elements of the proposed Accession Partnership have reinforced this decision .
Firstly , the strengthening of the Customs Union between the European Community and Turkey , our alternative to the inevitable mutual trials that would result from Turkey ' s accession to the EU .
Secondly , Article 4 of the Commission proposal .
If Turkey absolutely fails to make any discernible progress in fulfilling the Copenhagen accession criteria , i.e. if it fails to establish a functioning democratic constitutional state with protection for minorities , then we expect the Council and the Commission to take ' appropriate measures ' in conformity with Article 4 .
Rapporteur Swoboda is right , in this specific case , to call for consultation of Parliament , which would be acting within the scope of its authority .
Mr President , Ankara has still not set a course for Europe by implementing an unequivocal policy of reform .
Yet it is still being given the chance to join the EU .
We must now wait for a clear Turkish response , and that will demand a lot of patience on Europe ' s part .
However , we must not let ourselves be talked into simply disregarding our carefully compiled accession criteria for that reason .
Mr President , in principle , we welcome any attempt to improve conditions in Turkey and bring the country closer to the European Union .
But the question is under what conditions and with what financial resources .
A great deal has been said , quite rightly , about the human rights problems in Turkey , the Kurdish issue , and even recognition of the genocide against the Armenian people .
I myself visited Turkey as a trial observer a few months ago at the invitation of a group of students , and it was not a very encouraging experience .
It is interesting to note , for example , that the rapporteur himself , who has tabled a most interesting report , has changed his views on Turkey over recent years .
But we should not reproach him for doing so , for everyone has the right to alter their opinion .
Financial support for Turkey to boost those forces which want to move closer to Europe and achieve further improvements in democratic conditions must take place in tandem with observation of the human rights situation , however , and must not reduce the financial resources earmarked for other countries .
So we are interested in the TDI 's idea of setting up a kind of Council of the Wise , which would monitor human rights on an ongoing basis and make funding for specific projects conditional on improvements in this area .
Mr President , the Accession Partnership sets out a series of important and challenging priorities for Turkey to address as part of its preparations for European Union membership .
It will certainly test the resolve of Turkey to carry out much-needed reforms in the area of human rights .
A very topical aspect of this relates to freedom of expression , the functioning of the judicial system and the conditions in Turkish prisons .
This has been mentioned by previous speakers this morning and I spoke on this subject during our debate last month .
Following the adoption of a resolution by this House on the situation in Turkish prisons , I wrote to the Turkish authorities drawing particular attention to the request that Members of this Parliament should visit Turkish prisons to see the situation for themselves .
On 5 February , I received a reply from the Turkish Ambassador informing me that the Turkish Ministry of Justice was willing to allow a delegation of MEPs to visit F-type prisons in order to see some of the problems and the steps being taken to overcome them .
To my mind , this confirms the willingness of the Turkish authorities to engage with us in a positive and open manner .
It also demonstrates that some understanding for the Turkish situation , some balance rather than a constant barrage of politically motivated reproach , is more likely to lead to improvement in those areas where we have justified criticisms .
Constant references to events which took place generations ago in different circumstances should be avoided .
These merely serve to sustain generalised , stereotypical , negative images of Turkey and the Turkish peoples .
In this context , Parliament 's facilities should not be used for exhibitions designed to whip up hatred and I hope that this sentiment will be conveyed by the President to the Quaestors .
Let us look forward rather than constantly harking back .
We support the Swoboda report and the sensible amendments tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
Mr President , when I am in Turkey , I am always told that the European Parliament is Turkey 's enemy .
Here today , we have made it clear that this accusation is untrue .
The objective debate about Turkey , the speeches , the regulation , or at least the Commission 's proposed regulation , and the rapporteur 's report have in fact shown that the European Parliament is very keen to help Turkey and make it clear that there is absolutely no desire for hostility ; instead , together with the people of Turkey , we want to welcome Turkey as a democratic country in the European Union one day , and are developing sensible proposals to this end .
And here today , our colleagues from the Turkish Parliament are listening to us and following the debate .
I would like to tell them something : we have no great interest in constantly talking about what is wrong in Turkey , but let me explain why we express criticism when they exercise their mandate in Turkey .
We are politicians , and we rightly ask about the politicians .
I have here a quote from a Turkish newspaper , not a Kurdish organisation 's newspaper , and with your permission , I would like to read you an excerpt . It says , " Serdar Tanis , Chairman of HADEP in Silopi , and Ebubekir Deniz , HADEP secretary , have disappeared .
On 25 January , they were summoned by the gendarmerie to the gendarmerie station in Silopi and have not been seen since . "
I think this is our problem .
If this type of thing occurs again and again in Turkey and nothing is done about it , people will have to accept that our criticism is justified .
Then they will have to admit that we are right to adopt a highly critical approach to the Turkish issue .
Mr President , first and foremost I too would like , on behalf of the ELDR Group , to congratulate Mr Swoboda on his excellent report and the measured words of his introduction .
This is another small but still very important step on the long road leading to Turkey ' s accession to the European Union .
There are still a great many obstacles to be overcome along the way .
The political reforms and human rights are of course the first areas to spring to mind , but there are also problems with the economic reforms and Turkey must also satisfy requirements pertaining to environmental legislation .
There is nothing unusual at all in the fact that Europe is helping Turkey on its way .
However , we do expect that in return , Turkey will take our criticism seriously in the same spirit of trust and cooperation .
The Swoboda report is a technical-financial report that follows logically from the Helsinki conclusions .
But reading between the lines , it does highlight a very important message , namely Turkey belongs in Europe .
The ELDR Group wholeheartedly supports this fundamental message .
We are therefore disappointed that other noises are often to be heard from this Parliament .
In particular , noises are occasionally heard from the right side of the House to the effect that Europe should remain a Christian club where Muslims are not welcome .
We repudiate that kind of intolerance .
Europe is a secular Community , a Community of equal rights , religious freedom and openness .
Although there is still a long way to go , particularly in the field of human rights , Turkey will belong to this Europe one day .
Mr President , we oppose Turkey 's accession to the European Union because we are certain that the people of Turkey have nothing to gain .
On the contrary , even those in Turkey who believed that its accession would help democratise the country have come to realise , since Turkey was granted candidate status of the European Union , that the opposite is true .
And , if you believed your own declarations on democracy and human rights , declarations which come thick and fast , you would not spend a single euro of the European Union taxpayers ' money supporting a military regime which crassly tramples all over human rights .
The money being given to the Turkish Government is in fact being spent on the continued repression of the Kurdish people and the refusal to find a political solution to the Kurdish problem .
It is being spent on the continuing occupation of 38 % of Cyprus and the solution , Mr Swoboda , does not lie in Greece or Cyprus , it lies in an end to this occupation and in the application of the UNO resolutions .
And yet , even recently , Turkish leaders stated that the Cyprus problem was resolved in 1974 .
The funding proposed by the Council and basically supported in the Swoboda report will be used not for the economic and social development of Turkey , but to support the repressive mechanisms of the Turkish state , which recently demonstrated what it is capable of by barbarically attacking the prisons , killing dozens of political prisoners on hunger strike , and by imprisoning and maltreating even children .
The European Union 's overtures to and funds for Turkey are encouraging the regime to continue and extend its inhumane , repressive policies and are being cited by the regime at home as Europe 's acknowledgement of the fact that Turkey is a democratic country .
Which is why our feelings of solidarity and brotherhood with the people of Turkey who suffer this policy require that we vote against the Council 's proposal , which also illustrates just how hypocritical these declarations about democracy and the Swoboda report are .
Mr President , on 8 November the Commission adopted the reports for the year 2000 on the progress made towards accession by each of the 15 countries .
It considered that all of them , with only the exception of Turkey , were observing the political criteria set in Copenhagen .
Despite that , a fortnight afterwards , Turkey attended for the first time the fourth conference on the European Union social funds .
During the summit in Nice , Turkey promised that the new F-type prisons where physical and psychological torture exist would no longer be used .
We all ought to read the report of the human rights mission from 26 December until New Year 's Eve .
This report has been presented in Brussels and shows the desperate situation of hundreds of prisoners in Turkish prisons , in particular those of Kurdish origin .
Article 4 of the proposal dealt with by Mr Swoboda should be implemented immediately .
We do not need to go any further .
This must be stopped right now .
Otherwise , is this the right way to guarantee the promotion of Kurdish identity ?
As Mr Brie has pointed out , reality contradicts us .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Turkey is the key country above all others in creating good relations between the Christian and the Muslim worlds .
This fact can never be underestimated - especially in the light of the situation that Turkey is officially a secular state , while its citizens are overwhelmingly Muslims .
At the same time , modern Turkey is also the second land of the Bible , where Saint Paul built up his first Christian congregations .
My first question to the Commissioner and the Council is therefore : in which way are you prepared to help promote religious dialogue between Christians and Muslims ?
My second question is : what concrete measures are being taken to strengthen religious freedom in Turkey , the whole of the Middle East and North Africa ?
There are many of us wondering , especially millions of Coptic Christians in Egypt .
I would like to discuss a practical case in Turkey .
On 22 February the trial of the Syrian Christian priest Yusuf Akbulut will continue from December last year before the State Security Court in Diyarbakir .
The prosecution derives from Section 312 of the penal code used to try several politicians and writers , including Yasar Kemal , in which actions which " openly stir up and incite the population " to animosity and hate by highlighting differences in religion , race , social class or geographical area are prohibited .
Yusuf Akbulut is on trial for having been quoted in the newspaper Huriyet on 3 October 2000 as having welcomed the US Congress recognition of the genocide perpetrated against Armenians in 1915-1918 .
In this context he added the fact that other Christian peoples such as the Assyrians / Syrians were also murdered during the genocide .
For these statements he risks several years of imprisonment .
The trial raises a number of issues ranging from the absurd matter of having such a vague and , with regard to freedom of speech and opinion , unclear paragraph such as Section 312 in the penal code , to the evidence and the background to the case .
We in the Christian Democratic parliamentary Group PPE-DE are following the case .
My third , and final , question to the Commissioner and to the Swedish Presidency is this : are you prepared to carefully monitor the case of Yusuf Akbulut ?
Mr President , Mr Lagendijk once said , and rightly so , that recently , since Helsinki , the gap between the European Union and Turkey has narrowed ; but the problem is that the gap between Turkey and democratic principles , respect for human rights and compliance with international law remains almost as wide as ever .
What we have to achieve is that , as the gap between Turkey and the European Union is reduced , the gap between Turkey and democracy , human rights and international resolutions is reduced proportionally .
The truth , however , is that in recent times things have not been going well in this area in Turkey , where human rights are still being violated .
For example , we know of the letter by Pierre Sané , the secretary of Amnesty International , to the Commission and Council at the end of last year , and also the threats in the last few days to Akin Birdal and the Turkish Human Rights Association , the persistent declarations by the Turkish authorities on the situation of the Kurdish people and the Cyprus conflict , and many other matters .
In adopting the Swoboda report we will for the nth time be sending a positive message to Turkey : look , we in the European Union want our relations to get better and better and for you to be part of our great family , but for this to happen it is essential that you comply with democratic principles .
We have to get this message understood by Ankara , but at the moment they do not want to understand .
The message is a positive response but with this reasoning , with these conditions , with this hope that demonstrable steps will effectively be taken in the immediate future .
I can suggest some , such as freeing our Sakharov prize-winner Leyla Zana , taking a constructive and committed attitude towards Cyprus and the Kurds , and , of course , adopting the essential legal changes to certain laws which date from the military dictatorship and still do not respect human rights .
Mr President , first I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Swoboda , for an excellent report , and the same goes to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , and Common Security and Defence Policy for their realistic presentation of the matter .
The regulation under discussion concerns pre-accession aid to Turkey .
Turkey was accepted as a candidate country at the Helsinki Summit .
For this reason , it would be appropriate if we treated it as we do the other candidate countries .
The EU Financial Perspective includes a Heading 7 covering pre-accession aid .
Every year around three billion euros are set aside there - rather more than that , in fact .
In the EU budget , however , pre-accession aid to Turkey , as with Cyprus and Malta also , has been placed under Heading 4 , " External Action " .
These countries are therefore actually accorded a different status from the other candidate countries .
In addition , the same objective , that is to say , pre-accession aid , is being financed now from two different headings , which is blurring the transparency of the budget .
Heading 7 , " Pre-accession Aid " , has not been used correctly .
Payment appropriations are lagging far behind committed appropriations , and this is thus clearly a case of over-budgeting , which is realised as unspent resources that are returning to the Member States .
However , Heading 4 , " External Action " has become over-burdened .
For two years in succession now - at 200 million euros per year - a flexibility instrument has had to be used to finance it , something which in fact is Parliament ' s own disposable fund for unforeseen expenses .
Parliament has thus borne a greater responsibility for EU foreign policy than the Council .
Budgeting for pre-accession aid for Turkey , Cyprus and Malta in Heading 4 has increased the over-burdening further and jeopardised the ready availability of these funds .
For that reason I support the proposals in the report to switch these funds to Heading 7 .
Mr President , in my opinion , Turkey has a place in Europe , for both geographical and historical reasons , and no one can stop it from taking its rightful place , along with its culture , history and religion .
That is one issue and it is a separate issue from the Swoboda report , which we are dealing with here , the philosophy behind which is that we should put Turkey , from the point of view of funding mechanisms , on the same basis as the other candidate countries .
This position is wrong for three reasons .
The first reason is because , in Turkey 's case , the Copenhagen criteria have not yet been met . This distinguishes it from the other candidate countries .
The second reason is because we should not discriminate .
In the case of Slovakia , in the case of Slovenia , in the case of the Baltic states which failed to apply human rights or had other problems , the integration process , including funding , stopped until they came into line .
The third reason is because , if the European Union continues down this line , it is paving the way for a huge showdown with Turkey ; it is writing out cheques which will be referred to drawer and at some point it will be called to account , whereas what we need is a policy of steady progress in which - if need be - the European Union takes the first , the second , the third , even the fourth step , but in which Turkey too takes a step .
Just yesterday we were talking with Mr Verheugen about 12-year-old children who are in prison because they belong to the PKK , about Leyla Zana , who received the Sakharov prize and who is in prison .
So let Turkey take a step on the Cyprus issue , on the Kurdish question and on human rights before we go down this line .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I am sure that everyone here in this Chamber wants a modern , progressive Turkey .
However , to be perfectly honest , I am beginning to wonder if Turkey wants the same thing .
That notwithstanding , the message which we must send out is that , if Turkey joins the European Union , it must adjust to European standards and not the other way round , with the European Union adjusting to Turkish standards .
To be honest , I am not sure if this message has got across - I am referring , Mr President , to the period following the approval of the partnership - and I should simply like to draw the House 's attention to two facts .
First , to what happened in the Turkish jails which was condemned by the European Parliament .
And , secondly , to the hard line stance taken by the Turkish-Cypriot leader Denktash , who is refusing to sit down to inter-community talks and who is being encouraged in this stance by Turkey .
Turkey has obligations on both these issues under the partnership agreement and is choosing to ignore them .
In all events , even if you overlook Turkey 's disdain , so far at least , for its obligations under the partnership agreement , you will be brought up short by Amendment No 1 proposing that Turkey participate in the ISPA and SAPARD programmes .
This amendment is totally unacceptable and I will tell you just two reasons why .
The first reason is that the budget for these programmes has already been decided .
It was decided and agreed in Berlin - Mr Verheugen was personally involved in this agreement as Germany 's Minister of European Affairs and knows all about it - and cannot be increased .
Consequently , the only solution would be to cut the share of the other Central and Eastern European candidate countries , such as Poland , Romania , Bulgaria , etc . , which would then receive less money .
The second reason , and this is very important , is that , when it adopted the ISPA and SAPARD programmes , the European Parliament voted against amendments seeking to fund pre-accession tools , Cyprus and Malta from these programmes , on the grounds that Cyprus and Malta were being funded under the ÌÅDA programme .
May I remind the House that Turkey also benefits from the MEDA programme .
What I am wondering , therefore , is why we said no to Cyprus and Malta and are now preparing to say yes to Turkey .
And I say this notwithstanding my immense appreciation for the report by Mr Swoboda , who has done sterling work here in the European Parliament .
But that does not prevent me from disagreeing with this specific amendment for the reasons stated , reasons which are of a technical and a political nature .
Mr President , the proposal for a Council regulation on assistance to Turkey under the pre-accession strategy and the report by Mr Swoboda mark yet another significant step towards achieving a great historical objective .
As a matter of fact , Turkey ' s economic involvement with the European Union is already high , since more than half of Turkey ' s imports come from the Union and more than half of its exports are destined for the European Union .
Furthermore , Turkey is a member of NATO , which has a tradition of mutual recognition towards European countries that are members of the alliance .
In addition to other aspects , particularly cultural ones , there are therefore bases on which progress can be made towards Turkey ' s future membership of the European Union .
This proposal for a regulation will now enable us to create the necessary legal basis to establish an Accession Partnership , in order to help Turkey fulfil the Copenhagen criteria .
It will do so not only by intensifying the Customs Union , but also by promoting economic and social development , which are essential aspects of an effective partnership .
We therefore support the rapporteur ' s proposals that complement the spirit of the Commission ' s initiative , particularly those that are designed to ensure that Turkey will benefit from the support provided by the Pre-Accession Structural Instrument and from the Special Programme for Agricultural and Rural Development .
Nevertheless , within the development strategy that we are advocating , the path towards economic and social development must go hand in hand with political development , in other words , the exercise of democracy and human rights .
It is in this context that we wish to emphasise and support the content of Article 4 of the proposal for a regulation .
We also feel that by playing a more effective role in this process , the European Parliament can make a contribution and provide certain guarantees .
Mr President , I have a dream .
A dream of democratic European cooperation in which Turkey too participates on an equal footing , for Turkey is a part of Europe and has a lot to contribute to European cooperation .
Turkey must make a choice , however : a choice between the future and a past characterised by ethnic oppression , torture , the death penalty and absence of legal security .
The hunger strike in Turkish prisons - I myself spoke a short time ago with prisoners , their families and lawyers and a range of politicians when I travelled as part of a delegation to Istanbul - is an expression of a conflict which should belong to the past and which it will not be possible to solve until Turkey no longer opposes cultural , ethnic and political pluralism but instead uses these as a positive force in the development of a Turkish democracy .
I should also like to call upon Turkey and the Commission to make special efforts to reconstruct the villages destroyed by Turkish authorities in eastern Turkey .
I should also like to ask for efforts to be made to help the population to resume their normal lives in these villages .
This might , for example , be via the project developed by , for example , Erik Siesby at the Danish Centre for Kurdish Human Rights , and I know that they have sent details of the project to the Commission .
Mr President , now that the Helsinki European Council has confirmed Turkey 's status as a candidate for accession which must fulfil the same criteria as the other candidate countries , it is logical that Turkey should also benefit from a pre-accession strategy and an Accession Partnership .
The Swoboda report is one outcome of the Helsinki decision and is therefore important .
Let me repeat , the issue is not " whether " there should be an Accession Partnership and pre-accession strategy , but " how " .
In one respect , the Swoboda report goes far beyond the Commission 's proposal in that it calls for Turkey to be included in the ISPA and SAPARD financial instruments .
This would have two consequences .
Firstly , the ISPA and SAPARD financial instruments would have to be cut back , and secondly , the Berlin financial agreement would have to be cancelled .
Both are highly unlikely scenarios .
On the other budgetary aspects , I go along with the Swoboda report .
I also think it is important that there should be no discrimination against Turkey .
But SAPARD and ISPA are designed for transformation societies which are evolving from a communist planned economy to what is hopefully a social market economy .
And of course this does not apply to Turkey .
The purpose of the pre-accession strategy and Accession Partnership must be to achieve convergence between Turkey 's political , economic and social conditions and the EU .
It is essential that all candidates for accession are treated equally .
But this does not require any additional resources , e.g. from PHARE , ISPA or SAPARD ; it requires the same procedures as apply to the distribution of PHARE funding .
I therefore call once more for Amendment No 1 of the Swoboda report to be rejected .
Mr President , I will continue where my colleague Mr Stenzel left off .
We had concerns about Turkey 's candidate status , but now it is here , and Turkey therefore also has the right to be included in the financial instruments .
I say this without any ifs and buts .
I welcome the fact that this regulation has now established clarity , especially as the European Union has actually done very little to fulfil its financial commitments towards Turkey since the conclusion of the Customs Union Treaty five years ago .
So this is a fresh start which has our full support .
As far as the two programmes are concerned , I wish I could agree with my colleague Mr Stenzel , but I must also point out that it is not enough for us to view the 177 million already envisaged for the pre-accession strategy as a general framework .
As Mr Kuckelkorn has said , new money , i.e. additional funding , must be made available to Turkey for economic and social cohesion .
This is our common concern , and we therefore support Mr Swoboda 's report in general terms - not in every respect , and not all the proposed amendments , but its general trend .
The regulation includes an Article 4 which allows funding to be suspended under certain circumstances .
This Article 4 is necessary , and it is now up to Turkey to answer all the questions which we have been asking for years , and make progress with regard to a basic democratic structure , the role of the military in the National Security Council , and human and minority right .
To our great regret , I believe that relatively little has been done in these areas in recent months ; on the contrary , we have the impression that the progress initially achieved in the second half of 2000 has now been reversed and that the Turkish side - the government itself - has lost the courage to adopt these measures swiftly and resolutely .
Article 4 is not an instrument which can be used indiscriminately ; it is only intended for the event that very serious shortcomings become evident in the pre-accession process , and I hope that it will not need to be used in the near future .
But one thing must be clear : Turkey 's accession to the European Union can only take place under the conditions set by Europe , not simply on Turkey 's terms .
So far , neither politics nor the government has addressed this misconception held by the Turkish public .
So I would also ask our colleagues on the rostrum to help dispel this misconception at last .
Accession will only take place on our terms .
Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Swoboda on his report and to thank Parliament for an extremely constructive and responsible debate .
I think you have sent a very positive and also a very clear and unambiguous signal to Turkey .
I believe that , at the end of this debate , we can say that consensus regarding our policy towards Turkey has become much broader .
We agree that the current situation regarding human rights , the protection of minorities and the quality of democracy and the rule of law in Turkey is not what we would wish for .
Unfortunately , nothing has changed in that regard .
There is no point glossing over this fact or remaining silent about what is actually happening .
Because the situation is as it is , because it is so unsatisfactory , we have endlessly debated what political possibilities we have of changing it .
This brings me to my second point .
We also agree that it is not only in Turkey ' s interest but in the interest of Europe as a whole , and especially in the interest of the European Union , to have Turkey as a stable and reliable partner in the long term .
I am sure everyone in this House will agree with me when I say the long-term stability of a state can only be guaranteed if this state is founded on the values we all share , such as democracy , the rule of law , and the protection of minorities .
Thirdly , I think we agree that the prospect of membership of the European Union has been the central and most important catalyst for reform ; at least this has been the case throughout the entire history of our enlargement process .
If you look at the countries of Eastern and Central Europe and the tremendous pace of reform they have embarked upon and the enormous success they have had , this has only come about because they had membership in their sights .
The question we must now answer is : can we achieve the same with Turkey ?
In Helsinki we said , yes , we should give it a go .
We are now at a stage where the strategy adopted in Helsinki has become operational and we can therefore actually implement it .
So there is little point in talking today about whether the strategy adopted in Helsinki has changed what is happening on the ground in Turkey or not .
It simply has not .
I would never say it has changed it , but the instruments of this strategy are just not in place .
That is why one cannot say either that it has not had any results .
With what is being discussed here today and what you will subsequently adopt , you are paving the way for the entry into force of the central element of this strategy , namely the accession partnership .
The Accession Partnership sets out our expectations of Turkey .
It lays down what Turkey must do so that we can achieve the result that Turkey fulfils the political and other accession criteria .
Once this document has been formally adopted - indeed it has not yet been adopted as we are waiting upon Parliament to express its opinion - we can expect an immediate answer from Turkey .
This document will be the most important document in the history of Euro-Turkish relations over the past few decades .
What I have learned so far leads me to the belief that we are quite possibly on the brink of the most far-reaching political reform in the history of modern Turkey .
That is not to say that today we can discover whether everything that Turkey says to us in its reply will be fully in line with our expectations .
In this respect , Mr Swoboda is quite right when he says that the ball is now in Turkey ' s court .
It is really now up to Turkey what steps it takes , what rhythm it adopts and what qualitative efforts it puts into fulfilling the conditions for taking up negotiations on its membership of the European Union .
That is why I underline what a number of speakers have already said .
Turkey is an important country .
Turkey is of particular strategic importance .
But that does not mean that , because of Turkey ' s strategic importance , the European Union can change its inner character .
That can and must not happen .
It is only right and proper that Turkey wants to join the European Union and not the other way round and that , for that very reason , the accession conditions we have drawn up for all are equally and fully valid for Turkey .
Turkey will not become a member until it has fulfilled these accession conditions to the letter .
Neither I nor anybody else knows whether the strategy we adopted in Helsinki , which is fully supported by Parliament , will have the desired effects .
But we have for the first time reached the stage where Turkey must present us with a binding programme and must tell us what it intends to do to change conditions in Turkey .
It will give us the opportunity to bring influence to bear on this programme , because it is a jointly agreed programme , because it is jointly financed by us and because we have the opportunity to influence it and monitor it .
That is why I believe that we have made enormous strides .
As far as the financial and budgetary aspect is concerned , questions have been raised , which I will be pleased to answer .
Firstly , all those who say that it would be logical to channel pre-accession aid for Turkey , Malta and Cyprus through the relevant Heading 7 of the Financial Perspective are quite right , as we are clearly dealing with pre-accession aid .
The Commission would like this to happen too .
But I must make it clear that this would not alter in any way the amount of money that was available .
It would simply mean reducing the relevant Heading 4 and increasing Heading 7 , which would not be of much benefit to Malta , Cyprus and Turkey , who naturally want more money .
They do not want us to change the Heading , but more money .
But we do not have more money because the programmes in the Financial Perspective which was adopted in Berlin have been established . Nor are there any budgetary reserves .
A Member of this House asked this question . No , we do not have any budgetary reserves in the pre-accession instruments .
They have all been paid out .
Only SAPARD was paid out rather late .
That was because of the regulation for this instrument , but the funds that have been planned for 2000 will be fully paid out during the course of 2001 .
But we do not have any budgetary reserves there .
We could only satisfy the desire , which was expressed by Mr Swoboda and is shared by many of you here , to increase pre-accession aid to Turkey , Malta and Cyprus in order to make the ISPA and SAPARD instruments accessible , by making available more budgetary resources , money which the Commission , at any rate , does not have .
This must be discussed with the Council .
The need may well be there , but I could not , at the moment , accede to the request .
I feel bound to say in all honesty that the Commission would not be able to implement such a resolution because it simply does not have the money .
Mrs Stenzel was quite right to point out that naturally there is a difference between the candidate countries of Eastern and Central Europe , and Turkey , Malta and Cyprus . The candidate countries of Eastern and Central Europe not only have to adapt to the acquis , they also have to transform their entire economy .
That is , in fact , the political basis for the situation we have today .
May I say finally that , in my estimation , in the year 2000 we set something in motion in Turkey .
We , as politicians , know that the start of a political movement cannot be measured initially in real changes , be it in terms of prisons , NGOs , schools or whatever . No , the start of a political movement can only be measured in the way a society talks about the issues , what issues it talks about and what long-term objectives it sets itself .
In this connection we can very clearly discern in Turkey a massive movement in the year 2000 .
In my opinion , the correct response for the European Union is to support such a political movement and to make the instruments available which we need to bring about tangible concrete results .
I would like to say one last thing . We will not be able to measure the success of our pre-accession strategy towards Turkey by the promises made , i.e. we will not be able to measure it in terms of the editorial content of Turkish newspapers .
But we will be able to measure the success of this strategy in what changes in concrete terms for the Turkish people , whose situations under current conditions are deplorable and in need of radical change .
It will be measured in real structural changes and in real changes to people ' s living conditions .
When we see these changes , the time will have come to talk about the next step , but not today .
I am pleased to have discovered such a broad consensus regarding this matter in this Parliament .
I believe that it will help us a great deal if Turkey realises that the Council , Parliament and the Commission have , on this matter , adopted a firm common stance - at least in terms of the basic issues .
Our steadfastness in this matter will help us to reach our goals .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by wholly echoing the thanks which Commissioner Verheugen addressed to Mr Swoboda for his excellent report on Turkey ' s pre-accession aid which has been discussed in this Chamber .
I am convinced that your report , Mr Swoboda , will play a key role in the difficult discussions we are all so involved in , namely how best to bring Turkey closer to the EU .
I asked to speak in order to reply on behalf of the Council to the question which Mr Sacrédeus addressed to the presidency concerning religious freedom and tolerance between religions in Turkey .
Let me just say that we in the Council naturally see these issues as being extremely important .
Our discussions with Turkey on religious freedom are , of course , based on the fundamental Copenhagen criteria and on what we encounter in the partnership with Turkey concerning fulfilment of the requirements to respect the rights of minorities .
Mr Sacrédeus takes up the important issue of how to stimulate dialogue between different religions in Turkey and generally .
We see this as an important element , not only in the partnership with Turkey but generally in Europe-Mediterranean cooperation .
As far as the Swedish Presidency is concerned , we have tried to build on some of our own experiences .
For example , there is the Euro-Islam project and the conferences against intolerance which were recently held in Stockholm , and of which Mr Sacrédeus is no doubt aware .
We have tried to build on experience from these and to introduce a number of similar ideas into the partnership with Turkey in order to highlight the importance of respect for religious freedom .
Mr Sacrédeus also takes up the important issue of the trial of a Turkish priest .
The Council is monitoring this matter extremely carefully .
We know that the next trial hearing is on 22 February .
The Council will be monitoring what happens then very carefully and we will react in a way we believe is appropriate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Lisbon
The next item is the joint debate on :
Report A5-0034 / 2001 by Mr Bullmann , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the spring 2001 European Council : the Lisbon process and the path to be followed ;
Commission statement - synthesis report on progress since Lisbon and future measures ;
Report A5-0020 / 2001 by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the impact of liberalisation and the economic reform process on economic growth in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon Summit has bequeathed a great heritage .
It defined a major task and disseminated a courageous idea : that by the year 2010 Europe will become the most competitive area in the world .
The summit placed its bets on the best Europe has to offer .
It stated that we are on the road towards full employment .
It also made it clear that we want to stake our hopes on the innovative power of the people of the European Union , on their ability to educate and train themselves , to take their destiny into their own hands , and to bring about their own prosperity and that of their families .
This is the strongest productive force that Europe can release .
This central idea logically leads to a political approach which says that economic reform , social involvement , social cohesion and job creation go hand in hand .
They are interacting facets of one and the same process along this path to success , and they must be of mutual support .
They must not be played off against each other .
For many of us this is a challenge to our way of thinking .
Many people who have striven their entire lives to achieve a common liberalised market will have to make some mental effort to realise that only social cohesion and employment policies can produce the social productivity which will make the common market a success .
Others , who have prided themselves all their lives on the achievements of the Member States , will also have to make some mental effort to realise that the new enlarged common market calls for concerted efforts and new rules to ensure that the process to achieve success can be implemented everywhere .
The Stockholm Summit comes precisely at this decisive moment .
It will decide whether the ambitious goals of Lisbon can be implemented , or whether the citizens of Europe think that we are dealing with nicely worded but empty statements which would have no real impact on political reality .
Those who want success in Stockholm must measure and compare how far we have come along the road to success .
Above all , they must have the courage to set new ambitious targets so that we can move further along the road to success .
We are told that concrete objectives are difficult to set .
Of course they are . But just take a complex issue like inflation rates , which is dependent on many decentralised actors making clever decisions .
On the way to economic and monetary union we clearly managed to introduce a very successful process which has led to success which we would not have believed possible up until a few years ago .
Take a complex issue like interest rate trends or the dismantling of excessive national debt .
We have achieved all this with a common effort , and these are all complex matters which call for more than one participant .
If we can achieve all this , then we will surely manage to give every schoolchild in the European Union access to the Internet .
We will be able to set up conditions in which all schoolchildren will not only have access to the Internet but will make decisive progress in the rest of their school curriculum to ensure that , when they enter the European labour market , they will have the opportunities they need .
If we can achieve all this , then we will surely be able to offer every entrepreneur in the European Union a clear , easily comprehensible and simple regulatory framework , which operates in exactly the same way in Spain , Greece , Italy and Germany alike .
If we can achieve all this , then we will surely be able to call upon the strongest productive power in Europe .
We will be able to offer the still more than 14 million unemployed in the European Union real opportunities of taking part in this process of bringing about success .
We still have an employment rate of over 8 % and I would like to draw your attention to a situation which was given short shrift in the debate in the Commission : the fact that we have a youth unemployment rate which is twice as high .
This is a major problem , especially since we are saying here today that we want to make the demographic change manageable , and we want to rely on the intelligence in people ' s heads and invest in heads .
Much more could be done in practical terms to combat youth unemployment and to invest in the future of Europe .
But for that very reason it is also proper for the Commission , in a preparatory paper in the run-up to Stockholm , to propose that in Stockholm we should look at very specific goals to increase the employment rate to 67 % by 2005 and to strengthen the participation of women in the labour force to 57 % .
These are the right goals to set and we , as the European Parliament , as the representatives of the people of Europe , want to see these goals documented in the final report of the Stockholm Summit .
We think it is important that the people of Europe read about targets which they can readily understand , with which they can identify and in which they can see that their prospects of success in Europe lie .
This will also help us to decide whether there is acceptance of the necessary enlargement of the European Union , which we all want .
But we must also send out a clear signal that all who are currently disadvantaged and who want to contribute their resources will have the opportunity to do so .
Whoever wants to must move forward courageously and overcome the rivalries between the European institutions .
The people of Europe do not understand the petty jealousies over the allocation of competences .
It must be made clear that the European Council is assuming its leadership role and that Parliament is taking up its proper place , the place to which it is entitled as the directly elected representative of the people of Europe .


Mr President , Mr Bullmann , Mr Cocilovo , Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , first of all I should like to thank you for the chance Parliament is giving me to debate with you the Lisbon strategy , the system we have established to monitor what was decided there and how it is being put into practice .
Last year in Lisbon , the European Union , as Mr Bullmann has pointed out , set itself a goal which meant achieving over the next decade the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , allowing us to achieve sustainable economic growth with the creation of more jobs and greater social cohesion .
Mr Bullmann has stressed this global vision , a vision that I share absolutely , to which , of course , the Commission ' s synthesis report responds .
In this synthesis report the Commission not only tries to define the progress made so far since Lisbon but also what our next goals are .
And Mr Bullmann has stressed this point too .
In Lisbon people said we should set some structural indicators that would enable us to draw a better comparison between the situations in the various countries .
In Nice we defined 35 structural indicators , which are the ones the synthesis report is based upon .
There is no doubt at all that they are useful tools for seeing the progress that has been made , the concrete objectives defined and the timetables for achieving them .
They are also a reference for the progress we can make in the next few years .
It is true that in the way we designed them these indicators are not solely for use in the synthesis report ; they will also be used in other Commission reports , such as the report on the implementation or fulfilment of the obligations resulting from setting the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines in motion .
The report - I am not going to repeat it - highlights what we consider to be the positive progress achieved during this period .
There are clearly some elements , such as the progress made on certain liberalisations , that are without any doubt clearly positive .
In other cases things are moving too slowly .
While success may focus , for instance , on the improved reorientation of the economic policy guidelines , taking the Lisbon objectives on board , or on subjects such as the approval of the taxation package , the European company statute or the adoption of the social Agenda in Nice , it is also true that there are areas where we are lagging behind , such as the Community patent , the Galileo programme , or others as significant as the lifelong learning strategy or the tax benefit systems , which are certainly fundamental for growth and employment .
In any case , the synthesis report highlights the good performance of the economy , the growth achieved last year and that expected next year , and the creation of 2.5 million jobs , which is , without any doubt , a fundamental point .
In any case , the synthesis report aims to stress that the Lisbon objective is a global objective , as Mr Bullmann has pointed out .
We must not just think exclusively about growth and forget about the other aspects of Lisbon .
There is no doubt that macro-economic growth and stability are fundamental elements , but employment and social cohesion are too .
We have included in the synthesis report , as Mr Bullmann has mentioned , a series of specific proposals , ten priorities that the Commission would like to see approved at the Stockholm European Council , so that they will enable us to make progress in strengthening our commitments to structural and social change , which is fundamental for the sustainable economic growth that will enable us to reduce unemployment and improve cohesion .
As the Commissioner responsible for Economic and Financial Affairs I should like to say a little more about three points that I think are relevant : first of all , the maintenance and strengthening of a stable macro-economic framework .
In addition to the objective already mentioned of achieving a knowledge-based society with better jobs , I believe it is important to achieve a stable environment allowing us to achieve the objectives of price stability and healthy public finances in the medium term .
In the current favourable economic climate , despite the slowing of American growth , I believe we have to continue the processes of fiscal consolidation and improving the quality and sustainability of public finances , taking into account aspects as important as the ageing of the population , for instance .
When I say quality , I mean especially a fiscal policy aimed more towards creating jobs , supporting research and innovation , and increasing investment in human resources .
When I say sustainability of public finances I mean the ability to meet future obligations .
The second of my concerns is that we have to strengthen the potential growth of the Union .
It is a fact that good progress has been made on the reforms needed so that we can maintain a model of permanent growth .
Yet in this period of economic boom we have a unique opportunity to improve the internal market for services and achieve greater openings in sectors such as energy , transport and others that benefit the consumer .
We are aware , of course , that any liberalisation process has to be accompanied at the same time by a regulation control plan , which in the end will allow us to achieve positive effects without a negative impact on society .
My last comment refers to job creation and a rise in the activity rate : we must remember that two thirds of the difference between the gross domestic product levels of the United States and the European Union is due precisely to the different use of the work factor .
It is therefore absolutely fundamental to set in motion all the necessary fiscal and social reforms , including early retirement , pension plans or labour regulations , which will enable us to improve this situation .
Also fundamental are elements like education and training , business incentives and also public investment , essential for job quality .
All this should enable us Europeans to make progress along the line defined in Lisbon , which we all want to be consolidated in Stockholm .
The reports we are dealing with here , the Bullmann report and the Gasòliba i Böhm report , include a large number of suggestions that are very close to the content of the synthesis report .
My idea is to take into consideration all these references and indications , some of which refer to specific indicators , and analyse them to see to what extent some of the elements put forward can be incorporated in our future reports .
Parliament is right when it points out that for the Lisbon strategy to be successful it is absolutely essential to have the commitment of all the players involved in the process .
From this viewpoint the two reports presented to the House today are without any doubt basic elements and a clear expression of Parliament ' s commitment to cooperate in the Lisbon process , which - as I said earlier - we hope will continue and improve with the decisions made in Stockholm .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , last year ' s Lisbon European Council established a process for the European Union to reach the same level of competitiveness as the United States , or at least for us to achieve this level by 2010 .
I believe that both Mr Bullmann ' s report and my own make a positive and constructive contribution to our thinking on how to achieve this goal and our ability to take stock and analyse the situation after the past year , before the Stockholm European Council .
The strategic goal of the European Union economy is to turn itself into the most dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world capable of sustainable growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
All these objectives are highly demanding .
The European Union will not give up its level of social cohesion as an economy based on well-being , which is one of the great features of European society , achieved and consolidated during the second half of the last century .
At the same time it is a clearly dynamic economy , as it has been demonstrating over these last years .
But nobody can fail to see that having such strong social commitments , ensuring sustainable growth and also being the most competitive economy in the world are three highly demanding objectives , and to meet them we must therefore keep well on top of any possible obstacles to achieving this .
In my view , something that may jeopardise the joint achievement of these three objectives is if the basic factors that ensure the competitiveness of the European economy are not implemented rigorously enough . I believe there are basically three of these factors .
First of all , there are some markets that are still not open enough to competition , and given that they are basic to our production structure they have a negative effect on cost structures , including unit prices for goods and services .
Mr Solbes has mentioned them : energy , transport and telecommunications .
They are obviously fundamental factors , and if we compare them with the other leading world economy , the United States , we still have a gap to make up , clearly preventing us from approaching this desired level of competitiveness which we have set for 2010 .
In second place is a subject that concerns me greatly and is very well expressed both in the Bullmann report and my own : employment .
It is obvious that we cannot give up the idea of raising employment levels , which is one of the major goals set by the Swedish Presidency .
But it is also obvious that to achieve this level of employment - and as both reports point out , with a more highly qualified labour force - we have to find a greater willingness to adapt , both socially - there are countries within the European Union that have very interesting formulas in this respect - and , as the 1995 Delors report said , in the sphere of labour market flexibility .
This is an essential factor in achieving two objectives , that is , a higher employment rate and greater competitiveness throughout the productive structure , where of course the labour dimension is fundamental .
Lastly , education .
I shall not labour this point , since the Bullmann report has mentioned it , as has Commissioner Solbes . This third essential element is that of quality education at all levels , from occupational training to specialist studies in higher education .
This must lay the foundations - I am finishing here , Mr President - for us to get what we really need , something that Europe has not yet achieved in comparison with the United States . Although we have a very high level of scientific training and scientific innovation , we still have not closed the gap on the United States , nor have we overcome the existing difference to achieve a kind of technological development that can be turned into competitive goods and services .
This is the third fundamental recommendation in this analysis and stock-taking of the Lisbon European Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is with great interest that I take part in the debate on Mr Bullmann ' s report on the preparations ahead of the Stockholm European Council and on the report from Mr Gasòliba i Böhm on the significance of deregulation and economic reforms on economic growth in the European Union .

I have listened with particular interest to Mr Bullmann ' s report on Parliament ' s contribution to the Stockholm Summit and would particularly like to welcome the holistic approach of the report , namely that all parts of the agenda floated in Lisbon must be implemented if Europe is to achieve the ambitious target which we drew up , i.e. for Europe within ten years to be the world ' s most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy , with the opportunity of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and increased social cohesion .
Full employment must constitute a fundamental aim for EU economic and social policy .
The strategy adopted in Lisbon is an important milestone in the development of the EU .
With regard to the employment targets in the Lisbon strategy , the Council agrees with the Bullmann report ' s proposal for intermediate targets .
We hope that the Council will be able to decide on this in Stockholm .
Today ' s Europe is better equipped than it has been for a long time to extend the opportunity to work to everyone who wants to , and is able to , work .
The outlook for the European economy is still good .
Public finances are strong .
Prices are stable .
Reforms of the product and capital markets are well underway across Europe .
However , there is no room for complacency , as 14 million people in Europe are still out of work .
Unemployment is a massive waste of economic resources and - what is worse - of people ' s skills and ambitions .
Having a job means the chance of providing for oneself and , in the long term , is the best way to achieve a society in which everyone can feel they are taking part .
The Stockholm European Council on 23-24 March will be the first in a series of spring summits aimed at encouraging development towards the strategic aims established in Lisbon .
In Stockholm we should openly and critically assess the progress made in the last year .
We intend to move the work forward both through Community legislation and what is known as the new open method of coordination .
The Swedish Presidency will work on not letting the Lisbon strategy be derailed by adding too many new issues .
Nor do we need any new processes .
Instead , the Stockholm European Council should highlight certain prioritised areas .
Full employment and increased competitiveness will be achieved through economic reform and open and functioning markets , combined with a healthy macro-economic policy which stimulates growth and employment .
I was interested in what the report from Mr Gasòliba i Böhm had to say on economic reform and growth and agree that the role a policy on economic reform has to play in growth and employment must not be underestimated .
However , I would like to stress that economic reform must take place in conjunction with investment in training , a modernised social security system and improved welfare .
This also requires a commercial climate which facilitates investment and the establishment of new growth companies .
I want us in Stockholm to highlight the directions for further progress in these areas .
Let me name a few .
In Stockholm we expect to be able to establish the timetable for liberalisation of the electricity and gas markets .
We aim to push on with reform of the financial markets , with regard to which the important Lamfalussy report will provide the foundation for discussions in Stockholm .
Furthermore , we need to continue work on opening up the transport markets .
However , opening up the product and capital markets is not an end in itself .
Instead , there are two reasons for this action : it is a tool for growth and increased employment . It is also a tool for increased consumer benefit - lower prices and a greater range and better quality of goods and services .
In this context , we are also aware that external trade policy has a role to play , and we hope to be able to shed light on this issue too in Stockholm .
The Stockholm Summit should also emphasise the significance of new technology by developing the action plan for e-Europe and removing obstacles to the growth of biotechnology and its significance for innovation and growth .
However , we must also take into account the moral and ethical dimension of biotechnology .
Expected demographic development in Europe poses a growing challenge .
Low birth rates and an increasing proportion of older people threatens to considerably increase the maintenance burden for people of working age from around 2010 onwards .
Demographic development must be tackled on a broad political front right now .
This will require an extensive review of pension systems and systems for health care and care of the elderly .
It will also require measures to increase participation in the labour market .
The significance of improved conditions for families with children , increased equality and lifelong learning should be highlighted more clearly as means of meeting the demographic challenges .
As more people take up employment , the focus on working conditions increases .
The aim in Stockholm is to be able to agree on a definition of the concept of quality at work and its significance for growth and employment .
I would also like to stress the vital importance which the successful development of economic and monetary union has for stability and welfare in Europe .
The Swedish Presidency will be actively working to ensure that the introduction of notes and coins in euros in the currency union at the start of 2002 is an unqualified success .
This is in the interests of us all .
Mr President , I do not know how convincing I can be in just four minutes .
However , I shall at least try to make my position clear on some aspects of this report which have concerned Parliament in reaction to the Commission ' s initiative and the commitments announced by the Council .
Other Members have effectively summed up the most significant results of the Lisbon Summit already .
The goal of full employment is once again proposed as the object of common attention and common commitment .
We all know it will not be achieved tomorrow , but we declare it achievable under certain conditions .
We have found a new determination to build the most open and competitive economic area in Europe based on the information and knowledge society , and updating the package of operational instruments which accompany that effort .
But above all , we have asserted that these results can be achieved without adding a fourth process to the existing ones , through a solid combination of policies . There needs to be a complementary approach in economic policy , employment policy and social policy , and of course the policies being associated and combined to achieve the objectives must be compatible in terms of internal consistency .
Finally , the special spring European Council provides a clear opportunity for everyone to take stock of progress made and of the effective implementation of the processes and decisions which have been taken , noting any successes and any delays , through the open method of coordination .
I would like to talk about that for a moment , because open coordination is certainly different from superimposing Community policies and guidelines on the policies of the national states and societies that operate within that framework , but it is also something more than empty coordination .
Open coordination cannot be a magic formula , nor can it be an empty declaration , and it should mobilise public opinion in support of a European project that guarantees transparency and effective opportunities for verification .
It is not acceptable for the stability pact and convergence parameters to be backed by instruments and offices for checking , measuring and , where necessary , censure .
They are backed by weapons and police forces , whereas economic policy choices consistent with the aims I referred to earlier , supporting competition and growth , active policies on employment , investment in human capital , investment in lifelong learning , equal opportunities and regaining regional structural advantages , are very often largely dependent on commitments that are so solemnly affirmed and proclaimed but so little verified or verifiable .
That would disarm our advocacy , however prophetic , of the virtues of the European economic and social model .
Instead , comparable data should be made available , together with a rigorous social glossary which would make it impossible to go on using the same words with different meanings , as has sometimes happened , but , most of all - which is worse - to go on using the same words and doing different things .
Hence the importance of the proposal on indicators to stop us constantly changing policies to maintain the scientific phenomenon of perpetual motion , that strange experiment which keeps a process moving while at the same time preventing it from reaching any goal .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Bullmann on having produced a report which manages to keep consistently to the main point and address all the consequences of the very important resolutions passed in Lisbon .
The rapporteur proposes a dynamic combination of measures based on a complementary perception of economic reform , employment and social policy , illustrating the added benefits for each of these sectors .
We can only hope that future follow-ups to Lisbon will apply the same policy and demonstrate the same soundness of judgment and consistency .
I should like to comment , in particular , on the importance of the knowledge economy and of investments in human resources as a basic element of European policy .
Lifelong learning is a prime means for the European economy of developing the human capital which a knowledge society needs at its disposal .
We need more educated , suitably trained workers in all leading-edge sectors .
Lifelong learning is not a new philosophy ; it is a serious political proposal to allow human resources to adapt and evolve in the face of new developments .
We also need to ensure that suitable information networks are created , to which all citizens have access , without exclusion and without a cost barrier .
All current obstacles to lifelong learning should be dealt with and removed .
This is a social cost which we need to bear in the belief that it will yield a maximum return , for the benefit of the European social and political model .
Another important point which I should like to highlight is the free movement of students , teachers , instructors and researchers , in order to strengthen the role of education in the nascent knowledge-based European society .
However , measures must also be taken to avoid the obvious danger of information poverty .
Care must be taken to ensure that labour market flexibility does not lead to new forms of insecurity and marginalisation for workers .
In today 's era of globalisation and huge technological changes in everyday life , citizens need to be given more opportunity to adapt and evolve and additional cultural choices .
We need to strengthen culture in general in Europe and the cultural environment which is directly linked to the economic and social situation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are living in an age of globalisation and digitalisation , and we talk about a knowledge-based society .
The whole of our society , our economic life , is on the threshold of major structural changes .
What we have become used to is disappearing ; things are changing .
A policy to establish a regulatory framework is now more pressing than ever .
The European Union has set itself the ambitious target of becoming the most dynamic economic region in the world by 2010 .
To this end , a number of conditions need to be met and we need to do our homework .
The policy on training has already been addressed on a number of occasions .
The resource Europe has is knowledge .
This is where we must invest in our young people , in particular .
We talk about new technologies such as the Internet .
But we also need to talk about equipping people with new ways of thinking .
My generation and the generation before that did not concern itself very much with the idea of being independent or becoming an entrepreneur .
I think in future we should make young people in school more aware of this idea so that it becomes quite natural for them to embark upon an independent life .
But we also need to talk about flexibility in our labour markets .
I fully concur with Mr Bullmann , when he talks of targets , but we are constantly experiencing just how little targets match up with concrete actions .
We are all in agreement on the objective of making labour more flexible .
But if we take a look at Germany and the new Industrial Constitution Act , then we realise that targets and actions do not always tally , which makes it all the more difficult simply to orient policies towards targets .
We also need to make more effort in the area of high technology .
The Internet has been mentioned .
Access to the Internet in Europe is still too expensive .
Its use in comparison with other countries is still too limited .
Our approach to new technologies , such as biotechnology , needs to be more aggressive and more optimistic .
But we should not restrict our investments to new technologies .
We should also consider how to bridge the gap between the new economy and the old economy .
I am fundamentally opposed to this demarcation .
In Bavaria there is a carpenter who already achieves 70 % of his sales via the Internet .
If I may ask the experts here , does he belong to the old economy or to the new economy ?
I think he simply belongs to the economy .
We need to bring them together and make them viable .
But - and I would like to warmly congratulate Mr Gasòliba i Böhm on his report on deregulation - we need to become competitive .
We need to make our structures competitive . We have had very positive experiences when it comes to air transport , telecommunications and energy , and other markets such as transport , gas , the postal services and finances are also being considered .
Ultimately though , our goal must be to have competition only where it benefits the consumer .
I would like to offer a word of warning that not every sector should be deregulated straight away just for the sake of positive competitiveness .
An example is water .
Water is a limited resource .
We certainly cannot abandon the water market in Europe , with its high quality standard , to the vagaries of competition overnight in a sector specific or even case specific way .
In this connection I support the issue of limiting competition - of limiting general European competition law to local and regional public services .
Social structures and evolved structures are a form of capital for Europe : good training , good health , social tranquillity .
We should not maintain structures just for the sake of maintaining them , we must develop them further ; they can incorporate competitive elements .
We can make them more effective and structure them positively .
But we must not abandon political responsibility .
It is a difficult balancing act .
We will raise this issue again later in the year in the liberalisation debates in this House .
But I think it must be possible to combine competition , subsidiarity and political answerability on the ground .
I believe this is the route Europe must take to become more competitive and yet maintain cohesion .
Mr President , it is sometimes said in the debate in my home country that the EU cannot be changed , but I think that the political agenda we are now discussing shows that change can be made .
In 1995 , when I was new to this Parliament , we almost exclusively discussed stabilisation policy .
This area remains , but stabilisation policy has been supplemented by issues regarding growth , employment and social welfare .
A changed reality has made this possible , but it is also a matter of political priorities .
This has come about via Amsterdam and Lisbon and is now continuing in Stockholm .
It is sometimes said that the issues which we are now addressing - issues of employment and social welfare - are exclusively national .
Yes , to a large extent they are local , regional and national issues .
However , by setting out targets for meeting common challenges in the future , we create added value through a European policy .
We do this partly through straightforward legislation in areas such as the work environment and labour law and partly through the open coordination method , which means establishing common targets for various matters .
The process of monetary union and targets for inflation , interest rate development and budget deficits have proven the success of the approach .
Now we are doing the same thing for employment levels , exclusion and demographic issues .
The Lisbon process comprises three parts : economic policy , employment policy and social policy / social cohesion .
It is important that there be a balance between these three areas , which are all vital to the process .
I would like to thank rapporteur Bullmann for highlighting , in his report , this balance and the importance of maintaining it .
I would like to emphasise two points in particular : education policy in a knowledge-based society , which is incredibly important , and , as I have said , the significance of tackling the challenges with regard to demographic development right now .
In Stockholm we need to focus , as we cannot manage everything at once .
So let us focus on certain important issues so as to set the process in motion .
Indicators are not an end in themselves , but simply a means of achieving established targets .
I would also like to emphasise the role of Parliament .
We have a role in legislation , but we have no clear role in the issue of the open coordination method .
As this becomes increasingly important , we must have an Institutional Agreement in which the role of Parliament is strengthened .
However , one ingredient is missing - we mention it in our report and hope that the Gothenburg Summit will address the same aspect - and that is also to link the ecological aspects to this process and to these issues .
Mr President , the Lisbon European Council gave a clear message to the people of Europe : Europe is to become the most competitive economy in the world .
This is the right ambition to have and must now be followed up effectively in Stockholm .
However , it must not be the same as so many other EU documents - words without concrete results .
We now need firm proposals .
The 14 million unemployed have had enough of grand resolutions .
I must admit that we Liberals are taking a rather guarded approach until we see the results of the Stockholm European Council .
I would like to stress that Mr Bullmann has done a good job , but the report has become too wide in its scope and the large number of proposals has meant a loss of focus .
We would have preferred a more concentrated approach and a clear list of priorities .
We fully support the Commission ' s criticism of the slow speed of reform in Europe .
In this context the Council deserves the most criticism , but Parliament is also at fault .
Allow me to highlight a few important measures aimed at getting Europe moving : there needs to be further liberalisation of the energy markets , and the post and telecommunications sector - an area in which Mr Danielsson can act on his strengths .
Other issues include reduced taxes , particularly on work , better conditions for small and medium-sized businesses and a more flexible labour market .
In addition , we need to create a common financial market - an area in which very little has happened so far - and a connected e-Europe .
Biotechnology must also be stimulated .
A more liberal Europe means a Europe with greater cohesion and greater social security , which means that people ' s willingness to take risks and dare to try new things increases .
Europe needs a policy in which jobs are created and citizens can choose their own future .
It is a good idea to set out targets and constantly monitor progress and have relevant statistical indicators , but this never replaces concrete proposals .
As a Swede , I hope that the Stockholm European Council will be a watershed , where decisions will be taken which pave the way for a competitive and liberal Europe .
Finally , I would like to say to Mr Danielsson that a dynamic Europe also requires a common currency .
Do not forget that .
More and more people are wondering when Sweden will fulfil its commitments .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , my speech will concentrate on the Commission report on the Lisbon European Council .
I believe that it is an interesting report and the comments that I shall make are intended to suggest a few improvements to the Commission .
It is what is called constructive criticism .
My first point concerns the content of the report . I am extremely surprised that no reference is made to the marked disparities between countries and regions of the European Community with regard to the information society .
It is a fact that the European Union is made up of geographical subdivisions which differ greatly from one another .
The situation of the Scandinavian countries is quite different from that of the countries of southern Europe , and account should be taken of this in order to refine this analysis .
My second point is that the Commission quite rightly talks of an integrated response .
I would like to make some suggestions regarding three broad areas to make this integration operate more smoothly .
First of all , with regard to sustainable development , it is vital that the Commission recognise that the Lisbon process lacks an environmental dimension .
We must ensure that the Gothenburg report rearranges the order of Lisbon ' s priorities .
To give a practical example of this , in terms of energy and transport , it is not sufficient to say that liberalisation will enable us to lower prices , and , consequently , consumers and businesses will have greater access .
We also need indicators showing the increase in public transport or the growth of truck-on-train technology .
The issue of indicators will emerge and that is why we tabled a number of amendments to the Bullmann report .
Similarly , it is not enough for the Commission to say that it has made a statement on services of general interest .
Parliament is currently considering this issue .
Initiatives must be taken to limit the extent to which competition is introduced into various sectors .
Secondly , there is the role of education and training .
You start off by making a fundamental observation about the general lack of training .
The Commission should look into two issues more closely .
On the one hand , the issue of balancing work , training and leisure time .
Why not have a framework directive , or at least a Commission recommendation , to enable workers and citizens in general to benefit from the different patterns of training , work and leisure ?
On the other hand , there is the issue of public and private funding of this training , the problem of the responsibility of businesses , including for the training of their workers , which raises the question whether public money is well spent .
Thirdly , I believe that it would be a good idea if the Commission statement followed the example of the report on economic and social cohesion , in which Mr Barnier discussed European Union enlargement .
Clearly , many of the priorities set out in the Commission statement should be reworded , in view of the European Union ' s enlargement , for example , with regard to the labour market - where issues such as health and safety will become fundamental - social exclusion and social protection .
This cannot be related to the issue of an ageing population , but simply to the creation of a whole new branch of social security , as the latest report from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development has just reminded us once again .
These are a few suggestions , Commissioner . I hope that they will be taken into consideration in the Commission ' s next reports , particularly with regard to integration , sustainable development and the knowledge-based society .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what is the path to be followed after Lisbon ?
I would like to give my response in terms of the content , our responsibilities and the method .
First of all , I believe that we cannot regard the European Union ' s strategy on sustainable development , full employment and greater social cohesion as set in stone .
The Lisbon process has many virtues and its objectives are extremely ambitious and well founded .
It has a comprehensive and open method of coordination and reflects a clear understanding of the challenges of the information revolution .
However , it still contains many areas of bias .
The current framework to monetary , budgetary and financial policies encourages fiscal and social competition ; the ability to carry out public policies is still compromised on a national level and is totally obstructed on a European level .
I would say that this is negative integration , in the sense that Tinbergen intended , and it is not wholly positive integration .
These areas of bias are obvious in the current problem regarding indicators .
There are comparable indicators at a national level , which are useful , but there are no European-level indicators to enable us to rank Europe ' s position in the global economy and to apply common policies .
Moreover , we do not study the impact that the choices made by one or more countries have on other countries .
Why is Ireland being criticised ?
Is it for its policy of public spending in favour of growth or actually for its anti-Community social dumping policy ?
I understand why Mr Bullmann says that growth is actually taking place but that we must not rest on our laurels .
In this respect , it is disturbing that the Council and Commission do not evaluate the social and economic impact of the large , integrated financial market or that of the launch of the euro .
That is why we should consider Lisbon to be more of a beginning than an achievement ; we must work on ironing out these contradictions and , sooner or later , we will have to change this strategy in order to make progress .
Mr Goebbels and Mr Bullmann have , moreover , tabled a good amendment to enable us to do this .
Secondly , the European Parliament should be able to make straightforward choices .
In my opinion , the two reports , for which the committees voted unanimously , contradict one another .
I support the Bullmann report , which recommends public investment and social legislation .
However , I cannot support the report by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm which concentrates on deregulation and flexibility alone .
I would like to stress , moreover , that if the internal market does not reach its goal in terms of essential services such as energy and transport , it is not due to deregulation , but because of a lack of infrastructure and common public regulations .
I would also like to say that I disagree with the endless reduction in social security contributions , which is still being called for , which absolves businesses of any responsibility and creates poor workers .
Thirdly , and finally , we should indeed help every European social and civil operator to make a choice in terms of economic and social policy .
Yet , people are not familiar with these methods of coordination .
They have absolutely no idea what they entail .
We should , therefore , give thought to our responsibilities .
On this subject , may I remind you that , in December 1996 , following a report that I had presented , Parliament voted in favour of a resolution which confirmed its intention to hold an annual conference of the European Parliament on fundamental choices in economic and social policy , following an interactive debate between the various national authorities and a public consultation with the key players in civil society .
I believe that we could take up this proposal again , in order to attract the attention of the citizens .
Mr President , it is difficult to disagree overall with what Mr Bullmann and Mr Gasòliba i Böhm propose . Apart from anything else , their proposals would at least mean greater transparency .
What is hard to understand is not their work , but why , supporting the outcome of the Lisbon Council , the Union is sometimes out of line with the principles it stands for .
As we know , the 15 Member States do not have a common economic policy so much as a group of Community guidelines , laws and prohibitions .
Faced with the challenge of globalisation , there must be more effort to give the Union common arrangements and policies based on a common history and culture , and every country must adopt a competitive flexibility .
But it is not unusual for both to be harnessed only for purposes of economic growth and not for social progress .
In some cases , public administration needs to be reformed , but in others there is also a need , for the purposes of wealth production , for the individual Member States to reform developing sectors and realise their potential in terms of basic criteria through their infrastructure policy , and move towards a policy of wealth redistribution .
Yet faced with the growth of insecurity and poverty , there does not seem to be anything else to do at national and Community level except represent it statistically as accurately as possible .
However , while virtue in public accounting is fundamental , compared with growing poverty and insecurity , it cannot find meaning only in the reduction of social costs without any non-statistical consideration of demographic growth and of the sometimes strident justifications for the continual requests to reduce labour costs without a concrete participatory system .
Liberalisation enters into these considerations too , because , while we support it in terms of theoretical benefit to the final consumer , in practice it is not reflected in quality , safety or universal enjoyment .
So roll on greater coordination of Community policies and better indicators to demonstrate their effectiveness .
But it remains desirable that the Union should not only determine its future arrangements rapidly but should also make the principles it repeatedly proclaims increasingly applicable , binding and consistent .
Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , I have to say that my assessment of the Lisbon resolutions and , above all , of the goal , so often evoked in this House , of making the economy of the European Union the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , can be summed up like this : it is an empty , rhetorical formula with little or nothing to do with what is or is not really happening in the economies of the European countries .
Yesterday , Alan Greenspan told us that the United States economy will only grow by 2.5 % in 2001 and unemployment will rise by 0.5 % , from 4 % to 4.5 % .
Those are the statistics of a dynamic and competitive economy .
For us , those statistics would represent a boom in economic growth , while the United States economy is considered to be in recession .
I appreciate the work done by Mr Bullmann and Mr Gasòliba i Böhm - in particular I fully support the Gasòliba report - but I think that it may amount to too little because Parliament is given too little to discuss and propose .
For example , the Bullmann report talks about modernising the pension systems , a subject also mentioned by Commissioner Solbes .
Well , if we are going to talk about practical things to be done and not just high-flown goals , Parliament should make its voice heard in a much stronger , more decisive , more rigorous way , and call urgently for a reform which leads to financially sustainable social security systems which are less unfair in terms of balance between the generations .
In Europe , we are irresponsibly consuming the national insurance contributions of young people .
What are they going to get , 20 or 40 years from now , in return for the high contributions they have to pay today ?
Reforms are needed , either of the parameters by raising the minimum pensionable age , or of the system by - as I believe would be appropriate - changing to a capitalisation system for compulsory national insurance , and not - that would be the last straw - just for supplementary national insurance .
In the dynamic economy dominating the world today - the United States ' economy - there is concern about social security deficits which will begin to show up in 2025 and will have used up the accumulated capital reserves only in 2037 .
In Europe and in many European countries - I am particularly thinking of my own country , Italy - we are irresponsibly heading for disaster in the social security accounts .
In Europe , we have no way of defeating the corporate resistance of those - I am thinking primarily of the trade unions - championing pensioners and people retiring on the backs of young workers - the lucky ones - and young jobless , supported by the very high national insurance contributions which depress employment .
I am very much in favour Tony Blair ' s proposal for a Europe where people can work after the age of 65 , because I come from a country where people retire at 55 and even younger , and their pensions are paid for by the contributions of younger workers .
In conclusion , Mr President , let us talk less about goals we all agree on - who would not want Europe to be a dynamic economy ? - and a bit more about the choices , some of them painful and difficult , which need to be made as soon as possible .
Mr President , following the launch of economic and monetary union two years ago , there would indeed appear to be great resistance to the coordination of economic policy .
It seems an almost impossible feat to get 12 different economies with divergent economic situations to sing from the same hymn sheet .
The fact is that the Member States accepted monetary union reluctantly , but are not about to sacrifice even more policy freedom in order to achieve the real convergence required .
The socio-economic performance indicators proposed by the Commission represent an attempt to bring about a form of socio-economic coordination nonetheless , without having to go through a legislative procedure bristling with pitfalls .
It is far from ideal , but better some of a pudding than none of a pie , you might say .
Given this political reality , it is very foolish to nip this convergence process in the bud by proposing a confusing mass of indicators .
The business community is already complaining of fact-finding overload .
The national statistical offices simply do not have the resources or manpower for the job .
And to saddle Eurostat with it would be putting the cart before the horse .
The 27 indicators proposed by the Commission is on the excessive side as it is .
We should start with around ten and then increase the number carefully , and where there is a pressing need to do so .
It is a shame that the Bullmann report is sending the convergence process into the wilderness in its tender youth .
I hope that the Commissioner will shortly explain in clear and specific terms to what extent , and in what kind of timeframe , the far-reaching proposals from the motion for a resolution can be put into practice .
In any case , statistics do not tell the whole story .
They provide a snapshot of reality .
After all , we do not say that the United States has the greatest sporting prowess because they won the most medals at the Olympic Games .
You only have to divide the number of medals per head of population for the US to drop like a stone down the international league table , and for most European countries to emerge with better sporting achievements than the United States .
And of course Belgium has long been renowned for its skating prowess .
In short , indicators are a means of steering policy but not an end in themselves .
I would just like to say that , broadly speaking , my group is able to support Mr Gasòliba ' s report , although , unfortunately , it devotes far too little attention to the drawbacks attending liberalisation .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have all set ourselves the ambitious target of turning Europe into the most modern and most attractive economic region in the world for enterprises and workers .
As is so often the case , there is conflict not about the target , but about how to achieve this target .
Some people believe that this target will be achieved through completely free entrepreneurial activity : others through controlling and regulating turbo capitalism .
Of course , the truth lies in coming up with an intelligent combination of the two approaches .
To make our economic area the most attractive in the world , our economy needs to be highly efficient . At the same time it needs to be human driven and take the form of a social market economy .
Mr Bullmann has given us a lot of definitions of important structural indicators , which are intended to give us pointers for the correct approach to take .
This in fact gives rise to the problem of increased burdens on medium-sized enterprises .
That is why we support the proposal made by the Group of the Europe Liberal , Democratic and Reform Party that new statistics must not mean that medium-sized enterprises will have to shoulder a greater burden ; existing material must be resorted to .
Too much knowledge leads to all too frequent interventions , and this could blacken the prospects for the economy .
The problem for the future consists in doing the right thing with the data and new facts at our disposal .
It is therefore about fostering competition between systems , and private involvement .
At the same time we also need rules to make sure that our systems are competitive .
A look at my country is enough to show what should not be done : the extension of codecision in Germany .
In my country it is argued that , because of the dynamics of the economy , more works councils should be set up which , for practical purposes , means for all medium-sized enterprises .
Just imagine it if you can : new works councils are to be set up not only for large enterprises , but also for medium-sized enterprises . Now , that is nonsense .
Not even the Bullmann report would argue to that effect , and rightly so . There is everything in there , from the development of research to pension regulations , but thankfully he does not say anything about extending codecision .
By sticking with this concept , the red-green coalition in Germany is treading a misguided path , which is neither covered nor called for by European analyses .
So , on this point , Germany , the biggest country in Europe , is showing itself to be incapable of meeting the new challenges as the most attractive economic area in the world .
No , the red-green coalition is doing this aspect of the European challenge a real disservice .
The token gesture that has been made to the trades unions in Germany because their influence is decreasing , is a poisoned chalice .
Many in our group fear that the report before us contains too much detailed knowledge and detailed analyses .
We must take this problem into consideration .
The basic message that the European globalised world and the Europeans in this globalised world must take with them is that , above all , our economy must remain competitive and must not be restricted by this report .
However , what we also need - which is missing in the report - is the next phase of the analysis .
We need more global rules for global competition .
Mr President , the new European strategy which came out of Lisbon for a competitive , dynamic and knowledge-based Europe stood the test of time in the year 2000 and so , with the help of the synthesis report and the resolutions adopted at Stockholm , it must be further consolidated within the main thrusts of economic policy , which must be more binding this year than they have been in previous years .
Unemployment has finally fallen , even though the still high level of unemployment is deplorable .
Nevertheless , 2.6 million new jobs have been created and the positive economic trends have been confirmed by good economic data , even though the pace has slowed down .
The strategic approach of giving equal status to the policy areas of economic reform , economic growth , full employment and social inclusion has proved its worth .
But it must be consolidated and implemented .
The US economic climate , however , is keeping Europe on tenterhooks .
But a soft landing does seem possible .
Nevertheless , Europe must be prepared for lower demand for its exports .
For that reason , there is no alternative but to introduce structural reforms in the goods , services , capital and labour markets , which must lead to increased output potential and productivity .
Mr Friedrich , extended codecision can even lead to higher motivation among the workforce and thus to increased productivity .
The European Union has made great strides in terms of structural reforms , which is underlined by the most recent progress report of the International Monetary Fund on the euro zone .
This is also true for information and communications technologies and for the labour markets .
At the same time a policy mix must be developed which will help compensate for the effects of a possibly negative impact on the EU internal market from reduced US demand , by increasing domestic demand .
The Bullmann report and the synthesis report , with its ten correctly identified fields of action , rightly emphasise that the future of Europe lies in the ability of Member States to reform themselves , in the qualifications offensive aimed at increasing employment , in the modernisation of infrastructures , the expansion of the information society and in overcoming poverty and social exclusion .
To this end , the instruments of privatisation and deregulation must be exploited to the full .
But new instruments must only be used where restructuring and , hence , regulation are needed .
Especially important is a clear regulatory framework in all areas , most notably for financial services , which have a high priority for increased investment activity , which is crucial in the EU .
This is in the interest of the European model of a social market economy .
It is also important that the open coordination process method is taken a step further .
In this connection , a timetable , together with qualitative and quantitative objects , as well as intermediate goals , are needed .
This proved to be crucial with the advent of the internal market and the introduction of economic and monetary union .
In this case too , it must lead to the streamlining of the domestic market in the interest of the economy and employment . To this end , the European Parliament needs to play an enhanced role and be more involved in the process of coordinating economic policy .
The Swedish Presidency has called for democracy and transparency in this area .
I hope they are as good as their word .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Commission on its synthesis report and on keeping up the pressure on the Council and this House to deliver the promises made in the Lisbon process .
However , I would like to address one specific issue where the Commission and indeed all of us are rather weak : that is the issue of regulatory burdens .
We need to be a little better informed about the kind of regulatory burdens which we might be creating wittingly or , more importantly , unwittingly in the legislation that we pass .
I see in the Commission 's synthesis report no more than four or five paragraphs on this very important issue .
Regulatory burdens and the reduction of regulatory burdens is a subject which is thick with rhetoric and clichés , but rather thin on action and practicality .
It means that as legislators in the European Parliament we are often legislating blind .
We often deal with proposals that come from the European Commission which do not have proper impact assessments attached to them .
We then table amendments when we do not know what the effect of those amendments will be .
That is clearly an inappropriate way in which to legislate and not a particularly effective way to pursue the goal of competitiveness .
Therefore , I urge the Commission to reflect on this quite seriously and not dismiss it as just an add-on to the Lisbon process but place it at the centre of its reflections and perhaps think of new institutional ways of creating an agency specialised in these matters .
Commission proposals ought perhaps to be subject to proper impact assessments and , similarly , MEP amendments , so that we actually know what we are doing when we legislate in pursuit of this overall aim of competitiveness .
Mr President , it sounds wonderful that the EU wants to create the most competitive , dynamic and knowledge-based economy .
But would it not have sounded even better if the EU had chosen to create the most environmentally friendly , sustainable , just and equal economy ?
This appears not to be the case , particularly not in the report by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , which is an ode to deregulation , privatisation and social cutbacks , i.e. the things which create deep divisions and environmental damage .
For example , my own country Sweden has in the past been a very egalitarian country .
According to many reports since joining the EU , it is now a country where divisions , antagonism and inequality are increasing the most rapidly .
I would like to recommend all market fundamentalists to read the following in today ' s Guardian , " California and New Zealand that were once keen privatisers are now both turning their backs on deregulation .
They are ready to renationalize .
California is turning dramatically left .
New Zealand ' s experiment in market fundamentalism has failed " .
With this in mind , I wonder what the Swedish Presidency intends to do now .
The Swedish Presidency was in fact recently praised by The Economist for the egalitarian traditions in Sweden .
Are you now going to continue down the EU ' s incorrect road towards deregulation fundamentalism ?
Or will you instead perhaps regain some sort of tradition of solidarity and try to move the EU in a direction which takes more account of environmental friendliness , sustainability and solidarity ?
It would be interesting to receive an answer on this .
Mr President , I agree with Mr Bullmann when he emphasises a number of positive signals from the Lisbon Summit .
I am thinking particularly of the demand for full employment , but also the emphasis on dynamic growth , innovation and lifelong learning .
However , I wonder how this links up with the Maastricht model ' s emphasis on stability , inflation control , low wage policy and social savings .
Has this belt-tightening policy been abolished on the basis of the Lisbon decisions ?
No , clearly not .
The Commission ' s current action against Ireland shows that the Maastricht model lives on , for in many ways , Ireland is a prime example of the growth policy which has been promoted as a result of the Lisbon European Council and which is now being punished by the EU .
My conclusion is therefore that the EU has two contradictory economic models : one which is , for the time being , political reality and another which is a matter of dreams and visions about what is to succeed it .
There is a ' dream of the left ' and a ' dream of the right ' , which both seem to be covered by the Lisbon concept .
I naturally hope that , at the Stockholm European Council , the Swedish Government will highlight and prioritise the left-wing model which stresses the importance of full employment and a socially responsible development policy and rejects the trend towards liberalisation , deregulation , flexibility , etc .
But we will have to wait and see what happens when we get to Stockholm .
Mr President , at the outset I want to take the opportunity of congratulating Mr Gasòliba i Böhm on the preparation and presentation of his report .
I wish during this debate to take the opportunity of addressing economic growth , in particular in my own country of Ireland .
Let me immediately state that I support the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam which call for the need to coordinate broad economic policies of the various participating Member States within the single European currency .
However , any proposals which are brought forward in this regard , whether it be via the European Commission or otherwise , must be fair and they must be balanced .
Ireland has consistently supported the European Union and this has been borne out in all of the referenda in my country , where the citizens - and it does not happen in every country - have been given the right to express their views in relation to Europe .
I do not believe that the proposals which were put forward by the European Commissioner , Mr Solbes , were particularly balanced with regard to these proposed recommendations concerning the workings of the Irish economy at this time .
It is important to substantiate this and it is important to note that for a number of years the economic growth in my country has been between 10 and 12 % - in sharp contrast with the late 1980s when it was 0 % .
The provision for the current year is for a growth of around 8 % .
Unemployment figures are as close as you will get to full employment in today 's Union .
We are one of the few Member States making massive provisions for future pensions .
We are proud of the fact that many countries in the world are desperately trying to improve their economic situation and they are using the Irish model as a reference .
And yes , Mr President and Commissioner , our inflation is falling .
It is falling significantly - and am I wrong in stating that other Member States have higher inflation rates than ours ?
I did not hear that mentioned recently .
It seems to me that the biggest sin we have committed in our country is to reward the people with tax cuts and increases in salary .
Here , the Commission conveniently forgets that before the economic boom the citizens of our country were required to make major sacrifices in order to achieve that boom .
But according to the Commission there can be no question of them reaping the benefits .
Are we to be the victims of our own success ?
It is for these reasons I believe that those detractors who are voicing concerns about the operation of the Irish economy are over-reacting .
The majority of the people in my own country support our Minister for Finance and the only people who do not are those in opposition in my country and they are using the recommendation of the Commission for what they deem to be short-term political advantage .
Any suggestions from any quarter that Ireland should suffer as a result of the success of the Irish economy is a very serious threat .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Heads of State and Government of the European Union have set themselves the goal of turning the European Union into a truly dynamic , competitive , knowledge-based economic area over the next ten years .
We will have to make enormous efforts to achieve this and it will only be possible if we succeed in mobilising the forces which are currently slumbering in European enterprises and in European research and training establishments , in the context of an open market economy .
We are on the right path .
I found what Mr Prodi said yesterday very encouraging .
Soon , the single currency will be introduced and an optimum currency area will be created through enhanced mobility within the European Union .
We are moving forwards in terms of protecting intellectual property , which is also important if we want to mobilise research .
I believe that the European patent is an important step along this road . We also need to move more quickly in liberalising telecommunications , energy and the postal services , if we want to get closer to these goals .
We also need to create a European economic policy based on common principles and I am convinced that can only be done in terms of a social market economy .
But the question is this : who is responsible for this economic policy ?
Or are the responsibilities different ?
There are areas which are clearly allocated to the European Union : the area of competition , where the European Union has the strongest powers ; the area of monetary stability , which is monitored by the European Central Bank , and the Stability and Growth Pact - these are the most important instruments .
They are the areas which fall to the European Union .
There are other areas where responsibility clearly lies with the Member States , such as taxes , social security systems and training .
Here , Europe can only make a contribution through dialogue ; it is not empowered to make decisions .

As far as the collection of data is concerned , which Mr Bullmann proposed , my opinion is that , clearly , for us in the European Union , the areas where the European Union makes decisions must be given top priority .
In areas in which the European Union contributes through dialogue , the collection of data need only be accorded secondary priority .
Where do I think these priorities lie ?
In which areas will we need more information before long ?
We need more up-to-date information for example on the development of GDP and its components .
We need more data on the growth of services in the European Union .
We know a great deal about production in the European Union but too little about the development of services .
At the moment , we have inadequate data on the balance of payments of Euroland , and these are fundamental principles which underpin decision making , for example when the European Central Bank takes its decisions on interest rates .
As regards other data , the essential thing is to get a dialogue going in order to come up with the principles of benchmarking .
I must make it very clear that , in the case of data collected in this area , I would regard it as disastrous if , once it is available , such data was misused for planned economic intervention in the economic affairs of the European Union , and we need to build in the relevant safeguards in advance .
This data , which I believe , in full agreement with Mr Bullmann , we need , must be used to increase competition between Member States .
By having common borders on the outside and open borders on the inside allowing the free circulation of people , goods , services and capital , we in the European Union have created competition not only between enterprises but also between Member States , which is aimed at offering the people of Europe the services they expect from the state at better prices and under better conditions .
It is my firm belief that the data mentioned in the Bullmann report should be used for this purpose .
I shall give the floor to Mr Rack for a procedural motion .
. ( DE ) Madam President , over the last few days you have worked miracles time and again .
For instance , you managed to get Air France to bring Members to the Chamber on time .
Perhaps you could work yet another miracle .
We have just tried to come down into the Chamber using the lift .
From the eighth floor it was full to capacity , nobody could breathe , but nevertheless it stopped at every floor .
We managed to get here , but might it be possible to tell the lift to go faster .
VOTE
Madam President , following yesterday 's constructive debate , we meet today for Parliament to vote on this directive which will be a cornerstone in the establishment of a harmonised legal framework on copyright in the digital environment .
As we indicated yesterday , the Commission is in a position to accept all the compromise amendments of the rapporteur and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market that have already been adopted in the Legal Affairs Committee , that is to say Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 14 and 15 .
However , the Commission has concerns about some of the other amendments adopted in the Legal Affairs Committee and therefore cannot accept Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 11 , 12 and 13 .
Moreover , a series of further amendments , Amendments Nos 16 to 45 , have also been tabled for the plenary session .
All these further amendments are unacceptable to the Commission .
Today 's vote is of utmost importance for the future of copyright and related rights in the information society .

Thank you , Commissioner Solbes , and I shall give the floor to Mr Cashman for a procedural motion .
Madam President , I would like to inform the House that , as a substantial rightholder in the audio-visual sector , I have a direct financial interest in the issue before the House and will accordingly be abstaining throughout .
Thank you , Mr Cashman , for sharing this information .
.
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to make a similar announcement to this House .
I think that many in this Chamber are affected , as authors .
But as far as Amendment No 33 is concerned , I am particularly biased .
I will definitely not be voting on Amendment No 33 .
Thank you too , Mrs Echerer , for your honesty .
Madam President , I would like to declare my economic interest and for this reason I will not be taking part in the vote .
Madam President , there will of course be many Members who will have some direct or indirect financial interest in this matter , in most cases to a rather small extent .
Parliament 's Rules of Procedure however state that Members must declare their direct financial interests if they are going to speak in the debate .
I refer to Article 1 of Annex I of our Rules of Procedure .
The Rules do not require us to register such an interest before voting .
If every Member who has an interest is now going to get up and declare it before we start this vote , we will only start the vote at 1.00 p.m.
Such interests are registered in the written declaration of Members ' interests , so they are there for the public to see ; that declaration will also soon be on the Internet following the vote in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs last week .
Given that this issue is very clearly understood , I think that we can agree that all Members who are in this situation should abstain .
There is no need to declare this before the vote ; if you agree , we shall proceed in this way .
Otherwise , we can continue ; I have a long list of Members who have requested the floor .
I only hope that there will be some Members left to vote .
Madam President , as I have declared it to other people already I thought it was only fair to declare it to this House that I will be abstaining because of pecuniary interests .
Madam President , the same applies to me as a major international publisher and broadcasting company .
I shall be abstaining .

Madam President , I would willingly have gone along with Mr Corbett ' s suggestion but , since everybody else is doing it , my financial interests are obvious .
I will be abstaining .
Madam President , I would also alert you to the fact that I have a vested interest in copyright matters in connection with Danish Radio , and I am therefore abstaining from voting .
Madam President , I am actually in the same situation .
At the same time I would be interested whether there is some borderline , and indeed to know where it runs to mark where the advantage is so clearly perceptible that one should abstain from voting on this very important matter .
Now that we have started , I think that the Members who wish to declare their interest explicitly may do so , unless they choose otherwise .
Madam President , following a point of order made by Mr Corbett , entirely correctly referring to the Rules on this , I should like to draw to the attention of the House that on the previous vote of the Bowe report , if everybody in this House who had an interest in pharmaceutical companies through shareholdings had declared an interest , we probably would not have arrived at the majority required .
It is therefore important that Members do not need to abstain on the vote .
They need only to make a declaration of interest in committee or in Parliament if they speak on the matter .
Otherwise we shall find we are short of majorities on a number of votes where people legitimately have interests .
Mr Blak , Mr Nogueira Román , Mr Turchi , Mr Speroni and Mr Blokland are in the same position .


We can now , therefore , proceed to the vote .
Before the vote on Amendment No 11
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to table an oral amendment .
I have the English text in front of me . After the phrase , " their own past archive productions produced or commissioned " should be added , " no later than December 1996 " .
Then it goes on , " by them under their own editorial control " .
The background to this is quite simple , in December 1996 the WIPO Agreement was concluded .
We want to ensure it only covers archive productions which were produced before December 1996 .
Mr Lehne , in your speech , you made it very clear that you are proposing an oral amendment .
Madam President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I wish to say that we are against the tabling of this oral amendment .
Mr Medina Ortega , in the circumstances , I do not think that it is necessary to ask 12 Members to rise ; I imagine that there will be at least 12 .
Nevertheless , we shall conduct the test , pursuant to the Rules of Procedure .
( The President noted that more than 12 Members rose to oppose moving the oral amendment )
After the vote on Amendment No 32
Madam President , it is with regard to Amendment No 32 in which the English uses the phrase " may use works " and the Swedish uses " tillgång till " [ literally " access to " ] .
This is not the same , so I request correction in all language versions .
Ideally , this point should have been made before the vote .
I think that you are absolutely right in stating that this must be investigated properly before voting .
However , in this case , Amendment No 32 has been rejected , and that settles the issue , I believe .
Before the vote on Amendment No 38
Madam President , the Dutch version of Amendment No 38 has not been correctly worded .
It should follow the English version , which reads , " a natural person for his or her private use " .
The words " his or her " are not present in the Dutch version , so this must be adapted in accordance with the English text .
Indeed , Mr De Clercq , we shall do that if the amendments are adopted .
Before the vote on Amendment No 35
Madam President , I would just like to say that here too the German version is incorrect .
We are sticking with the English version , in which the words " his or her " have been added .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended ) President .
I note , from the Members ' comments , that we must pay particular attention to the consistency between the various language versions .
Recommendation for second reading of the report ( A5-0039 / 2001 ) by Mr Miller , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and the Council relating to special provisions for vehicles used for the carriage of persons comprising more than eight seats in addition to the driver 's seat , and amending Directives 70 / 156 / EEC and 97 / 27 / EC [ 9012 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0456 / 2000 - 1997 / 0176 ( COD ) ]
Madam President , as my colleague , Mr Liikanen , announced in the debate that took place yesterday , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 7 and 8 , and it can also accept in principal Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 10 .
The amendment that the Commission cannot accept is No 9 .
Madam President , I just wanted to explain that this directive on a uniform bus for Europe was rejected by all groups at first reading .
Then there were 90 pages ; today there are 150 .
That is why the European People ' s Party has brought in Amendment No 9 . I support referring this draft directive back to committee because , after the standardisation of the European cucumber , we do not want the standardisation of the European bus as well .
I call on my colleagues to vote against it .
( Applause from the right )
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Report ( A5-0025 / 2001 ) by Mrs Müller , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to food supplements [ COM ( 2000 ) 222 - C5 ­ 0234 / 2000 - 2000 / 0080 ( COD ) ]
Madam President , the reason why I have asked permission to speak is because , pursuant to Article 144 of the Rules of Procedure , the EDD Group is requesting that the matter be referred back to committee .
The background to this request is important and something of a matter of principle inasmuch as the proposal for a directive is alleged to have been issued pursuant to Article 95 and therefore to be a proposal for an internal market directive . In fact , the directive in view is overwhelmingly concerned with health policy , which is why , legally , it pertains to another part of the Treaty , namely Article 152 .
This is an issue which is not unimportant as a matter of principle because Article 152 makes it clear that harmonisation cannot take place within the health sphere .
However , a series of other measures may be adopted .
What is worth noting and justifies the group ' s request for the matter to be referred back to committee is the fact that no light has been shed anywhere , either in the Commission ' s proposal or in Mrs Müller ' s report , on this crucial issue of where authority basically lies , and I would refer to a whole range of decisions from the European Court of Justice concerning this line of demarcation .
The least we must demand is that the issue be investigated , and we would therefore ask for the matter to be referred back to committee .
Mr Krarup , on behalf of his group , has just moved a request for referral back to committee .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , I shall put this to the House .
Is there a speaker in favour of this request ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , during yesterday evening ' s sitting , Mr Krarup tried to refer the Commission proposal , the directive and the report back to committee and to block them .
I regret this very much because the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities was not involved in the early phases of the work on the report , either in committee or through the tabling of amendments .
Secondly , I would like to point out that we are not dealing with Article 152 here , on health , but with Article 153 , which concerns consumer protection .
For this reason , I ask that we vote on this report today and that we do not refer it back to committee .
Mrs Müller , the rapporteur , has spoken against the referral back to committee .
Is there a speaker in favour of the request ?
Madam President , I should like to speak in favour of the proposal for I believe that , if the least suspicion can be created that we are exceeding the legal basis for our work , then we have a problem in a Parliament which takes a serious approach to its work .
I believe that , as long as this matter has not been fully investigated , it is wise not to take a final decision , and I am therefore warmly in favour of referring the matter back to committee .
Madam President , I am sorry .
I did try to avoid this , but perhaps we should base our arguments on the facts and on the system of law in the European Union .
In the context of the internal market we are obliged to work at harmonising legislation in the area of consumer protection too .
That is exactly what we are doing with the present legislation , for which Mrs Müller is the rapporteur .
We are harmonising existing legislation on food supplements in the Member States and one of the reasons why we are doing this is to protect consumers .
The intention is not to overstep the competences of the European Parliament , and we are simply doing what we are doing in other areas .
The Court of Justice will agree with us at all times .
Anyone who today tries to postpone it and to get it taken off the agenda is doing so using invalid arguments .
Before we proceed to the vote on the motion for referral back to committee , Mr Corbett has requested the floor on a procedural motion .
Madam President , this request from the EDD Group is actually an abuse of our procedures .
If the EDD Group were really concerned with this issue , it would have tabled an amendment to the legal basis of the proposal at committee stage , or at first reading , or when it came to the committee at second reading .
To come back now and make this procedural motion in Parliament because they have failed to do their homework in committee is really abusing the Rules of Procedure .
( Parliament rejected the motion for referral back to committee )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0015 / 2001 ) by Mr Lange , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 97 / 24 / EC on certain components and characteristics of two or three-wheel motor vehicles [ COM ( 2000 ) 314 - C5 ­ 0334 / 2000 - 2000 / 0136 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0018 / 2001 ) by Mrs Jensen , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision on Community incentive measures in the field of employment [ COM ( 2000 ) 459 - C5 ­ 0384 / 2000 - 2000 / 0195 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0024 / 2001 ) by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council regulation on assistance to Turkey in the framework of the pre-accession strategy , and in particular on the establishment of an Accession Partnership [ COM ( 2000 ) 502 - C5 ­ 0468 / 2000 - 2000 / 0205 ( CNS ) ]
Madam President , I ask if Amendment No 3 has been checked for admissibility , as it is wholly discriminatory on grounds of religion .
I shall ask Mr Swoboda .
I believe that this amendment is admissible .
Madam President , I do not discern any discriminatory content .
It was accepted almost unanimously in committee , in the presence of Baroness Nicholson in fact .
I do not see a problem .
This is the first time that something like this has arisen .
That is what I think as well .
However , thank you , Mr Swoboda , for your comments .
Madam President , my apologies .
Amendment No 9 is discriminatory , in my view , on grounds of religion .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
. The European Parliament has been asked to give its assent to this agreement between the European Union and the United States of America in the field of higher education and vocational education and training .
As rapporteur for the European Parliament I gave my support to this agreement as cooperation of this kind is essential in today 's global society .
I believe that there is a great deal to be gained on both sides with this agreement .
European skills in business and technology can be enhanced both by learning from American teachers and with American students .
The same model could be reversed to help improve American knowledge of language teaching methods and working in multi-cultural contexts .
This is borne out by the agreement itself , which was inspired in the United States by their observation and admiration of the ERASMUS programme .
I am sure that the European Parliament would welcome a greater involvement in the discussions for this agreement , and hope that MEPs are consulted at an earlier stage of the proceedings than for this set of negotiations .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport was notified of the agreement only a few weeks before the negotiations with the American authorities .
The agreement is to receive EUR 8.6 million for its five-year duration .
I would propose that research be carried out from next year into how private funding can be used to supplement this figure .
Discussions with the Commission and the American authorities have shown enthusiasm for the idea , and I hope it is one that the European Parliament , European Commission and US Administration can cooperate on .
As I set out in my explanatory statement , the programme would also benefit from being given a name that would help raise its profile among students , universities and the general public .
Part of the reasoning behind the programme is to serve as a symbol of cross-Atlantic cooperation , and so it needs to be as widely known as possible .
In this , too , I have received positive feedback from the other concerned parties , and I trust that it is one that can be discussed in greater length in time for the next agreement in 2005 .
I personally think we should consider the following names of statesmen associated with US-European relations : Churchill , Eisenhower or Lafayette , any of whom in my opinion would be an appropriate name for this programme .
Bowe report ( A5-0032 / 2001 )
Madam President , Bonino List Members have voted in favour of this directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms .
It is certainly an important vote because this directive takes account of the precautionary principle without confusing it with prohibition , and , after three years of work , we believe we have taken an important step forwards .
However , Members will allow me to hope that Parliament is willing to grant the same openness to research into biotechnology in the medical and health field .
When people talk of bioengineering they are actually talking about a huge sector which is opening up , not only in food but also in medical research , and I hope this Parliament will want to reverse its decision to block research and therapeutic cloning .
That is what today ' s vote means .
I hope the vetoes and bans will be removed in this way , but , above all , I hope this openness will not just apply to agribusiness but also , and as soon as possible , to the field of medical research , and that it will not be overshadowed by clerical or religious vetoes .
Madam President , the Pensioners Party has voted in favour of opening up the production and marketing of GMOs , the subject of Mr Bowe ' s report .
Why ?
Because pensioners are waiting for the wine that rejuvenates ; pensioners are waiting for the wine that does not intoxicate ; pensioners are waiting for the wine that does not damage the liver , the wine that makes men fascinating , and indeed the champagne that makes women , even mothers-in-law , utterly beautiful .
And finally , Italians are waiting for GMOs to make bistecca alla fiorentina completely harmless so they can consume that choice Italian and European delicacy without a care in the world .
. The ban will remain because new GMO approvals are not acceptable until an adequate EU biosafety framework has been completed and been implemented by all Member States .
Such approvals would , in fact , contravene the precautionary principle to which the new directive makes explicit reference and they would put the environment and consumers ' health at risk .
The Member States should resist any attempts to lift the de facto moratorium by ' gentleman 's agreements ' with biotech companies .
Due to Green efforts , the new directive will also require all locations of GMO releases to be recorded in a public register .
It will also ensure new and higher safety standards for the protection of the environment and human health , it is based on a broadened risk assessment approach and introduces new concepts of traceability and monitoring which might help to identify and remedy adverse effects of GMOs at an earlier stage .
However , elements of this framework , the traceability and labelling of GMOs and their derivatives , the liability for damage caused by GMOs and the implementation of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety have not yet been addressed through any legislation .
To vote in favour of the directive would be like buying a pig in a poke .
More than 6 000 hectares of farmland in four Member States of the European Union were sown last year with oilseed rape varieties contaminated by genetically modified plants .
Under the directive Member States are required to terminate such unauthorised releases .
. There is much to be welcomed in the new directive when compared to its predecessor .
I particularly welcome the recognition of the possible wider direct and indirect effects and risks of the release of GMOs into the environment .
I am pleased that there will be a public register of the location of GMOs whether deliberately released or placed on the market .
The requirement concerning the termination of unauthorised releases also clarifies the need for a consistent response .
However , I regret the delay on the ban of antibiotic markers and the qualification attached to this ban , the streamlining and setting of shorter deadlines for the authorisation procedures and a number of other factors in this final result .
I have therefore abstained in the vote .
The whole regulatory package is not yet clear : for example in relation to liability and the export to non-GMO states .
Neither am I convinced that the research capability currently exists to fully assess the factors contained in the directive .
The needs of our environment and biodiversity should be paramount in this area .
I do not believe that is the currently the position of Council .
- ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats are voting in favour of the proposal approved by the Conciliation Committee .
This is not a stand for or against genetically modified products , but a way of regulating our current reality .
We have a responsibility as politicians to ensure that this area is regulated .
The result of not approving the new text is that we retain the old legislation , which has not kept up with new developments in the field of gene technology .
We must trust that the Commission will present a clear proposal regarding traceability and labelling , as it has promised .
Consumers must be able to choose whether or not to buy GMO products .
We believe it is important to establish clear rules in this area .
Once again , I refused to approve the draft directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms , as it stands following the work of the Conciliation Committee of the Council and the European Parliament .
I also refused to approve it at its first two readings in the European Parliament , which were held on 11 February 1999 and 12 April 2000 .
Quite apart from the strategic reason that I already explained in the course of the main debate ( we risk being duped if we accept the implementation of an authorisation procedure and then , tomorrow , the moratorium is lifted without further guarantees ) , the content of this text , in our opinion , still appears to be far from satisfactory .
Admittedly , we noted that some progress has been made on the timetable for the gradual elimination of antibiotic-resistant markers in GMOs .
However , there are still some disturbing grey areas .
First of all , no progress has been made on the issue of liability or any requirement for those who release GMOs to take out insurance .
The Commission has merely made a rather vague promise to " bring forward proposals " , but these certainly will not be regarding the requirement for insurance , which neither the Commission nor the GMO producers want .
Furthermore , authorisations for placing products onto the market are based on a ten-year period , which is far too long , and this is Parliament ' s fault , since it has let itself be influenced by pressure groups .
The national safeguard clause in Article 23 is too weak , as a Member State may find itself bound by an authorisation for placing products onto the market that would be valid throughout the European Community .
To sum up , of all these disheartening provisions , we support those which are concerned with keeping the public informed , i.e. notifying the relevant authorities of the locations where GMO crops are grown for commercial purposes and having these locations " made known to the public in a manner deemed appropriate by the authorities " .
In other words , in this matter , there will be no requirement to give honest and open information .
This policy of restricting information reminds us of the method the Commission already used at the beginning of the 1990s , when the mad cow epidemic was spreading .
There is no doubt that the European authorities are repeat offenders .
Our vote against this report is not a vote against research into agriculture or against the scientists who carry out research in this area .
However , the results of this research are inevitably used by agri-foodstuffs corporations as the results strengthen their dominant role in the agriculture industry , because farmers must increasingly go through these corporations to buy seed etc .
We have absolutely no trust in the agri-foodstuffs corporations , who are motivated solely by research and optimising profits , even at the expense of consumers ' health and the environment .
Yet , there is nothing in the proposal for a directive which convinces us that releasing GMOs and , more importantly , placing GMOs on the market , will be subject to strict monitoring , leading to an outright ban if this were shown to be in the interests of society , even if this means a clash with the interests of the agricultural food corporations .
The fact that these agricultural food corporations continued to sell bonemeal , despite having been proven to be harmful , and the lax attitude , even complicity , of Member States and European institutions towards this issue are already sending out warning signals and we will certainly pay a high price for this in the future .
We therefore voted against this report .
We shall vote against the report that Mr Bowe presented on behalf of the Conciliation Committee , since the revision of Directive 90 / 200 on deliberate release of GMOs has not met its anticipated objectives .
Yet , with regard to a question that is so fundamentally important to our citizens , the European Parliament should have reached agreement on all the issues that were raised and on the simultaneous implementation of all the measures which safeguard the precautionary principle .
Admittedly , some progress has been made on the previous directive ( such as exemptions for pharmaceutical products and renewal of authorisation ) . However , we would not want to accept a directive that did not ensure traceability , labelling or the responsibility of producers .
How can we contemplate releasing GMOs if manufacturers do not accept their full liability and if we do not have a directive which regulates the issue of traceability and labelling of GMOs .
The Commission has made known its intention to table draft directives - but when will these be approved ?
What provisions will they lay down ?
We cannot vote on the release of GMOs without these guarantees .
We should bear in mind the consequences of the BSE crisis , the precautionary principle , our standards regarding food safety and inevitable risks of spreading disease to other crops , in addition to the effects on human health .
At any rate , five Member States have already stated their determination to retain a strict ban on putting GMOs on the market in the future , even if the revision of the directive should be approved , and I would like to congratulate them .
This draft directive constitutes more of a threat because of what it omits rather than what it contains .
During the conciliation procedure , the European Parliament did , however , insist on clear labelling and traceability rules for GMOs , which are essential for consumers who can only take a decision about whether to buy products containing GMOs if these products are properly labelled .
This then really is a fool ' s bargain .
It is more important for the precautionary principle to take precedence over the commercial interests of various multinational companies and that the protection of European consumers is the only aspect that we take into account .
The compromise that the European Parliament and the Council have reached is clearly inadequate , even though the content of this proposal for a directive is an improvement on the original proposal and , above all , because it is more comprehensive than the previous directive .
We must bear in mind , however , that there is currently a moratorium on GMOs , which , it is envisaged , will end as soon as this new directive comes into force .
Since the Commission has made a commitment to presenting appropriate legislative proposals on labelling and traceability in 2001 , which will complement the current labelling system in line with the White Paper on food safety , the moratorium must be maintained , at least during the process of drafting and adopting this legislation .
The new directive on deliberate release of GMOs aspired to " include all direct and indirect ecological aspects " .
I have to remark that the end result is still a long way from the stated objectives and that the niggling issues have been brushed aside .
Therefore , the issue of environmental liability covering damage resulting from GMOs has been postponed to a later date , as has consideration of potential cumulative long-term effects associated with the interaction of various GMOs .
It is clear that we are allowing the release of GMOs in agriculture without being fully aware of the risks that we are taking and without knowing who shall be held legally responsible for the damage either .
The authors of the directive express doubts , proving once again that a moratorium must be imposed on the production of GMOs , for ecological and public health reasons .
By merely attempting a half-hearted restriction on the release of GMOs , the directive denies the need for a moratorium , and that is the main reason why I am voting against the report .
Furthermore , the social and democratic implications of the spread of GMOs are clearly understood ; spreading GMOs strengthens the domination of the agro-industry over farmers and consumers .
As such , the directive gives more than a fair share to big business and that is the second reason why I am voting against the report .
. ( NL ) When it comes to genetic modification , the choice now seems to be between maintaining the old regulation , which is inadequate I know , but which does not pose a risk because it includes a moratorium , and a new regulation , which is slightly better but does not guarantee the continued existence of the moratorium .
I made the point in Tuesday ' s debate on this subject that the real choice is quite different .
One possibility is to permit commercial applications , accept uncontrollable changes in nature and promote the sale of new products with a still unknown risk to unwitting consumers .
The other possibility is to extend the moratorium on commercial applications , whilst scientific research alone is conducted in the meantime .
This scientific research will be necessary for a long time to come , in order to chart what the potential , long-term positive and negative effects of genetic modification will be .
I would go for the latter option , but that is not , by any stretch of the imagination , what is being put to the vote today .
As I see it , the majority of Members of the Group of the European United Left , as well as the majority of Members of the Green Group , have allowed themselves to be thrown into confusion due to this lack of choice , which will now lead to abstentions .
My party , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , thinks that is no kind of solution .
Hence I will vote against the proposal .
. ( EL ) The final version of the new directive on genetically-modified organisms ( GMOs ) certainly has some good points , such as improved controls , public registers , the gradual elimination of antibiotic-resistant gene markers etc .
Nevertheless , it allows for consent to be granted for mass cultures and , in my view , does not apply the precautionary principle in full .
The debate illustrated the considerable risks from GMOs without throwing up any definitive or persuasive arguments to the contrary .
We refer to the risks to public health ( allergies , increased resistance to antibiotics , possible toxicity ) , and , in more general terms , to the ecosystems in which GMOs are released ( threat to biodiversity etc . ) .
Add to this the fact that current knowledge on GMOs is still - and generally admitted to be - inadequate , in that there is no systematic or confirmed information on how the overall genetic material introduced into the gene acts and develops .
' Accidents ' or ' surprises ' have already been recorded in specific cases of this sort of genetic manipulation in the USA , Australia and elsewhere .
Even the Council 's common position was adopted despite the fact that Member States such as France , Italy and Denmark stated that they felt that a new five-year moratorium was needed .
All this reinforces our reservations and our belief that , quite apart from the need to strengthen controls and monitoring , the time has not yet come to legalise the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment .
Furthermore , we are by no means convinced that GMOs can contribute to agricultural productivity and development ; we are barely even convinced that they can help reduce certain pesticides , as is already being stated in American studies on a large number of areas cultivated with GMOs .
Clearly , one of the main reasons for insisting on the dissemination of GMOs is that it gives certain companies the opportunity to register patents and exclusive rights to varieties containing GMOs , as the Italian Minister of Agricultural Policy recently remarked in the Italian press .
It is for these reasons that we are unable to vote in favour of the common position on the new directive on GMOs .
García-Orcoyen Tormo report ( A5-0033 / 2001 )
Madam President , we approved the report as it is an important instrument for rewarding businesses which go further than other businesses .
The eco-management and audit scheme will be an incentive .
But we are disappointed that the principle of the best available technique is not incorporated into this report . We are also very disappointed that there is no support for it in the major groups : it would have been a further incentive for businesses in fact to use the best available technique .
Great success has been achieved , however , in that this will hopefully motivate businesses to take part in EMAS , since registration in EMAS is stagnant at the moment because of the competing ISO 1400 system . This decision will hopefully help to rectify this situation since EMAS is much better than ISO .
EMAS ensures that the best are singled out , while ISO only singles out those businesses which are better than they were , even though absolutely nothing is said about what they used to be like . That is why we voted in favour of the report .
We hope that registration in EMAS will increase , especially in Germany , where it is already very widespread . We also hope that this will serve as an incentive to enterprises to really improve their environmental instruments and to do what is best for the environment .
Madam President , I voted against the report on the regulation allowing voluntary participation in EMAS .
I have voted against because I am opposed to the word ' voluntary ' which appears in the title .
Now is the time for European environmental legislation to get really serious .
The damage caused by the heedlessness of the past and by governments ' lack of determination to respect the environment have brought about the terrible , dreadful situation in which we find ourselves .
I believe directives and regulations inducing respect for the environment should be compulsory and cannot be entrusted to voluntary action and the good intentions of companies to respect the rules .
Who is responsible for assessing how environmentally-friendly companies are ?
The report produced by the Conciliation Committee deems the outcome of the conciliation procedure highly satisfactory .
This relates to the compromise , in which amendments were adopted and withdrawn .
One of the withdrawn amendments concerned a desire expressed by Parliament at previous readings to be able to allow independent accountants and environmental accountants , as well as large verification institutions , to participate in a Community environmental management and audit system and issue certificates .
The possibility exists in Germany , but in the Netherlands and Denmark the large institutions are trying to block it .
I would remind you of the amendment tabled by the former MEP Mrs Van Putten , of the PSE Group , which was designed to prevent individual countries from continuing to exclude independent accountants .
I note that this aspiration was not given due attention during the conciliation procedure .
This would appear to put the ball back in the court of the two Member States concerned .
However , this strategy will not succeed because the excluded group of interested parties will continue to point out that there is now a European regulation .
I expect there to be some differences of interpretation regarding this , as yet , unresolved problem , in the time to come , and will therefore ask the Commission for clarification before long .
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0043 / 2001 ) by Mr Boselli
Madam President , I voted in favour of the report on protecting copyright .
I am in favour of European regulation of this important sector , but I have to say that , after I had voted , I was assailed by a doubt which , I hope , can be resolved in the future .
Before coming into the House I met a young man , Marcello , from Pescara .
He told me - you will not believe this , Madam President - that he pins up my declarations of vote on his office wall .
I am not making this up , it is true !
Obviously he finds them interesting and worth exhibiting .
Well , what I want to know is this : does this directive also protect Mr Fatuzzo ' s copyright when he presents his explanations of vote ?
I hope so .
If so , I will be even happier that I voted in favour of the motion .
Madam President , it is always a difficult task to strike a fair balance between the necessary level of copyright protection and protecting everyone ' s right to knowledge and learning .
My friend Mr Poos and I voted against almost all the amendments that were tabled by the parliamentary committee and by other Members , because we believed that the first common position was very fair and well balanced .
I am pleased to see , however , that , after the battle over the amendments and all the pressure from various groups , the common position has hardly been changed .
I believe that it provides Parliament and the Council with a good starting point for resolving this difficult problem .
Madam President , I also welcome today 's vote on copyright and the information society .
This has been a very controversial and difficult area to legislate in but today we have achieved a victory for common sense .
We can be confident that in our vote we are providing - for example , in Amendment No 5 - protection for rightholders against potential Internet piracy and we have also knocked out some amendments tabled by the PPE-DE Group which would have been very damaging for rightholders .
At the same time we are not denying access of citizens to the brave new world of the information society and , in particular , to the more disadvantaged users and communities .
Today 's vote means that we can now sign up to the WIPO Treaty and we can give international copyright protection to our creative industries .
The computer games industry in my own region represents a third of the computer games world market .
We need to protect these industries which create jobs and boost our economy - not just locally , but in the European domain .
We can now look forward to future reviews of legislation and the work of the contact committee to ensure that there is no violation or abuse of copyright on the Internet or any limitation on genuine private use or fair use .
. Irish superstars Boyzone and the Corrs have asked the European Parliament to protect their music in the age of the Internet .
It is very important for Ireland 's music and publishing industry that music can be accessed through the Internet legally .
It is especially important that the success of young up-and-coming musicians and performers is not jeopardised by piracy .
The music industry would crumble without proper protection from piracy on the Internet .
The rights of authors and creative people of all kinds are a priority but the directive also aims to allow libraries to continue to make copies available for private use .
However , the libraries have accepted that the rights of authors are a priority .
- ( DA ) At the second reading of amendments to the directive on copyright in the information society , the Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of securing the necessary balance between , on the one hand , the rightholders ' entirely justified interest in protecting their rights in relation to the new opportunities offered by the Internet and , on the other hand , the public ' s interest in using these opportunities to benefit that exchange of information which is the prerequisite for the development of the knowledge-based society .
In the vote , we have voted in favour of amendments that will make it possible for public service stations to develop what are known as their ' on demand ' services .
We have done this because we think it important that no unnecessary obstacles should be placed in the way of public service stations continuing to be a part of the overall media picture .
We have attached crucial importance to public service stations naturally having to pay for the use of materials to which others have the rights .
In the vote , we have also attached importance to no unnecessary restrictions being placed upon education , research and library work , two of the cornerstones of a modern democracy .
. In the digital age it is important that copyright and intellectual property problems do not prevent broadcasters using their archives .
In the UK we do not have this problem , but understand it may be a difficulty elsewhere .
Based on UK experience we see no reason why that need be so , which is why the British Conservatives are now voting against Amendment No 11 .
If , however , this matter cannot satisfactorily be dealt with without legislation , we believe it should be reviewed as part of the review of the directive in 18 months time .
We obviously support the right of authors , artists , composers , performers , writers and journalists , etc . , to make a reasonable living from their work . That is why we support their calls to defend copyright .
Very often , however , large record companies and publishers of books and CD-ROMs , media and Internet giants brandish copyright in order to conceal their own interests and they take their profits from authors themselves , at the expense of the consumer , who is , moreover , often put off culture by the cost of books and CDs , etc .
To these large companies , copyright simply means their own right to maximise the profits they make from authors and the general public as well as organisations such as lending libraries that attempt to make works of art available to the general public , who would otherwise never have access to such material .
The text is an attempt to reconcile the interests of the information industry capitalists with the interests of authors and the public and we abstained on several amendments , but voted in favour of the ones which do actually protect the interests of authors and the rights of the general public .
. I declare an interest in the matter of copyright .
I am advised by a legal advisor that I do however have the right to vote as an individual author .
I am not a paid lobbyist .
. Like other Members who spoke at the beginning of this debate , I have abstained in the vote because I am a rightholder in the field of television documentary archive and books .
None of these interests are directly involved in any financial gain for me should the amendments be passed , and in any event - in common with the rapporteur , Mr Boselli - I am opposed to many of them .
Nevertheless , it is the wisest course to abstain and to congratulate Mr Boselli on his successful negotiation of a report which comes so close to the common position and the balance which it achieved .
I would like to take the opportunity of the vote on the Boselli report to state that this report , and the ensuing debate , raise the issue of the future of European culture , one which is very closely related to the resources granted to creative artists .
The report does not fool the cultural world and creative artists and they have joined forces with great enthusiasm .
I met several of their representatives and have read their statements . I believe , as do many Members of the House , that they are , generally , in the right .
Naturally , it is in everyone ' s interest for works of art to be widely distributed , particularly by the new methods of communication .
It should not , however , lead to daylight robbery .
That is why it is absolutely necessary to control the process properly and , in particular , to ensure that private copying retains a status that is truly private .
Despite today ' s vote , the battle is still far from being won .
That is another reason why citizens should continue their battle for a European Union that is not just an economic , financial , cold and heartless monster .
. ( PT ) The creative output of writers and artists in general cannot simply be considered to be merchandise , and we therefore have to find technical solutions that will guarantee and promote literary and artistic creation and , at the same time , ensure that the works that are produced are distributed .
These aspects must be borne in mind even when the new technologies are used .
Protecting the interests of users in itself requires the existence of high-quality work , the promotion of creativity and , of course , support for the distribution of these works .
We therefore regret the fact that some of the proposals tabled by the GUE / NGL Group , of which I am a member , which were designed to improve copyright , have not been approved .
In any event , despite the limitations of this directive , we acknowledge that some positive changes have been made to the final position and we hope that the Member States will pay particular attention to this aspect of artistic and literary creation and to promoting the distribution thereof , whilst respecting copyright .
. ( NL ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and the Commissioner on the result they achieved with this important report , which was very nearly the focus of more lobbying than any other report has been .
Why was there was so much lobbying ?
Because the legislation stemming from this report will have an enormous impact on society , and the lobbyists must act as the mouthpiece of this self-same society .
Ultimately , I myself am very satisfied with the result achieved , which struck a fair balance between the interests of the consumer , industry and the rightholders .
Although I advised the Liberal Group to stick to the line of the common position , including the compromise amendments tabled by the rapporteur , and to reject the remaining amendments , in view of the attitudes within the group , I have taken the liberty of deviating from this line with my vote on the latter
I believe that the purpose of copyright law is to protect the rightholders , and this could be done more effectively than the strategy adopted by the report .
I have some concerns about the multiplicity of potential exemptions per Member State when it comes to copying rights , and about the possibility of being able to intervene in technical measures , because I feel this could disrupt the principles of the internal market .
Reasonable recompense will always have to be paid in the case of exemptions imposed by the government , regardless as to who picks up the tab , because I think it is unjust that rightholders then have to offer their work for free .
Regarding Amendment No 2 , I believe that double payment must be avoided .
The purpose of Amendment No 1 appeals to me a great deal , but the wording goes much too far for my taste in this case .
Naturally it is desirable to be able to listen to , or watch , old recordings via the digital highway as well , but only with due recompense for the rightholders , and if they are demonstrably difficult to trace it is important to have a collective licence system in place which functions as a safety net .
In the matter of caching , I would have thought it more desirable for this report to tie in more closely with the e-commerce directive .
The digital techniques will ultimately start working in a self-regulatory way and I do not see that as a risk but as an opportunity for the further development of our society .
All in all , I am very satisfied with the outcome , and I feel that it will give Europe legislation that strikes a better balance than the much vaunted American legislation .
Protecting copyright and related rights , which plays a part in the creative process , is in itself a problematic issue .
It becomes more critical in the new information society , as it is called - inaccurately , for that matter .
The new technologies , symbolised by the Internet , appear to grant absolute freedom , which favours the consumer but prevents creative artists and industries receiving all the due profits from works of art and reproductions .
That is why it is difficult to reconcile the divergent interests of consumers , industries and rightholders .
How can the profits of the so-called cultural industry be protected without putting an end to the freedom that allows people to collect all the works of arts they find whilst surfing the Internet ?
For an industry that is making a profit out of information technologies , as they are pompously known , the Brussels proposal for a directive on copyright is a fair compromise .
For authors and composers , this compromise weakens copyright protection .
For instance , radio broadcast archives would be excluded from protection , as would short-lived reproductions and works of art referred to in libraries or multimedia libraries .
Authors are quite rightly demanding fair compensation for the losses they will incur because of the exceptions .
In the case of authors , compromise will have to be reached between the three parties by way of contracts .
Exceptions to protection would , in fact , be subject to expropriations for which there should be compensation .
. ( NL ) It is not for nothing that so many different interest groups have circulated their voting recommendations on the amendments on copyright .
Creative producers ' interests are different to those of consumers , and together their interests are different to those of dealers in music , written works and productions .
For artists , the work they produce is their income .
Society exempts them from doing other types of work by paying them for their products .
If they lose this money they will have to look for alternative work .
Consumers , on the other hand , would prefer to get hold of these products for free .
Whilst they still accept that you have to pay for a book or a trip to the theatre , and that museums are paid for by public funds or by charging an admission fee , a great deal has changed with the spread of photocopiers , video recorders , recordable compact discs and downloading from computers .
People pay the manufacturer for these appliances of course , but they would rather not have to pay those whose work they are appropriating in the process .
There are also companies that use artistic products to make money from the distributive trade , or as a way of luring clients for other purposes .
When it comes to the vote on copyright , I shall be voting in accordance with the wishes of the trade unions and artists ' associations , for the sake of the producers and consumers , and not for the sake of business .
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0039 / 2001 ) by Mr Miller
Madam President , I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the name of my group .
Yesterday in the debate , constraints of time meant that none of us were able to speak , but this is a proposal which we have supported wholeheartedly in committee and which we supported wholeheartedly today .
I was particularly glad that Amendment No 9 was defeated and that we carried the directive substantially in the form in which it left the Legal Affairs Committee under the able guidance of the rapporteur , Mr Miller .
This is a long-awaited directive and it is extremely important to disabled people .
Our own disability intergroup has been campaigning on it for a long time and so has the European Disability Movement .
It has taken nine years to get this far .
What we are accomplishing are secure , minimum safety standards for the design of buses operating in Europe and secure basic requirements to ensure access for disabled people and others with reduced mobility , including older people - Mr Fatuzzo and others no doubt - and parents with children using urban buses .
This is really important .
My group wishes to declare its solidarity with all those who will be assisted by this .
One of the marks of enhanced civilisation in my lifetime has been the far greater attention that we pay in public places and public activities to ensuring that our fellow citizens , who have the grave misfortune to suffer from one or other kind of disability or handicap , are fully admitted to public life in our societies .
We can be proud of that and glad that this directive has been passed .
Madam President , last time this came before us , i.e. in 1998 , Parliament rejected the common position .
At that time there was widespread support in the House for the Commission being forced to take this way of reducing regulation in Europe seriously .
We in the PPE-DE Group still take this line .
I am surprised that Parliament is not now taking the same stand with regard to this very complicated , highly technical and over-detailed proposal .
I do not believe it is fair to the voters for Parliament to devote itself to adopting a position on whether the gangway slope should be 12 % or 12.5 % .
This is why I believe it was important to keep to the approach decided by Parliament in 1998 .
I am concerned that people change tack so quickly in the second reading .
This is something which I believe the Commission really must take on board so that we can achieve a better method of creating regulations in Europe .
Madam President , I voted in favour of this report with great pleasure . Amongst other things , in addition to meaning that the design and other technical characteristics of buses with more than eight seats can be controlled , it ensures that elderly and disabled people can use these vehicles .
I also voted against Amendment No 9 calling for no debate on this document .
It may be true that the European Parliament sometimes overdoes the legislation on technical points , for example when we debate the curvature of bananas and cucumbers , as mentioned by President Prodi yesterday , but that is certainly not the case when we are debating whether people affected by disabilities should at last be able to travel on buses .
.
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking on behalf of my group when I say that we endorse the position expressed by Mr Rübig before the vote because I would find it totally absurd were it not also somewhat amusing .
I do not think that the Members of this House can be called upon to be standardisation experts on technical issues .
This report says , for instance , that parents with children in prams are people with reduced mobility .
The question I ask myself is this : is the childminder , or the uncle or the grandfather who looks after this child for a day also a person with reduced mobility ?
Joking apart , I believe that the people of Europe who are following this debate are quite right to ask whether we in this House do not have more important things to do .
We should leave things where they belong .
Subsidiarity should not be just a nice word ; it should be implemented .
. This Parliament can be proud today that it has voted to enhance disability rights .
In particular , this report is a victory for disabled transport users .
It has taken nine years to get this legislation .
The new technical standards we voted for will ensure that wheelchair access is available for public transport .
It creates minimum safety standards and puts in place access requirements which will be good for elderly people with reduced mobility and parents with prams boarding urban buses .
It is regrettable that the PPE-DE tried on a technical issue to get rid of this legislation with Amendment No 9 .
The European Disability Forum and Parliament 's Disability Rights Intergroup have campaigned long and hard on this issue .
It is cynical political manipulation to play games with disability rights .
With the vote on this legislation we can as Parliament say we are legislating for all citizens for equal access and equal rights .
.
( PT ) I voted in favour of the common position because it addresses many of the demands by the Disabled People ' s Associations . It does away with exemptions laid down in the proposal for a directive and establishes principles that are to be complied with in order to guarantee greater accessibility for disabled people .
At this second reading , the rapporteur is insisting on extending the concept of the ' passenger with reduced mobility ' and on conditions for greater accessibility , in line with the view of associations working in this field . This is something we welcome .
Finally , I must point out that our position has been completely the opposite of the view put forward by the PPE-DE , which sought to destroy the common position that had already been reached . This approach jeopardised the rights of the disabled .
.
May I wholeheartedly congratulate my Labour colleague Mr Miller on his report improving accessibility in vehicles with more than eight seats .
I fully support measures to improve accessibility for people of reduced mobility to urban buses with the introduction of ramps or lifts and low floor buses .
This will transform the lives of older people , people with disabilities and parents with children living in towns across the North-West who will now be able to use local buses as easily as everybody else .
Moreover , it is not just elderly people , people with disabilities - including blind people - and parents with children who will benefit .
We are seeking to broaden the definition of " people with reduced mobility " to include everyone who has difficulty when using public transport , such as those with heavy luggage , pregnant women and people with shopping trolleys and shopping bags .
We have all experienced getting on the bus laden with shopping bags from the local supermarket , and I for one certainly hope my bus ride home will be made easier and less stressful .
These are simply common-sense measures that will make life so much easier for people across Europe , particularly in Britain where buses are an essential way of getting around our towns and cities .
The bus and coach directive will secure minimum safety standards for the design of buses operating in Europe and basic requirements to ensure access for people with reduced mobility , such as the continued manufacture of existing low-floor buses and better facilities for passengers with mobility difficulties , especially wheelchair users and parents with pushchairs .
I give the green light to these measures and look forward to a more pleasant bus ride home from Bolton town centre after a Saturday afternoon 's shopping spree .
- ( SV ) We believe that Parliament lacks the necessary competence to adopt a position on technical details of such a specific nature as in the case in question , although in principle we support the regulations which follow on from the proposal for a directive .
Therefore , we support the amendment aimed at rejecting the common position .
Müller report ( A5-0025 / 2001 )
Madam President , I have closely followed the progress of Mrs Müller ' s report through from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I voted in favour of the regulation on supplements because it is right that they should be controlled .
So many women take this pseudo-medication to slim , become more beautiful , more slender , more agile , and they sometimes do not realise that a bit more weight makes them more attractive .
So I think certain substances should be controlled .
Substances are added to foods to make them aphrodisiac . Substances like Viagra are on sale .
The pensioners of the party I represent have no need of these food additives and supplements .
So they are calling - and rightly so - for their regulation .
- ( SV ) We have voted against the report by Mrs Müller on food supplements .
We believe the legal grounds for the decision are incorrect and that the EU lacks the competence to push through harmonising legislation in this area .
The question of food supplements is a public health issue which should wholly or in part be decided on the basis of Article 152 of the Treaty on European Union , in which harmonisation is ruled out .
. ( DE ) The report on the proposal to approximate the laws of Member States relating to food supplements is one more step in the right direction of disclosing the unnatural content of foodstuffs .
But quality not quantity matters .
Food supplements should be ruthlessly declared and officially monitored . They should not be added to foodstuffs until they have been reported to the competent authorities .
The annexed list has been drawn up for this purpose .
There is no reason not to introduce the duty to report in the same way in all Member States as quickly as possible .
My group has said it is in favour of implementing the White Paper on food safety in a more forward-looking way , not only to avert distorting the market , but also to implement the overall concept of the White Paper more ruthlessly .
The checks and balances within intracommunity trade , which have been created by necessary laws , are inadequately enforced by the controls which are currently in place .
That is why the measures to set up the already approved food standards agencies must be implemented .
After BSE , inter alia , the confidence of consumers must be regained through more transparency in the food production chain , safety and proper labelling .
I would like to point out that I cannot concur with the speech given by Commissioner Fischler .
European agricultural policy has been reduced to the lowest common denominator .
Europe must not shirk its responsibility .
I am firmly convinced that the public debate is only just beginning .
Food supplements are a sensible option which allow us to avoid possible dietary deficiencies and to stay healthy as well as prevent premature ageing .
Obviously , they should not present a health risk .
Furthermore , I approve the attempts to establish a European basis for food supplements , given the differences in relevant national provisions .
However , we should refrain from working towards European legislation that is too restrictive .
I have consulted specialists who confirm that taking vitamins and minerals orally presents virtually no health risk .
We must also avoid undue restrictions and administrative hassles that prevent us , in the European Union , from monitoring scientific discoveries and passing on the benefits of these to the consumer .
Basically , a food supplement should be considered to be something that enhances one ' s diet and testing should concentrate on the quality of ingredients and manufacture , rather than on what the supplements contain .
We must also avoid drawing up a list of vitamins that is too restrictive .
Why are Vitamins E and D not included when , at the moment , because of fears relating to exposure to sun light , there is a serious deficit of Vitamin D which causes a higher risk of osteoporosis ?
I am not a doctor , nor do I consider myself to be an expert in this subject , and so I have to place my trust in scientists .
I do not understand , however , how Members of the European Parliament can hope to be involved in the choices made by scientists in areas such as minimum and maximum doses or criteria of purity , as suggested in the explanatory statement .
I voted in favour of the report , but I wanted to make these comments in the hope that the Commission and the Council will understand that overzealousness and excessive restrictive regulation are out of place in this matter as they are in others .
Lange report ( A5-0015 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted in favour of the directive which regulates the characteristics of two or three-wheel motor vehicles , and I can state that with serenity , conviction and satisfaction .
Firstly , because my nostrils are still full of the dreadful smell these motorcycles discharge into the air of our beautiful cities , and secondly because I was urged to vote for this directive at Bergamo airport , before I left for Strasbourg , by a pensioner who knew we were due to vote on it .
He also stressed that there ought to be regulations on motorcycle noise .
Pensioners appreciate silence , bicycles and quiet motorcycles .
I suppose that it will not hurt for us to agree with a proposal for a Commission directive , as long as it is just this once .
It is not because we are looking favourably upon the statement from the Commission - you know our views on European integration in general and on this institution in particular .
We must admit , however , that for once the Commission has made an effort in terms of prior consultation with users and manufacturers , cost-benefit studies and realistic economic and technical alternatives .
This approach is only rarely seen in cases that we deal with here .
On the other hand , we do not agree with Mr Lange , as we do not really know if he is doing this to drum up popularity or if he was hired by our competitors to discredit European manufacturers .
If he carries on in this way , he is going to be demanding that motorcyclists stop breathing so as to stop CO2 emissions .

So we say yes to cleaner motorcycles , yes to new testing procedures that are more in line with actual usage of vehicles and yes to a timetable that manufacturers deem realistic .

However , we say no to unrealistic emissions limits , no to additional provisions that are not imposed on other means of transport and , in short , we say no to Mr Lange ' s amendments .

Jensen report ( A5-0018 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted against this report on Community incentive measures in the field of employment .
EUR 55 million are to be spent and not a single job created .
EUR 55 million are to be spent on publishing , printing leaflets , statistics , and talk , talk , talk about how to increase employment .
I think the European Union should move on from words to deeds .
. I fully support proposals to encourage an employment strategy across the European Union .
We can only fight the scourge of unemployment if we work together right across the 15 Member States .
Jobs , jobs , jobs .
That is what it is all about .
That is what the Labour Government is campaigning for and that is what Europe is working for .
It is our top priority and we must move heaven and earth to make it happen .
The goals set at the Lisbon Summit last year were a crucial step forward in establishing the right conditions to achieve full employment , whereby the Heads of State and Government set the EU the objective of becoming the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-driven economy in the world , capable of sustainable economic growth accompanied by quantitative and qualitative improvement of employment and of greater social cohesion .
The forthcoming Stockholm Council in March will continue to develop the European agenda for a flexible economy , liberalisation of gas and electricity markets , postal liberalisation , reform of the financial services sector , proposals on telecommunications and e-commerce , measures to create a favourable environment for SMEs , and targets for employment rates to benefit all our citizens in the European Union .
Cooperation throughout the Union is essential for exchanges of information and best practices , providing comparative analysis as well as promoting innovative approaches and evaluating experiences .
In Britain , our Labour Government is leading the way towards job creation and full employment .
Not only has youth unemployment been halved under Labour , but the government is now introducing vocational training for our young people to benefit from new skills in a high-tech and evolving job market .
The aim is to create a flexible , high-skilled workforce in Britain .
Madam President , I fully endorse this report which is yet another benchmark in our progress towards full employment in a dynamic knowledge-based economy .
The very title of this report arouses distrust because , generally speaking , incentives for employment are actually about granting employers aid , tax relief or tax advantages for job creation , when , in fact , they do not create any .
Of course , the text is not particularly explicit in this regard , and the basic intentions are wrapped up in general considerations , some of which are pertinent , particularly on the lack of equality between men and women in employment .
The expression of good intentions does not a policy make . Even more , this may indeed conceal a policy which provides no solution to the problem of unemployment .
In order to solve this problem , binding measures should be implemented with regard to those that hold the key to the problem , i.e. the major industrial and financial groups .
But to expect this of the European institutions is to ask the impossible .
We therefore voted against this report .
The report on which we voted today deals with a Commission proposal to implement Community employment incentive measures ( EIM ) .
This proposal is intended to implement the provisions of Article 129 of the Treaty establishing the European Community ( the legal basis for necessary expenditure on employment ) and to develop the activities highlighted by the Lisbon European Council in the context of the European Employment Strategy .
The objective is to promote cooperation between Member States and support their action in the area of employment .
Such measures will be funded from the Community budget to a value of EUR 55 million for the period 2001-2005 ( or EUR 10 million annually , with an initial allocation of EUR 15 million in 2001 ) .
Measures focus chiefly on the development , programming , monitoring , follow-up and assessment of the European Employment Strategy , with a forward-looking emphasis .
More specifically , the following actions will be covered :
1 ) Analysis and assessment of employment trends , general policy conditions , assessment of policy options and of the impact of Community policies ;
2 ) Assessment of national action plans ;
3 ) Collation and transfer of national experience as defined in the annual employment guidelines issued to Member States ;
4 ) Technical and scientific schemes required to develop common indicators , to improve and coordinate statistics , to rate performance and exchange information according to best practices .
In addition to implementing this range of measures , it is important for the Commission to take account of the statistical information , studies and actions produced by international organisations such as the OECD or the International Labour Organisation .
I also consider it essential to encourage the widest possible distribution of the results of any projects completed .
Parliament has also recommended that the Commission take steps to ensure that all the planned activities are consistent and complementary to other Community programmes and initiatives .
The planned activities shall , moreover , be open to the participation of EEA countries and those of Central and Eastern Europe countries subject to arrangements , especially financial arrangements , to be agreed with these countries .
I would also argue in favour of our Mediterranean partners being involved .
The European Parliament awaits an interim report from the Commission on 31 December 2003 and a final report on 31 December 2006 .
While we all have in mind the preparations for the extraordinary Council meeting on employment to be held in Stockholm in March , I voted wholeheartedly in favour of these new measures to promote employment .
The proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision on Community incentive measures in the field of employment is in keeping with the rationale of the Luxembourg Compromise ( 1997 ) , which initiated a process of assessment and comparison of ' best practice ' between Member States .
In this context , the amendments seeking to inform European citizens better , to act in cooperation with the social partners and local or regional authorities , or those seeking to promote an increase in awareness of the position of women and professional equality by means of studies of the causes of career breaks , parental leave and part-time work are positive steps , and I shall vote in favour of them .

However , we oppose a method which seeks to subordinate employment and social rights in general to the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines ( BEPG ) and the stability plans .
We refute the logic enshrined in the four pillars of the Luxembourg Compromise ( entering the labour market , enterprise spirit , business adjustment , equal opportunities ) which are used as the criteria for assessment between Member States and will serve to support the development of a European labour market subordinated to the liberal economy .
I therefore abstained .
The purpose of this proposal for a European Commission decision is to implement the provisions of the new Article 129 of the EC Treaty , introduced by the Treaty of Amsterdam with the intention of intensifying cooperation between the Member States in the area of analysis , research and verification of labour market policy , while developing a knowledge-based economy , identifying best practice , promoting exchanges , transferring experiences and implementing an active information policy in the said sector .
It was important to emphasise the need for a European strategy that would be accessible and transparent .
This report also calls for a quantitative and qualitative evaluation of the effects of that strategy , and an analysis of needs , so as to put in place a made-to-measure plan which takes account of overall economic policy .
It therefore emphasises the possibility of using the strategy as a method to be applied to other areas and establishing an analysis of the types of factors which indicate the employment trend .
In order to consolidate the employment strategy at local and regional level , the rapporteur suggests using part of the appropriations at that level to promote cooperation , improve knowledge and the exchange of information and good practice , and evaluate the results of the application of national programmes benefiting employment at local and regional level .
The text , unanimously adopted in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , also highlights the need to guarantee consistency and complementarity with other Community measures and initiatives .
I also support the topping-up of appropriations for the implementation of the activities , to provide an overall figure of EUR 65 million rather than the 55 set by the Commission .
It is the duty of all Members of Parliament to work to boost employment for the good of our countries and Europe as a whole , to give the rising generations fresh hope .
That is why the Union for a Europe of Nations Group has supported this report .
Swoboda Report ( A5-0024 / 2001 )
Madam President , I voted in favour of the report implementing the next step in Turkey ' s candidacy .
I am in favour of Turkey joining the European Union , but I ask all those concerned to add a clause to the agreement between Italy and Turkey .
I hope Turkey will be asked to commit its citizens to abandoning their dreadful custom of abducting the most beautiful Greek women , something they have been doing since the days of the Trojan War .
Their entry into the European Union will then be received with greater satisfaction .
Madam President , I voted against the report , not because I have anything against the Turkish people but because I am against the institutional system , which prevents true democracy .
As long as Turkey is not a truly democratic state and does not respect minorities or prisoners , political or otherwise , I consider this accession inappropriate .
In addition , we know that Turkey is hostile towards some Member States of the Union , when all they have done is recognise the Armenian genocide , which is a historical fact .
That is why I tabled an amendment calling for an investigation of Turkish democracy , like the one carried out for Austria .
If we want people to join us , they must be genuinely democratic , and Turkey is not .
Nor indeed is Italy , in certain respects , as the recent trials in Verona against my party demonstrate .
Madam President , I have voted against this proposal because of the profound contradiction that arises from the fact that this morning all the Members that have taken the floor on the proposal dealt with in Mr Swoboda 's report have directly or indirectly recognised that Turkey does not meet the Copenhagen criteria .
Article 4 of this proposal includes a type of suspension clause if there is insufficient progress toward fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria .
Now this proposal has been accepted I ask for Article 4 to be implemented and for aid to Turkey to be stopped until it meets the Copenhagen criteria .
Madam President , we remain concerned about Turkey .
On top of everything that has already been said , I would like to highlight the case of Kurdistan and the continued suffering borne by the Kurdish people at a mafia level : subjected to genuine genocide and forced to emigrate to other countries , leaving their own land .
And the Turkish Government has never done anything to stop it : indeed , as far as we know , it encourages it .
So , setting aside the past , setting aside what I represent as the heir of the Repubblica Serenissima which stood against the Turks in those days , there is very great concern , and I want to ask you , Madam President , to make absolutely certain that we are not going to have a serpent in our bosom in the near future .
. While I voted in favour of the Swoboda report on financial assistance for Turkey for the pre-accession strategy , I believe that the EU should be talking more toughly to the Turkish Government about its human rights abuses especially towards the Kurds .
It should also monitor fair distribution of the money .
In view of renewed military repression in the Kurdish south-east - with the probable aim of provoking the PKK - and recent arrests and disappearances of activists in HADEP ( a legal political party ) it seems Turkey is going backwards rather than forwards in respect of the Copenhagen criteria .
I voted against the Swoboda report which requests that EU financial aid for Turkey ( almost EUR 200 million per annum ) henceforth be classed under Heading 7 of the Financial Perspective " Pre-accession Aid " , along with the aid allocated to the candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe as well as , in the near future , Cyprus and Malta .
I do not think this reclassification is called for because , although the Helsinki Council of 13 December 1999 did indeed approve Turkey ' s candidate status ( something I would challenge , personally ) it was specified that negotiations proper would not be opened with Turkey until it had satisfied the Copenhagen criteria , particularly those relating to democracy and respect for human rights .
This is a condition with which Turkey has not adequately complied to date , as everyone in Europe acknowledges .
In such circumstances even those who are in favour of Turkey ' s accession are forced to accept that it is more a virtual candidate than a real and genuine candidate .
Why then should we grant Turkey a financial status which is not appropriate to its real status ?
Our concerns are only intensified by the provocative actions of that country , following the French National Assembly ' s recent acknowledgement of the Armenian genocide .
Not only has Turkey failed to acknowledge its own responsibility ( even though the crime should theoretically be remote enough in the past not to implicate the current government ) but it has also denied the facts of the case and has even taken unjustifiable reprisal measures against French firms .
This type of pressure and ongoing blackmail are inadmissible behaviour from a country which seeks admission into the European club .
We do not therefore comprehend why the Swoboda report is now seeking to implement a measure which would support these misplaced positions .
We are in favour of Turkey ' s being granted financial instruments and financial aid in proportion to its size and to its needs on the same basis as the other candidate countries .
This particularly concerns the restructuring of agriculture , raising the profile of the rural environment and environmental protection .
Any discriminatory action in this respect would penalise not the leadership of the authoritarian Turkish Government but the workers of that country .
It would do nothing to support proper conditions for the necessary fight to impose respect for basic democratic rights , quite the opposite .
The best way for the European Union to force the Turkish Government to meet its commitments , a method which is lacking in hypocrisy and which does not allow a pretext for further liberal pressure , which only in any case serve the interests of free trade in Europe , would be to support the democratic opposition .
The initiatives by militants working for human rights , trade unionists and politicians may , if they are given sufficient funding to mobilise public opinion , make it possible to put an end to a regime which murders the Kurds , causes political prisoners to ' disappear ' , restricts the movements of detainees , tortures democrats and lets Öçalan stagnate on death row .
. ( NL ) If Turkey was an EU Member State there would be a whole host of reasons for suspending its membership .
Officially this country is a parliamentary democracy which outwardly resembles Member States in terms of custom and practice , but for large minority groups amongst the population , this comparison does not hold water .
Sadly , the inhabitants of Turkey are not participants with equal rights yet , because they have different political beliefs or speak a different language .
The countless political prisoners , the ban on organisations , the press censorship , the army ' s internal war against the Kurdish-speaking population , the denial of the mass murder of the Armenians and the Turks ' persistent refusal to completely abolish the death penalty , show that Turkey is still a very different sort of country at present than a large majority of people in the current Member States would think desirable .
Under these circumstances , there is not a single reason for tightening the bonds of friendship and allowing Turkey to qualify for contributions from pre-accession funds such as ISPA and SAPARD .
Awarding Turkey this funding would only create the misunderstanding that the country is on the right path and that Turkey is going to accede to the EU just as soon as the Czech Republic , Slovenia or Malta .
It is not possible to bring about change in Turkey by giving money to the government .
It will only come through supporting the struggle of the internal opposition there and that of the exiles living in the EU Member States .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.21 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Action taken on EIB annual report
The next item is the report ( A5-0023 / 2001 ) by Mr Lipietz , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on action taken on the EIB annual report [ 2000 / 2173 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , the exercise I was asked to participate in has proved extraordinarily instructive and , I must say , a real pleasure .


There were three constraints I had to manage : the doubts and questions of my fellow Members in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the criticisms expressed by civil society , particularly through the CEE Bankwatch Network and finally the answers and arguments presented in response to both these types of question or criticism by the European Investment Bank .
I would like in particular to thank my fellow Members on the Committee of Economic and Monetary Affairs for the relevance of the questions that they , in a way , entrusted to me to put on their behalf to the European Investment Bank .
I would like to thank the civil society volunteers for their competence in monitoring the activities of a bank which , in the final analysis , has an influence on 5 % of all investments within the European Union , making it the EU ' s largest investor .
Finally , without any sycophancy whatsoever , I must thank the President of the European Investment Bank , and his colleagues , for the good will and indeed the warmth with which they undertook to discuss matters with me , to take on board and respond to criticisms , either convincing me of the legitimacy of their approach or accepting our comments and outlining with me appropriate solutions .
We have thus arrived at a report on which we are practically unanimous .
You have been able to note , indeed , that the amendments concern two mere details .
I shall discuss these in the latter part of my speech .
Broadly speaking , we were unanimous on the proposals for policy which are directed at least as much to the other bodies of the European Union , and even the Member States , as to the European Investment Bank .
We fully share all the priorities which the European Investment Bank set itself and indeed with the pillars forming the basis of the bank ' s policy , and grant it full discharge .
We must , however , stress that times are changing .
Europe is expanding eastwards . It is taking on greater responsibilities with regards to the Balkans , which are not yet included in the accession process .
Moreover , Europe has signed up to the Kyoto Agreement which requires it to reduce its production of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases by 8 % on average by the year 2010 .
In other words , this international agreement will become binding in 7 years ' time .
Furthermore , since Lisbon , Europe has given itself the objective of becoming a world power in terms of the knowledge economy and new technologies .
Finally , Europe has given priority to the development of SMEs .
Europe is seeking to obtain this position of excellence not by means of a ' Europe Incorporated ' with huge multinational businesses but rather by relying on SMEs .
There are three new objectives , then , in relation to the 1999 report , which we shall examine formally today .
However , in so doing , we shall of course be examining all the policy directions of the EIB : accession , Kyoto , the development of SMEs towards achieving excellence .
We wished to call upon the constituent bodies of the European Union and the EIB itself to reorient its policy in the light of these three objectives which were perhaps not as clear at the time when the EIB adopted its priorities or drew up its 1999 report .
The initial paragraphs of the report before you are absolutely unanimous and aim essentially at expanding or facilitating loans in these three areas .
To briefly mention the points on which we did not achieve unanimity , there was the official importance of the NGOs in the preparations for the EIB ' s decisions , the affirmation of the Kyoto objectives as a genuine leading factor and finally , the arrangements for the prudential supervision of the EIB .
These three points I refer to the decision of the House .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report on the EIB 1999 annual report and my compliments to the bank of course for the report itself .
This is the first time that the European Parliament has delivered its opinion on the annual report .
Naturally this opinion is of a political nature and it casts a critical eye over the institution .
Thus , for example , the report examines such things as the priorities and the internal and external scrutiny of the resources employed by this bank .
The EIB is the primary banker and investor for the European institutions and that is why the report analyses what the EIB ' s priorities are and whether these priorities are in line with the European Union ' s priorities .
Where significant differences were found , the rapporteur has looked at what the EIB should give greater or less priority to .
For example , the report asks the EIB to concentrate more on those investments that enable the EU to meet the Kyoto criteria .
As we see it , the fact that more priority should be given to this does not mean that matters such as the trans-European networks should be given less priority , as the rapporteur proposes in one of his amendments .
Next , the report draws attention to the EIB ' s internal scrutiny .
The rapporteur believes that the EIB should have a better overview of the quality of the loans .
To this end , the EIB should devote more attention to evaluation of projects in the fields of regional and environmental investment , for example .
At present , there is still too little insight within the EIB into the effectiveness of the loans .
In a normal operational management process , a company keeps tabs on the returns on its investments .
The EIB should also evaluate effectiveness and the return on investments more .
A final important point is that the EIB is subject to scrutiny by the European Court of Auditors where the Community resources are concerned .
The European Court of Auditors is then required to scrutinise the resources at the disposal of the EIB as to the effectiveness and lawfulness of the investments made .
We have tabled another amendment in order to ensure that the EIB is supervised adequately and according to the same rules as any normal commercial bank regarding its banking business .
The rapporteur proposes that someone from the European Central Bank should be appointed as a member of the Audit Committee , but an audit committee has more of an accounting function than one of real banking supervision .
Both functions must be fulfilled .
However , my group feels that the European Central Bank does not have the in-house capacity for banking supervision in the real sense .
This must be organised differently , for example by the Luxembourg Central Bank .
My other two amendments are adaptations designed to remove a few minor flaws from the text .
For example , we recognise the important role the EIB has in the European investment climate and we also feel that the EIB should take more account in its internal scrutiny of the effectiveness of the European funds spent on the environment .
I am sorry to say that we do not agree with the majority of the rapporteur ' s amendments because he is using them to emphasise a radical and one-sided position .
Naturally we also appreciate the importance of the environment and of NGOs , but other priorities must also be given a crack of the whip .
The Socialist Group has also tabled two further amendments and one of these has to do with a promise made by the President of the EIB .
This promise related to recruiting more women , so that the EIB employs roughly the same number of men as women , or at least works towards that goal .
That is also one of the European Union ' s priorities .
We call upon the bank to make a start with this .
I hope that the EIB takes Parliament ' s advice to heart , particularly where the scrutiny of European funds is concerned .
That is why we support this report wholeheartedly .
Mr President , I would like to start by welcoming Mr Maystadt warmly to this almost empty hall , but I can assure him that even when we have the President of the European Central Bank visiting us , by no means all delegates attend .
So the fault does not lie with you .
First and foremost , I would like to propose that we make a tradition of this , just as we do with our debates with the European Central Bank , with Wim Duisenberg .
I think it would be a good idea to carry on the tradition of devoting attention to the European Investment Bank here in Parliament , and I hope this will then stimulate more interest than is in evidence today .
A few days ago , you held your annual press conference , and presented the results for 2000 .
What we have here is nothing new , but it is something that happened at roughly the same time .
I think we may be able to do it next year but in any case , I would like to propose that we put the annual report on 2000 on Parliament ' s agenda just as soon as we can , and prepare it at least as thoroughly as we have done with this annual report .
Before I make a few comments as to content , I would just like to compliment the rapporteur too .
If the press report from last week is anything to go by , he has acquitted himself well .
I think the said press report also revealed that the bank has given a great deal of thought to environmental groups in its policy , and to the environment in general , and I believe its activities have contributed to this as well .
I myself have concentrated , on behalf of my group , on a number of other key points which , incidentally , largely coincide with those of the PPE-DE Group .
My first point concerns job creation , particularly in SMEs and the social sectors , whilst my second point is about transparency and supervision of the EIB ' s activities .
I will talk about employment first .
The employment objective , which is also one of the European Union ' s priority objectives - I think Lisbon confirmed this once again - is expressed too implicitly in your plans and reports to my mind , and is not sufficiently visible or verifiable .
It seems as if the reasoning prevails that economic growth will automatically create jobs and so there is no need to treat it as a separate issue , let alone consider the quality and sustainability of the jobs .
You certainly aligned yourself with the policy initiatives from the European Councils , as we can recognise the incentives created by the Luxembourg Summit and the special action programme promised in Amsterdam , in this report .
And then you rightly took up the initiatives from the Lisbon Summit held last year and in particular , launched new initiatives for the knowledge-based economy and new technologies , notably the innovation 2000 initiative .
I would now like to present you with the challenge of aligning yourself with new initiatives in the coming year , at the Stockholm Summit scheduled for next month .
There , the Swedish Presidency will pursue the line taken in Lisbon , and hopefully also succeed in making an annual tradition of these spring summits on socio-economic affairs .
The Swedes are not planning to establish a whole host of new procedures and processes on this occasion .
What they have succeeded in doing to my mind , is add a very important feature to the policy agreed in Lisbon , that of attention to the qualitative aspects of employment .
The quality of work is an extremely important consideration if people are to be able to function properly in the economy , in an economy based more on knowledge and creativity .
Attention must also be given to adequate participation in the labour market .
These are very important matters that we must concern ourselves with in the months to come .
Perhaps you could take up the challenge of including this investment in quality in a follow-up initiative after Stockholm .
Also on the SME front , I see that in 2000 you very nearly doubled your efforts to EUR 6.2 billion .
I think that is to be welcomed , but I would also ask that special attention be given to the SMEs that have difficulty acquiring risk capital through normal channels .
These are often highly innovative businesses too and so they do not belong to the very sectors of the economy that do attract capital from the stock market and risk capital , which is precisely why I want to draw attention to those flanking businesses that can provide quality work .
That is why we ask that attention be given to the social economy and to the development of what the French so beautifully call service de proximité ( local service ) .
I have a final comment to make .
Perhaps I should leave it out though because I think I can concur with what Mrs Peijs had to say on the matter , with the exception of her comments on the role of the ECB .
What our group does want to do is pursue the discussion on the potential role of the European Central Bank , also with regard to scrutiny of prudential rules and banking supervision .
Mr President , Commissioner , President of the EIB , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Lipietz , for his excellent report .
The European Investment Bank is a non-profit-making body because that is what the Member States ' governments decided , since its mission was not to obtain economic benefits but rather to contribute to the balanced development of the European Community through granting medium and long-term credits and guarantees for investment projects in the poorest regions , thus fostering economic and social cohesion .
But if we examine what the prime orientation for EIB funding is , where have the loans granted in 1999 ended up ?
We see that most have been used to cofinance investments in the four richest Member States ( Germany , France , the United Kingdom and Italy ) , which received over 60 % of the EIB resources supplementing the Community structural funds , while the so-called cohesion countries , that is , the poorest and most needy ones ( Greece , Portugal , Spain and Ireland ) got only 26 % .
Even if I am told that this inequality occurs on account of the populations of these Member States , I believe we have to think about this aspect , since balanced development will not be achieved through proportionality but through solidarity .
This will become even more necessary as we proceed with enlargement to include new Member States .
Do not let it be said , either , that what is happening is that the less well-off countries do not submit projects to be funded ; what is needed is a better policy of information , transparency , aid and monitoring .
To that end , it could well begin by facilitating communication with possible applicants , providing for the use of all the languages of the European Union , including regional and minority languages , so that everybody can have access to the European Investment Bank .
Mr President , Mr Lipietz has written an excellent report which highlights two of the European Investment Bank ' s real weaknesses .
The first is that the bank has had a terrible information policy , and there has been poor supervision of the bank ' s decisions and work .
The second is that the bank ' s environmental work has , as I see it , been extremely poor .
There are numerous examples where the bank has supported projects within the EU and in the candidate countries which have actually been indefensible from an environmental point of view .
With regard to the area of environmental impact analysis , it is clear that the World Bank , for example , is better than the European Investment Bank at making analyses public before decisions are taken .
We have at least recently encountered a new attitude from the EIB .
There has been more talk about dialogue , openness , environmental considerations and change .
We hope this will lead to real reform of the bank ' s work - which we would of course welcome - and to the Aarhus Convention on Access to Information , Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters being implemented in full at the bank .
I would like to say that we support this excellent report and the amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent report and the EIB for the very open dialogue we have been able to have over recent months .
Today ' s debate shows that the work of the European Central Bank has , in the main , been assessed very positively , which , President Maystadt , I am sure you welcome .
The European Central Bank has an especially important role when it comes to improving European Community structures in less developed regions .
Two thirds of its disbursements go towards this .
But I also believe trans-European networks are of major importance , especially for transport , and they need to be set up along European lines .
We see that a common European economic area is emerging . But we also see that the traffic situation is very often still following the old limitations and priorities of past centuries .
I believe that a common European market , a domestic market and an optimal currency area must incorporate a corresponding infrastructure and transport infrastructure .
All the activities of the European Central Bank in this area are of special importance .
I also believe that the work of the European Central Bank in other areas is of great importance , especially where small and medium-sized enterprises are concerned .
For SMEs , especially those which are innovative and assume risks , simply granting loans is often insufficient ; venture capital also needs to be made available .
In recent years the EIB has developed its own initiatives which , in my opinion , are especially welcome .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I first thank Parliament ' s President and Bureau for suggesting that , for the first time , the President of the European Investment Bank should be invited to speak at a plenary session on the occasion of the discussion of the report of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the activities of the EIB .
I regard it as an honour , but also as a sign of Parliament ' s desire to take an interest in the activities of all the European institutions , in order to ensure that the voice of the citizens it represents is heard more effectively .
May I also reiterate in Parliament what I have already had the opportunity to stress at committee level , namely how much I appreciate the constructive dialogue that has been established with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , at the instigation of its Chair , Mrs Randzio-Plath .
With regard to Mr Lipietz ' s report , I found it both stimulating and useful , and I can tell you that work has already started on implementing a number of the recommendations made in the draft resolution .
I shall , if I may , deal with both these recommendations and the questions put by the honourable Members in the following order : first , the bank ' s operational priorities , followed by evaluation methods and , finally , external monitoring and the policy of transparency .
To begin with , the bank ' s operational priorities .
I should like to point out that the new Corporate Operational Plan , which covers the period 2001-2003 , redefines our priorities along the lines proposed in recommendations 3 and 5 .
We have , in fact , included among the five priorities adopted by our board of directors , and here I quote , " encouraging environmental protection and sustainable development , in particular implementation of the Kyoto Protocol " .
This approach in practice already existed , given that last year lending for projects contributing directly towards improvement of the environment amounted to EUR 6.4 billion within the European Union , an increase of 39 % compared with the previous year , and EUR 740 million in the candidate countries .
In addition , we have reorganised our Projects Directorate in order to ensure that the environmental impact of the projects for which finance is sought from us is systematically evaluated .
With regard in particular to our contribution towards implementation of the Kyoto Protocol , a general policy note will be submitted to our board of directors in May .
Having said that , this emphasis on the environment must not , as Mrs Peijs very aptly put it , make us forget the other priorities , which I shall very rapidly refer to .
Regional development : we consider that at least two thirds of lending within the European Union must go towards projects located in assisted areas .

Support for the Lisbon strategy : we intend , over the next three years , to advance project finance totalling EUR 12 to 15 billion in the fields accorded priority by the Lisbon European Council and , of course , as Mrs van den Burg has suggested , we shall have to take account of the conclusions of the Stockholm Summit .

Preparing the candidate countries for accession : over the next three years we intend to earmark between EUR 3 and 4 billion a year to projects aimed at helping the candidate countries to satisfy the conditions for accession , especially with regard to transport infrastructure , the importance of which Mr von Wogau has rightly stressed .
Lastly , I would mention as the final priority support for the Community ' s cooperation policy , notably in the context of the recent Cotonou Agreement .
I now turn to assessing the real impact of the projects financed by the EIB , as a number of speakers have rightly dwelt upon this aspect .
In particular , recommendation 4 calls upon the EIB to undertake an in-depth study of the real contribution made by projects to regional development .
First of all , I should like to point out that , since 1995 , the EIB has had an independent unit for ex post evaluation of projects , a unit whose reports are transmitted directly to the board of directors , without any possibility of their being changed by the hierarchy or the Management Committee .
These reports are then made available to the public and Mr Lipietz ' s report in fact refers to a number of these . The initial reports were , of course , fairly critical .
Why ? Because we asked this newly created unit to concentrate first on those cases which we considered to be most problematic .
Today , we have reports covering a larger number of projects and the evaluation results are distinctly more encouraging .
Thus a recent report dealing with a number of projects in northern Portugal and southern Italy shows that the vast majority of these have had a positive , and in some cases very positive , impact on the development of the regions concerned .
However , the same report emphasises the importance of further refining the methodology , particularly in order to identify more diversified and more specific criteria for improving the selection , a priori , of the projects that are most promising for regional development .
That is why , in close cooperation with the staff of the Commission ' s Directorate-General for Regional Policy , we are currently working on developing a battery of performance indicators for loans for regional projects .
I would add that similar work is under way on evaluating global loans , that is , the loans that we grant to intermediary banks for lending either to SMEs or to local authorities .
Here again we are endeavouring to improve the ways of verifying that these loans are indeed used for the benefit of SMEs and that the most favourable terms are passed on to the ultimate recipients of these loans .
With regard to external monitoring of the bank , I can only unreservedly endorse recommendation 10 .
I should like to confirm before you that the agreement entered into in 1999 between the Court of Auditors , the Commission and the EIB concerning the bank ' s activities based on Community resources is being implemented to the satisfaction of all the parties concerned and that , of course , the EIB will continue to meet its obligations vis-à-vis the Court of Auditors resulting from that agreement .
I should also like to confirm that we are currently negotiating a similar agreement with the Court of Auditors with regard to monitoring the European Investment Fund , which has become a subsidiary of the EIB .
I would add that we are amenable to any practicable form of banking supervision .
This is a matter that has been discussed by your committee .
We are completely open to any proposals in this connection .
In any case , in the short term perhaps the most practicable approach is no doubt to strengthen the Audit Committee by seeing to it that members are appointed who have experience and expertise in the field of banking supervision .
Finally , with regard to the policy of transparency , we are willing to sign up to the guidelines set out in recommendation 11 .
However , we must emphasise that , unlike the institutions referred to in your rapporteur ' s text , the majority of the EIB ' s clients are private commercial companies and obviously do not want the confidentiality that is standard practice in commercial negotiations not to be observed in relations with the EIB .
But , subject to that reservation , we have decided to move towards greater transparency .
I am thus able to announce to you that we are going to publish on our website a list of all projects in the pipeline , before they are even submitted to the board of directors , except of course where the promoter has good reason to object on grounds of confidentiality .
With that sole proviso , all projects will be announced on our website .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Investment Bank is , as you know , unlike other banks .
It was established to serve the objectives of the European Union .
It is therefore only natural that it should be called upon to explain itself before the European Parliament .
I thank you for giving me the opportunity to do so today and am delighted that I shall be able to continue the dialogue in the future , as Mrs van den Burg has kindly suggested .
Thank you , Mr Maystadt , for the contribution that you and your bank make .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Parliament and Mr Lipietz on the analysis he has presented on the European Investment Bank annual report .
I share the idea mentioned by the President and included in the report that the European Investment Bank is an instrument of European Union policies , but we must not forget either that the EIB has the obligation to make optimal use of the resources at its disposal .
To a great extent the Commission shares the views contained in the report , but I should like to make a few comments on two or three subjects that I think are particularly relevant to the call for the Commission and the Council swiftly to extend the mechanism for subsidising interest rates on loans given by the bank , especially external loans as well as internal ones .
This is a difficult subject that the Court of Auditors has come out strongly against , expressing clear reservations as to its effectiveness .
From the Commission ' s viewpoint , it is true that we must do everything we can to ensure that the instruments we have are effective in facilitating investments , but it is no less true that there are projects , such as in the environmental field or from the countries applying for accession , which , in view of the interest rate levels we are working with today , could be resolved more efficiently by means of cofinancing systems , for instance through some of the current programmes .
Such efficiency could be even greater at a later stage , when said countries are members of the European Union .
The report also calls on the bank to ensure that its risk-capital activities are adequate and to make the necessary effort to attract risk capital via the stock exchange , especially in those sectors with problems .
The President of the bank has already made some reference to the efforts made .
The Commission , for its part , has supported the bank ' s ideas of arriving at a better distribution of functions between the former European Investment Fund and the bank .
We think the current model , in which the Fund has become the arm of the bank for carrying out these risk-capital investment projects , is a good one and the current availability of greater resources is without any doubt a clearly positive factor compared with the former situation .
Allow me to comment on the greater importance to be given to small and medium-sized enterprises .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are going to be able to take advantage of this possibility of access to risk-capital , but they are also going to be the great beneficiaries in the bank ' s Innovation 2000 Initiative , especially in its support for investment in information and the knowledge-based economy .
All this supports the Lisbon proposal , but it also supports this possible action on behalf of small and medium-sized enterprises .
A subject I think especially worth highlighting is global loans , which are also put forward in terms relevant for small and medium-sized enterprises and without any doubt will enable us to solve two problems that some of you have mentioned .
First , sharing out resources more efficiently .
We must not forget that these global loans at the moment are practically one third of the bank ' s new loans .
Secondly , the idea of the bank ' s activities being more consistent with Community policies is also important .
I think all of this will end up benefiting the bank ' s activities and the policies defined .
One last comment : on page 18 of the report the Commission is called upon to perform a monitoring role , especially in connection with risk-capital and also the control and management of interest rates .
On this subject in particular I can tell you that my colleagues responsible for these areas , especially as regards external assistance , are analysing the topic so that in accordance with the criteria and comments that I set out earlier we can reach the best possible solution to use the bank ' s funds in the most efficient way .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Lisbon ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on :
the report ( A5-0034 / 2001 ) by Mr Bullmann , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Spring 2001 European Council : The Lisbon process and the path to be followed [ 2000 / 2280 ( INI ) ] ,
the Commission report on progress since Lisbon and future measures , and
the report ( A5-0020 / 2001 ) by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the impact of liberalisation and the process of economic reform on the European Union 's economic growth .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a very important report for which I wholeheartedly congratulate Mr Bullmann .
I would like to make two points .
When we talk about the special things Europe is doing and why hopefully in the future we may be a model for the world , we must be able to support our facts with figures .
How do we measure this success ?
We have very traditional instruments : GDP or the unemployment rate which , according to research carried out by the Munich-based institute , the IFO , has fallen from 8.1 % to 7.6 % .
We also have the external value of the euro . But there are many other indicators we have hitherto not taken into consideration .
That is why I would particularly like to express my support for paragraphs 24 to 29 of this report , which redefine quality of life and quality of employment .
That would help our debate a great deal .
What has also been lacking hitherto is introduced by Amendments No 13 and 17 , namely the environmental aspect , which also seems to be a special concern of the Swedish Presidency . It is an area where there is still much to be done .
To Mr Friedrich , who spoke of the danger of knowing too much , I would say that we are rather in danger of knowing too little .
This particularly concerns Parliament , which brings me to my second point : access to information in the follow-up to the post-Lisbon debate .
It is undignified for preparatory documents on Summit meetings to be slipped surreptitiously into Parliament , and often not before they have first been made available to the press .
There is nothing unifying in this ; it is simply divisive .
With the partitioning off that is being practised , especially when Parliament is involved , the Council is doing itself a disservice .
It is simply promoting the delegitimisation of holders of political office .
Why are we in Parliament no longer trusted ?
Let the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , or the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , or the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy in .
Give one of the chairmen of our committees , Christa Randzio-Plath for instance , the chance , give Parliament the chance , to work with you on equal terms . What are you afraid of ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the strategic goal of full employment established by the Lisbon Council has been achieved in some parts of the European Union while many others still have a long way to go .
This not only raises a problem of cohesion - since it is not just a matter of compensating the less favoured areas - but also the problem of how to manage European development in the future , so as to promote the spread of development , and hence of employment , from the most favoured to the least favoured zones .
In this regard , I call upon the Commission to combine its economic perspectives with identification of the territorial benefits to be had from the plan for European area development .
I urge the Commission and the Union to pursue this ' good ' full employment we want for Europe - ' good ' in the sense of being capable of respecting environmental and social obligations - applying the method used up to now to drive forward the formation of the single market , with enlargement regarded as a valid part of this approach .
Enlargement should not be seen just as a supplementary cost for the Union but as an opportunity to create wider market opportunities , where the method pursued so far can be developed , both by progressively liberalising the old markets - and I strongly welcome the invitation , which I believe we should extend to ourselves and to Parliament , to adopt new directives on procurement quickly , for example , and open up a huge market currently closed to European competition - and by preventing the new markets from creating a new monopoly situation as may happen in the case of telecommunications .
For this purpose - both to liberalise the old markets and to prevent monopoly situations being created in the new markets - information can be very important and a bold strategy , helping the citizens participate in the process , can certainly be useful here .
Mr President , one word on sustainable development and the Lisbon process .
This was already addressed by some Members of the Green Group this morning .
What should be done in the Stockholm meeting is that the governments ' presence there should give the Commission a mandate to take the results of the Gothenburg Summit and to prepare benchmarking and concrete targets for the 2002 spring meeting during the Spanish presidency .
Only if sustainable development becomes as important in benchmarking as economic and social values can we advance .
I will take the opportunity to address the liberalisation aspect where there has not been a lot of reflection hitherto in Europe .
We need a new merger control and a new competition policy .
We have abolished monopolies , but we will have the same operators appearing as oligopolies in Europe if we are not prepared to have a different merger control and competition policy .
We need the biodiversity of a lot of small and medium-sized actors and not a monoculture of eight or ten major electricity companies which will employ blackmail on policy-makers as they did before in the monopolistic structures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a careful assessment of the follow-up to what has become known as the Lisbon Strategy clearly shows that that Summit , which sought to present itself as the defender of employment , was , in fact , a powerful boost to speeding up the process of liberalising fundamental sectors of the economy . In its report , the Commission now highlights what it considers to be ' good results ' achieved with regard to the liberalisation of the telecommunications networks , the creation of a legislative framework for electronic commerce and the definition of the European Company Statute .
At the same time , the Commission regrets what it considers to be delays in the regulation of public contracts and the liberalisation of the markets in gas , electricity , transport and postal services .
In other words , the Commission is insisting on the need to move ahead even more rapidly with the total liberalisation of the most varied sectors , including public services , and on more rapid progress in the capitals market , including the regulation of financial services . The Commission ' s aim is to boost pension funds and other types of funds , but this will lead to greater attacks on social security and other essential public services , specifically in the areas of health , education and communications .
Meanwhile , in the social sphere , despite the statements of intent , fundamental decisions on protecting workers ' rights are being delayed , as happened here only yesterday when we discussed industrial restructuring .
At the same time , statements are being made once again about the need to create a more flexible labour market , which is more mobile and able to adapt . I understand this to mean more precarious employment , with fewer workers ' rights , although it is acknowledged that unemployment is still too high and that poverty and social exclusion are unacceptable at the beginning of the new millennium .
These policies therefore need to be amended , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . What is required is not to touch them up to make them look better in one way or another but to make far-reaching change to the policy in this field .
Mr President , I can only assume that the Presidency which claimed to prioritise employment chooses to direct its attention to other matters rather than take part in our important debate on issues to be taken up at the European Council in Stockholm , but I am all the more pleased to see that the Commission is represented here today .
The presidency said they could not be here before 4 p.m. because - believe it or not - they are discussing with the contact group the Statute for Members which is understandable in the circumstances and the amount of time they have in Strasbourg .
So they are not here but they will be joining us as soon as possible .
Mr President , may I then just add that I am extremely happy that I raised it , as this gave you the opportunity to provide a good excuse for the Swedish Presidency .
I believe it is a mistake for us to draw up long , extensive and contradictory documents such as the llmann report , which risk not being taken seriously .
I also believe it to be a mistake to allow issues of work , growth and competitiveness to be reduced to statistical number crunching .
It is clear that we need indicators in order to make assessments and comparisons , but to use them to excess in this way just makes one think ' Gosplan ' .
Honourable Members , absent Representative of the Council and Commissioners , one does not need to be a politician to see the way powerlessness is spreading and divisions are widening in society .
We have major groups of poor , working people and we have a terrible proportion of long-term unemployed , benefit-dependent and marginalised individuals and families in Europe .
At the same time the EU still has difficulty matching the US with regard to job creation , research and development and population growth .
I believe the hunt for new indicators and more figures on employment simply delays the necessary renewal and liberalisation of European markets .
The Lisbon process requires a move from words to action .
One of 10 years will soon have passed .
Therefore , I am asking today for concrete targets from the presidency ahead of the European Council in Stockholm .
It is no longer a matter of directions and timetables such as we heard about this morning .
What decisions will you produce in the next six months to achieve increased competitiveness in Europe ?
I believe that the Swedes have an excellent opportunity to show some leadership .
Rather sceptical though it has been , the Social Democratic government has , for all that , continued with the successful liberalisation programme set out by the right of centre government at the beginning of the 1990s .
Thanks to a forward-looking policy which included opening up markets , Swedish industry in both the old and the new economies shows significant success .
With this in mind , the presidency could establish a modern agenda to enable the EU to live up to its proud aims .
Both the Council and the Commission have today addressed demographic development in the EU .
In this regard , I wonder when the Commission will be taking initiatives to stimulate increased labour immigration to EU Member States .
Yesterday , I listened to State Secretary Ekström , who is responsible for the European Council in Stockholm .
She introduced important elements into the discussion on growth , including the significance of trade .
This is excellent , as it is vital for both growth and solidarity .
Therefore , I wonder if the Commission and the Council can report on how work on increased trade and reduced tariffs can progress under the Swedish Presidency .
In this context , it would be interesting to hear whether the Council is still of the opinion that the question of the Tobin Tax is a national debate which has no place in this Parliament .
In its communication , the Commission takes up the need for simplification of regulations in the EU .
Bearing in mind the vote we had today on the awful Miller report and the old Bus and Coach Directive , I hope this was the last time we need concern ourselves with such issues .
It is fine to write that simplification of regulations is desired , but the Commission must also show that it is able to act on this .
Finally , I would like to say that economic growth is naturally linked to employment and social security .
A good economy is a prerequisite for welfare .
However it is not politicians and more statistics which create social security , but it is only with the help of a good economy and successful companies that the EU can create cohesion and social security in a new age .
Mr President , we must now rethink the future cohesion policy in view of the challenges arising from enlargement to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Enlargement will mean a large increase in population and geographical area , but also a dangerous increase in regional disparities .
Statistics are misleading , and a region that now has a per capita income of 70 % of the Community average will not have improved its situation when after enlargement this percentage rises by 10 or 15 points .
Income is one element defining regional development , but it must not be the only one .
For the new programming period we must have new indicators that reflect the growing complexity of our societies and our regions ' economies : the unemployment rate , especially one referring to young women and the long-term unemployed ; a region ' s dependence on sectors in crisis , such as steel-making or fisheries ; a low level of worker qualification ; a lack of occupational training or education ; limited economic diversification ; the demographic situation ; poor penetration of new technologies ; or poor integration of women in society in the least developed regions , which is a reason for their backwardness .
Cohesion must not be restricted to the Structural Funds .
All Union policies have to respond to this aim , helping improve competitiveness in the most backward regions and helping create more jobs and more skilled ones .
The Union will have to act in those areas where a stimulus that does not entail a large outlay is needed .
A stimulus that leads to regeneration and an increase in competitiveness and productivity .
The Commission should have a greater capacity to intervene and an overall view , and Community initiatives should be better-funded , in my opinion , in the next period .
Similarly , again in my own opinion , we should rethink how many of them there should be .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to speak on the subject of items 9 to 12 inclusive of the report by our fellow Member , Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , in order to specify our approach to the concept of universal service .
Universal service must be defined in relation to the new technological environment .
Current developments , particularly in information and communication technology , tending towards digital technology , have an irrevocable catalysing force .
It is up to the authorities to meet the challenge by enabling every citizen , whatever their situation , to benefit on a fair basis according to their needs from an identical quality of service .
That is where the advantage of a universal service lies .
In actual fact , technological developments make it possible to view universal service in an offensive and proactive manner rather than in a defensive backward-looking fashion , as a limited set of often mediocre public services , which people carefully avoid using , unless really driven to it .
Thus , the prospects offered in the medium term by the generalised use within Europe of new ' smart card ' type identity papers lead to a redefinition and readjustment of universal service , polarised on two vectors of change : a service level agreement and a rich content .
We should like to see the real possibility of developing in this direction so that this universal service may contribute to balanced realisation of what was set as a strategic objective at the extraordinary European Council meeting in Lisbon in March 2000 .
Mr President , on the report on the impact of liberalisation and the economic reform process our opinion can only be highly critical .
It is not because we do not share general ideas on the broad economic policy guidelines but because here , under the pretext of liberalisation , it is trying to lead us along paths which , instead of increasing the well-being of our societies , will only deepen the social inequalities in our supposedly more advanced societies .
In the report under discussion there are enough generic references to the United States model and phrases that have become the canon of right-wing economics that they cannot be accepted uncritically by those of us who try to keep a balance between broad economic objectives and building fairer societies .
This progressive attitude cannot be reconciled with statements made in this report .
Not only the ones I have just mentioned , but also others such as the statement on labour market reform , where it says , and I quote : " it is high time for labour market reforms that promote mobility and make it worthwhile for the unemployed to take up job offers " .
This - and I say this with all due respect for Mr Gasòliba i Böhm - is treating the unemployed as if they were so many parasites .
The key to achieving a balance between economic objectives , competitiveness and cohesion and social justice is not in this supposed liberalisation but in designing and putting into practice policies that make our economic systems more effective , extracting from other economies - copying if necessary - things that can enable us to move forward in both directions .
We do not want models like that of the United States , which will lead us to greater imbalances and social injustices or resounding disasters , such as the liberalisation of the electricity sector in California .
While you are at it , why not copy the American Treasury ' s policies and abandon the European Central Bank performance model , which has caused us so much harm in the past ?
The rapporteur mentioned in passing this morning that there were European countries with models of interest .
Of course there are . But why is this not highlighted ?
Because it is of no interest , or rather , it is of no interest to those who speak of liberalisation at all costs without thinking about the consequences .
Mr President , I would like to make three points with regard to the Stockholm Summit .
First of all , it is not justified , in my opinion , to hold this discussion here at Parliament ' s instigation whilst there was no document from the Commission available at the time to back it up .
If a summit on socio-economic problems is arranged in Stockholm and if this is done year after year , as was decided in Lisbon , then I expect each time - and I hope that the Swedish Presidency will take a decision in this respect - to see a framework document from the Commission which can be debated beforehand in Parliament .
We have now done just that , but on our own initiative .
Accordingly , the report that is before us is calling for an interinstitutional agreement to that effect .
My second point concerns social protection .
I would like to echo the view of a number of our fellow MEPs , namely that the topic of social protection is new .
It has taken ten years finally to grant the topic political status .
This has now been done .
But this is , of course , a very apprehensive start .
If we begin by prescribing indicators , then this is a good start , but it cannot , of course , be the final step .
The final step should be a process similar to that which we have followed for employment .
Indeed , we should end up drafting guidelines .
I hope that Stockholm too will take matters one step further .
My final point pertains to employment .
It is true that the number of unemployed across Europe is still high , and I am always surprised when it is suggested that we should most definitely encourage the influx of immigrants .
Some say that they should fill the jobs which require the highest qualifications , whilst others believe they should fill those functions which require the lowest qualifications .
First and foremost , our own unemployed should be trained , and the lowest qualified functions should be reassessed in such a way as to ensure that our own people at least accept this work in the first place .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I support the political line and all the proposals in the Bullmann and Gasòliba i Böhm reports . They highlight some of the qualitative goals which ought to be turned into binding decisions at the Spring European Council .
Amongst these I would like to stress the importance of certain initiatives relating to sectors central to the Lisbon and Feira Council guidelines , but where progress is still much too slow , as President Prodi recognised in his speech yesterday .
The most important is coordination of research and development policies .
While the European Commission has set up some highly significant European initiatives and projects in this area , there is still a lack of effective coordination of national programmes and public and private projects developed by each country .
This leads to a situation where meagre national financial resources are often spent on duplication or wasted investment , and where there is a failure to adopt certain shared priorities .
I would like to ask the Commission whether or not it intends to give effective impetus to the implementation of the open method of coordination , adopted by the Lisbon Council .
It can work if the Commission uses its knowledge of existing national programmes and projects to become the promoter and monitor of open methods of cooperation between certain Member States on specific priorities , thus testing national governments ' willingness to cooperate and converge to build a European Research Area .
Secondly , the introduction in the Union - also based on some experiments in open coordination - of a system of lifelong learning and training .
We are right to call , in Mr Bullmann ' s report too , for a combination of flexibility , mobility and security in employment policy , to prevent the emergence of insecurity and marginalisation of both young people and women and older workers as well .
Now , I do not know of any kind of security that can operate in a labour market characterised by flexibility and mobility , apart from the security that comes from employability , a process of lifelong learning and training guarantees .
Setting up a system like that to benefit as many working men and women as possible will overcome the resistance developing in various sectors , because the temporary nature of jobs - and that is a very real factor in our labour market - deters companies from investing in human resources .
All this means mobilising major resources and great individual determination , which can only happen if effective cooperation is established between the European Union and the national States , on the one hand , and between businesses and workers , on the other .
That is also a way to create the necessary conditions for the Spring Council to be a significant event ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I welcome the Swedish Presidency ' s arrival .
I hope that they have taken positive steps with regard to the Statute for Members , as we are on the edge of our seats .
I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Gasòliba i Böhm on his sterling report .
He has succeeded in listing our ambitions one by one in a readily understood manner .
It is our wish to become the world ' s most competitive and most dynamic knowledge-based economy , according to our leaders in Lisbon .
Upon which they went home , and everything carried on as before .
We are still having to put up with stifling bureaucracy .
Attempts to liberalise and introduce simpler rules for small and medium-sized businesses never come to anything on account of short-sighted national interests .
I sometimes dream about this , but I always wake up screaming .
In order to streamline legislation , we should not only scrutinise our activities here , but also examine how a directive emerges from the national transposition processes .
A simple and clear-cut customs act suddenly appears to be backed by legislation which fills three thick volumes .
Moreover , I am of the opinion that the fiche d 'impact should be given the kiss of life .
It should not amount to pure guesswork but to an actual business test .
A test of how a certain piece of legislation will be received in industry .
The problem Europe has - and I trust I can be so outspoken after eleven years in this Parliament - is that I am always duly impressed with the rhetoric , but never by the action that follows .
I would like to quote the liberalisation of the postal services as a case in point .
Not only Parliament , but also the Council , which had explicitly welcomed the liberalisation in Lisbon with open arms , have taken a step back rather than forward .
If we compare this situation in Europe with that in the United States , we are still in complete deadlock in certain areas .
It is not yet the case - not by a long chalk - that Europe can lead the world economy now that US leadership has temporarily lapsed .
Europe ' s core countries , France , Germany and Italy , have enjoyed the benefits of the cheap euro to the full , and have not made any structural changes to their labour markets and their economies .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , economic policy in Europe has chalked up a huge success and a huge failure .
Its success is , of course , the single currency ; its failure is that we have still been unable to mop up unemployment and achieve full employment .
What we wonder is why , despite our success with the one , we cannot achieve the same degree of success with the other .
In this sense , I should like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Bullmann , both on the professionalism of his work and on his enthusiasm for the resolutions of the European Council in Lisbon , which try to build a bridge from our success in the monetary sector towards similar success in the real sector , the real economy .
If you define Europe not by its political borders but by its economic borders ; in other words , if you include eastern Europe , Russia and North Africa , then you will see that we have the largest market in the world , with the highest per capita income and the largest concentration of educated workers .
Not even in Latin America or Asia or the whole of America do these three factors exist side by side .
On this basis , we can work miracles , and from this point of view , the Lisbon objectives are commensurate with our abilities .
The problem is : are our policies for implementing the objectives equally commensurate ?
I have the impression that , when it comes to implementation , we are overly impressed by the huge success of the process of nominal convergence .
However , I am not convinced that we are making proper use of our experience in the real economy .
Mutual monitoring , the famous peer pressure which we now want to transfer to the real economy , was not the only factor .
We must not forget the other factors , i.e. the simple , purely quantitatively defined objective of reducing inflation .
We must not forget that , in the case of the euro , there was a clear time limit : either you boarded the train , or the train left without you .
We must not forget that the aim of squeezing inflation took absolute priority and , in my personal estimate , even worked to the detriment of employment .
If we really want to transfer this method to the real economy , we should apply the wisdom of one quantitative target and one simple tool .
You do not need a great deal of wisdom in order to determine what they are .
The target is full employment and the method is to increase the quantity and quality of investments .
This combination has the additional advantage of indirectly resolving - en passant , as they say in chess - the second major objective of technological progress .
We should have had the courage to give these targets the same absolute priority as we gave legal stability .
I am not sure if we have the courage to do so now .
We have , of course , made some progress by quantifying the indicators , but typically here too , there are no detailed , analytical indicators ; the Commission has not proposed analytical indicators , Commissioner , on investments , public , private , infrastructure , on so many things we should like to promote .
And the rapporteur 's ambitious efforts notwithstanding , I should like to point out that increasing the number of quantitative indicators does not lead us into dead-end street , because we may find ourselves in a position where , to quote the Bible , someone one day says to the Commission : Ìartha , Ìartha , thou art careful , and troubled about many things ·

( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to speak today to express a concern which we also share about what we can achieve as a result of the Lisbon decisions .
In particular , with a view to the forthcoming Stockholm employment summit , I think we may have to develop some methods which might improve the evaluation of the goals gradually achieved , and emphasise the need to intervene forcefully and rapidly when those objectives are not achieved .
As many honourable Members have stated , we set ourselves an extremely important goal at Lisbon : achieving a competitive and dynamic Europe and , above all , a knowledge-based European society .
We also decided to compare our successes and , if you like , our shortcomings , with another great economy , the economy of the United States .
At present , United States statistics represent a target for us to achieve , in terms of both employment and , to some extent , development and economic growth , taking into account , of course , our totally different society and community , something that should not be forgotten .
I too believe that the goals of full employment , respect for a social market economy and rapid progress towards liberalisation in many sectors are objectives we can and must set ourselves .
However , I also think account needs to be taken of two things in Europe : the first is that the situations are completely different , and we are trying to solve problems that have already been solved there , and comparing different situations by applying the same rules does not seem to be ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Commission President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I appreciate the merits of benchmarking in our economic deliberations , yet I would urge Mrs Peijs , Mrs Carlsson and all those that continually cite the American model as an example to ask the people of California what they think of the virtues of liberalisation and the disruption of a public service as vital as the electricity supply in a modern twenty-first century economy .
I consider the reports before us today to be good ones insofar as they seek to consolidate growth in Europe .
They are based on the idea that such growth must be supported by structural reform .
We share this point of view , on condition that such structural reform is appropriate to one objective which is also our chief objective , as our committee chair , Mrs Randzio-Plath , stated : social reform must also lead to greater social integration .
No economic policy without this objective is possible .
We hope that Stockholm , too , will provide an opportunity to reaffirm that the strategy of full employment is now perhaps one that is feasible in Europe .
From this point of view , we find that Mr Gasòliba i Böhm ' s report occasionally expresses a rather liberal approach .
Liberalisation is not tolerable unless it is progressive , unless it goes hand in hand with a regulatory process .
Nor can it be carried out safely without supporting the European Union ' s objectives in terms of social and territorial cohesion .
From this point of view , we should like to see considerable progress in drawing up a framework directive on general interest services .
We would urge those that advocate excessive liberalisation and a fast track timetable for liberalising the electricity and gas sector to be very careful with regard to the postal and rail sectors , for these form the basis of social and territorial cohesion in our countries .
Mr President , I am very pleased that the President-in-Office of the Council is once again in this Chamber .
But , with all due respect to you , Mr President-in-Office , in view of the fact that Sweden constantly promotes equal opportunities , I would have liked Secretary of State Ekström to be here .
Yesterday she was at the joint meeting of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
On the Bullmann report : The Lisbon Council resolved to turn the EU into the world ' s most competitive area by the year 2010 .
Was that just an idle boast ?
Yet , with four million new jobs in four years , mostly highly qualified and ICT jobs , the signs are good .
A new dynamic with more flexible labour markets has emerged , but not everybody is keeping pace .
There are big difference between the regions , with high levels of employment and room for manoeuvre for enterprises in some regions but , in others , increasing unemployment causing people to leave their homes on economic grounds .
But we want economic and social cohesion in the Community and active labour market policies , which are reflected in the four pillars of the Luxembourg process .
The priority is clear : the promotion of innovative SMEs .
We have what it takes to shape the future and create jobs , but we need to dismantle bureaucratic , legal and tax obstacles and facilitate access to risk capital .
By implementing the directives in the NAPS , the employment rate within the EU can be raised to 70 % .
Quantum leaps need to be made in education and training .
Priority should be given to the upward revaluation of vocational training , the implementation of a concept of life-long learning , better framework conditions for cross-border activities , the promotion of mobility through joint training programmes for young people and pan-European recognition of qualifications .
The Hughes procedure brought together the findings of the Bullmann report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Cocilovo report in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Although the details may be assessed somewhat differently , this final report merits our support .
Mr President , the principles in the Bullmann report are linked to the basic ideas from Lisbon , which are to be made more concrete at the European Council in Stockholm in the spring .
These principles for Europe ' s aim to be a word leader in terms of economic development and growth are necessary in parallel with the development of an ambitious social dimension ; this is the whole point .
This balance is crucial not only to our success in implementing our strategies but also to the EU achieving increased public support and understanding , especially prior to expansion .
On the one hand we have right-wing liberals maintaining that the EU is only necessary for deregulating and opening the markets , creating free trade , etc , while the battle against unemployment and the development of social welfare are exclusively national issues .
This implies that some would like to be able to undermine the influence of labour law and the employee and tear up welfare policy , etc without the EU ' s interfering .
On the other hand , certain GUE politicians are now entering this current debate and attacking the Bullmann report for focusing too much on deregulation and competition .
I am therefore pleased that we have still established widespread agreement , excluding the outer fringes to the right and to the left , among those who realise that development of a social dimension is actually a crucial element of a successful economic policy .
However , this does not necessarily mean that the EU should take over the Member States ' powers to legislate , although the open coordination method naturally does not exclude legislating .
The most important thing is that we develop common aims .
These must address both deregulation and liberalisation to a certain extent , as well as common aims for dealing with the problems of unemployment and social exclusion .
Few have taken up this aspect .
But do not forget how vital this is to expansion , as the content of the Bullmann report will then be even more crucial .
The new Member States have an extra need for parallel development within the areas of growth , welfare , social rights and influence for ordinary citizens and employees .
Mr President , at the Lisbon Summit full employment was defined as the overriding objective of EU policy .
I approve Mr Bullmann ' s report , which was based on the employment guidelines first formulated in 1997 at the Employment Conference in Luxembourg .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work .
He is correct when he says that , in the future , more qualitative indicators need to be established which , for instance , take account of the variety of jobs and the minimum consultation rights of workers in their organisation , or environmentally-friendly technologies .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is right to call for this method of combating youth unemployment .
The draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mr Cocilovo , expressed this excellently .
Economic realism is necessary in all the targets we set ourselves within the framework of employment policy .
As the European People ' s Party , we will not be pursuing any pipe dreams .
The transformation of our society into a service and knowledge-based society is making great strides forward .
That is why all our demands are targeted at life-long learning and at restructuring the education systems along the right lines .
We often raise our employment plans in official addresses ; they feature in many papers , in European directives , in national action plans , where they are wonderfully expressed .
But paper is patient .
What matters now is that these plans are put into practice .
As its contribution to achieving the goal of implementing the proposals that have been made , the European People ' s Party will assess the Spring Summit .
We do not need a literature Summit .
I am convinced that Stockholm will not be a literature Summit , as action , not proclamations , is now called for !
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteurs and the many speakers for their contributions to the debate .
I shall try to make a few comments .
The debate has been full of ideas and very varied , and a number of aspects have been aired .
First , I should stress a point that I think is fundamental , which is that Lisbon has not , of course , changed its goals , i.e. , full employment and the modernisation of our society , not forgetting respect for our social system and strong cohesion .
When we analyse the employment figures , it is quite clear what results have been achieved .
We can mention public investment , as some of you have done .
But for us the important thing is the global strategy .
When we analyse the global strategy - and this is the content of the synthesis report - the emphasis is on the need to make progress in the various areas simultaneously in order to achieve the goals we set in Lisbon .
For instance , the broad economic policy guidelines for 2000 are already making substantial changes to their historical structure in order to include in the various policies those measures arising out of the Lisbon strategy .
Clearly , Lisbon is based on the idea , which all or most of you have highlighted , of a society with a dynamic and cohesive economy as I have just mentioned .
This means advances in innovation , education , training , liberalisation , and also adequate regulation , and of course the whole system of social protection .
Neither these instruments nor these policies can exist by themselves ; they are all linked together .
It is not a matter of balance between the various policies : it is more a synergy between different policies , which in the end should enable us to achieve the desired results .
If we analyse the report , it is clearly demonstrated that we have advanced since then .
I do not think we should be as negative as some of you have been , saying , " Nothing has been done . "
I think a lot has been done , in terms of liberalisation or in terms of economic results .
It is also true that not many other things have been done , and therefore in our report we define certain priorities that we consider fundamental for the immediate future .
There is one point I think is of interest , which was raised throughout the debate , especially in the first part this morning .
It is the role of indicators with regard to the goals we are seeking .
It is true that indicators should not be seen as some kind of inventory , of position-taking on specific policies .
It is true that indicators are not goals in themselves , but are tools that should enable us to make progress and interpret reality more globally and accurately .
Contrary to what some of you have said , it is important to have indicators what in themselves tell us the reality of our situation .
There is no doubt at all that comparison with other models is useful .
What doubt is there that comparing certain rates of technological penetration in the European Union and the United States , for instance , will give us a measure of where we are with regard to the most advanced country in these matters ?
Making a partial comparison - only on certain things and not on the whole model - between the two economies may give rise to interpretations that are not always correct .
In any case , when we are talking of comparative indicators there is always a difficulty , which is that we often do not have sufficiently homogeneous indicators for the realities we are comparing to be revealed through these figures .
Throughout the morning you also debated whether the number of indicators was excessive .
It is true that cutting the number of indicators would make the report more visible ; in terms of public opinion it would make it possible to send out clearer and more direct messages .
But it is also true that a smaller number of indicators would make it much more difficult to interpret the reality we are trying to understand .
I think that having 28 indicators classified under the four basic Lisbon goals is the least number required to provide a good understanding of where we are at this moment .
As I said earlier , however , we designed the indicators as a working tool .
This does not necessarily have to be a permanent tool , since real life and a better understanding of it will make us revise the indicators continuously , possibly changing some of them during this process which we began in Lisbon .
A subject I think is of interest , which some of you have raised , is to what extent we can achieve greater participation by Parliament in all this debate through an institutional agreement .
I believe that right now we already have enough instruments , at least for relations between the Commission and Parliament , to be able to make progress in our joint work .
In any case , the institutional agreement should also include the Council .
I should like to stress one point : participation by both Parliament and public opinion in the debate on Europe is always open .
The Commission has taken the initiative , for instance , with the economic interviews held once a year , the basic aim of which is to analyse the European economic situation specifically in this global world and in comparison with the context in those countries that serve as a reference for our situation .
This subject is always open to Parliament , and naturally we hope you will cooperate this year as you have in the past .
Another point I also find of interest is the scope of the synthesis report .
I have seen at least two references that seem to be of interest : Why do we not speak of sustainable development ?
What is happening with the enlargement of the European Union ?
Would it not be appropriate to mention both subjects ?
For its part , sustainable development will be the goal in Gothenburg ; for that reason there is only one clear reference to it in the current report , when it indicates that the economic and social dimensions of Lisbon will have to be completed by integrating the environmental dimension , which will contribute to a European Union strategy for sustainable development .
This , then , will be an open possibility after Gothenburg and will certainly figure in future debates .
A different problem is that of enlargement , which is also clearly referred to : the European Union economy must not only take this essential element into account , but our whole design must also be based on the consideration that the Union will enlarge in a relatively short time .
The European Union must take this element as a point of reference , but the applicant countries should also involve themselves in the Lisbon strategy by adopting its objectives as far as possible .
This text , practically in the same words I have just used , is included in our synthesis report .
In speaking of Lisbon we are also speaking of the new method of coordination , the method of open coordination .
It is true that this is an interesting method , which makes it possible to identify good practices and gradually develop a joint focus on topics of interest ; the method , however , should not replace existing Community instruments of a regulatory or quasi-regulatory nature , or the guidelines that already exist in areas such as economic policy or employment .
One point I should like to highlight is that of structural reforms .
We certainly included some specific references to structural reforms .
We consider that these have a highly diverse content , and among them is the concept of liberalising our economies .
This should certainly make us more competitive and will benefit users and make it possible to improve the quality of services of general interest .
But it is clear that a liberalisation process will only be efficient and not cause problems if it is carried out in a legal framework with adequate control as regards regulation .
We must not think of liberalisation processes that do not fit into a global framework .
This regulatory process will doubtless be a fundamental topic in forthcoming debates , and the references to public interest services that have been made this afternoon come into this framework
Another point I found interesting in today ' s debate is the extent to which an excess of bureaucratic posts is having a negative impact on the European development process .
I shall just say that this is a point which the Commission is concerned about ; at times we have even worked on an indicator for bureaucratic posts .
It is obviously a difficult subject and it is being piloted by Eurostat , where a working party intends to define elements of precisely this nature which will provide us with more detail as to whether the concerns of a part of our society about the excess of bureaucratic posts reflects the reality of the situation or not .
Coming to the end of my comments now , I must say that at the moment , it may be worth stressing that the synthesis report process is a global process that requires coherence between macroeconomic stability , a subject we consider fundamental , employment , reforms and social cohesion .
Within this concept of social cohesion , we must take a broad approach and keep a broad outlook ; it must not confine itself exclusively to individual topics but must also address regional topics , as some of you have proposed .
It is easy to highlight the progress that has been made in general terms , but it is rather more complex to point out how these advances in each of our countries , or in each of our regions , can be compared with the others .
In any case , and I think this point is fundamental , the reforms we are putting into motion will make sense insofar as we are able to increase economic productivity and efficiency .
Introducing elements of the new economy in the European Union will be the key to our future development .
Growth yes , growth with social cohesion , growth that will enable us to face the future in terms of technological challenge ; in the end , these are the Lisbon goals and these are the goals we have tried to include in our report .
Many thanks for your contributions and your participation in this debate .
We shall try to take into consideration all those elements that have arisen today , which will certainly be useful for our debate in Stockholm .
Free movement of persons
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the oral question ( B5-0005 / 2001 ) by Mr Rocard , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , to the Council on Regulation No 1408 / 71 / EEC on the free movement of persons - legal basis ;
the report ( A5-0026 / 2001 ) by Mrs Lambert , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 on the application of social security schemes to employed persons , to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community and Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 574 / 72 laying down the procedure for implementing Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 [ COM ( 2000 ) 186 - C5-0217 / 2000 - 2000 / 0070 ( COD ) ] .


Mr President , when the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs decided to present this question to the Council , it wished to focus on two specific and interrelated points : firstly the free movement of third-country nationals following the decision of the Tampere European Council and secondly , the expected legal base for this .
At the time , our question was also , of course , related to the preparations for the Nice Summit , since we hoped that decisions in favour of social policy and freedom of movement would be taken .
Since then , particularly in the lead-up to that European Council , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has had occasion to look into the issue of freedom of movement in more general terms .
This more general consideration has proved useful in indicating to us that , before extending freedom of movement to third-country nationals , we must , of course , ensure that it operates smoothly for European Union citizens .
We were concerned to note , however , that Regulation 1408 / 71 was becoming less and less appropriate , and that every month saw further postponement of moves to modernise and simplify it .
This is a serious situation , for freedom of movement is one of the truly fundamental principles of the European Union .
This is what enables EU citizens to move , reside and work without obstruction . That is why Regulation 1408 / 71 - which was originally designed to coordinate national social security systems - is one of the keystones in Citizens ' Europe , and any obstacle or delay to its being modernised is a serious matter .
Permit me , Mr President , to take these three aspects in turn .
Firstly , let me hark back to the wording of our question . Firstly , what do we have to say regarding the extension of Regulation 1408 / 71 to third-country nationals ?
We are forced to note that the action taken by the Council does not always , or rather does not yet - which is not quite the same thing , reflect the expressed political will of the Tampere European Council of 15 and 16 October 1999 to create within the Union , I quote , an " area of freedom , security and justice " in which " the legal status of third-country nationals should be approximated to that of Member States ' nationals . "
Indeed , I would remind you that Parliament had already decided the same thing in October 1998 , when the Commission proposal under review at that time was adopted , without amendments , by Parliament .
In other words , the Commission had taken the initiative , Parliament had supported the proposal in a clear vote and the European Council at the highest level , in Tampere one year later , gave legitimacy to this policy direction .
Yet , in 2001 , the Council has still not adopted a common position to enable us to continue the procedure .
What is the reason for this intolerable delay and this denial of political will by the Heads of State and Government even though , for once , there is perfect agreement between the three institutions , when this is not always the case ?
Apparently this is due to the question of the legal base of this text , which sets the Council against the position adopted by the European Council and the Commission .
But if you will permit me to express this legal dispute in readily accessible terms , what is the Council after in opposing this legal base ?
It is seeking to take the European Parliament out of the codecision procedure ( you will tell us that it could do this ) .
That is what is at issue .
So , do not shake your head !
You are rejecting our right to take part in codecision .
This business does not affect just the role of the European Parliament ; it is of direct political interest to the citizens of Europe .
The extension of Regulation 1408 / 71 to third-country nationals is such a sensitive issue that the citizens of the European Union ought to be fully involved in the form of the European Parliament , which represents them .
That is why the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs cannot accept the reference to other legal bases other than those given in the Commission proposal , and would like to point out that Regulation 1408 / 71 cannot be amended except through the codecision procedure .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , what we are challenging in the Council proceedings is one and the same issue , whether it concerns European Community citizens or third-country nationals .
In both cases , the slow progress of work in the Council is obstructing the development of free movement .
The Council cannot shirk its responsibilities ; it must apply the decisions of the European Council and apply them transparently with regard to public opinion and in proper compliance with democratic rules while respecting the role of the European Parliament .
Failing to go down this route , Mr President , would doubtless impel the Members of the European Parliament to respond firmly - and with public support , we have no doubt - and to take action to oppose these obstacles to free movement .
I would add that my protest is not , of course , directed at the Swedish Presidency as such but at the Council .
Indeed I believe that the Swedish Presidency , on the basis of its traditions , may make a great contribution towards solving this problem .
Finally , I would like to conclude on another matter relating to the imminent future of the European Union , enlargement .
The Committee on Employment deems it essential for the countries involved in the next wave of enlargement to be informed of the various outstanding proposals regarding reform of the relevant article in Regulation 1408 / 71 .
The issue of freedom of movement is , as we are well aware , one of the sensitive aspects of the accession negotiations .
What are the Council ' s plans in this area ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Rocard ' s question is very important .
The presidency therefore welcomes this opportunity to debate it and will of course be listening very carefully to the analyses of this issue by all participating Members .
As Mr Rocard points out in the question , the conclusions from the European Council in Tampere addressed equal treatment of third-country nationals who are legally resident in the EU or in the EEA , for example by according them rights and responsibilities similar to those of EU citizens .
It is therefore necessary to adapt the scope of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 with regard to harmonisation of social security systems .
The rules for harmonisation contained in this regulation are a prerequisite for the free movement of persons .
If third-country nationals are covered , they will also receive the opportunity of guarantees for ' acquired rights ' .
This is in contrast to the current situation in which harmonisation is only regulated through bilateral agreements , to the extent that such exist .
In 1998 , before the European Council in Tampere , the Council received a proposal from the Commission aimed at expanding Regulation No 1408 / 71 to cover third-country nationals .
This proposal was addressed by the Council in November 1999 .
However , the Council has not yet been able to reach a decision on the proposal , as there is unfortunately no agreement on the appropriateness of the proposal and its legal foundation .
In parallel with this , the Council is currently considering the Commission ' s proposal on simplifying Regulation 1408 / 71 .
This proposal also advocates the regulation being expanded to cover third-country nationals .
The Council is currently giving the proposal its first reading .
We are well aware of the criticism of the Council for the fact that this matter has taken so long .
However , one should remember that we are addressing a technically very complicated subject .
The technical review currently underway will help us to establish difficulties which may arise from an expansion of the scope of Regulation No 1408 / 71 .
The political negotiations necessary to complete the reforms will , without doubt , benefit from this detailed technical review .
With regard to Mr Rocard ' s third question on consultation with candidate countries , there is no formal consultation either with the candidate countries or with the EEA countries .
Mr President , I must say that I am slightly disturbed by the lack of response on one or two of the issues there , but I will come to those in one moment .
My report deals with this regulation and , as has been said , it concerns a key mechanism in the implementation of the European Union 's goal of free movement of people in that it coordinates social security systems .
It certainly does not seek to harmonise them .
There are three aspects to today 's debate .
We have heard already about third-country nationals and the legal base which should be applied to include them in the scope of the regulation ; the comparative lack of progress in including accession countries in the coordination process ; and the update of the regulation in my report to bring it into line with the changes made in the social security systems of certain Member States .
I will say more on that , but touch on the other two issues as well .
As has been stressed , a crucial factor underlining all these elements is the need to make rapid and positive progress on the Commission 's proposal for a simplification and modernisation of the whole of Regulation 1408 / 71 .
It is essential for the Council to understand that in Parliament we have consensus and are determined on that point , whatever the differences that might appear elsewhere about the right strategy .
We have been looking to the Council for a positive response about the speed of that overall reform .
Paragraph 4 of the resolution tabled by four political groups makes it clear that Parliament is no longer prepared to continue with the piecemeal amendments and technical updates - of which my report is the latest and , we believe the last example .
We must now have overall integrated changes necessary to resolve the bulk of the problems currently arising from this regulation as soon as possible .
That is why the amendments proposed and supported by the committee are technical ones .
We prefer generally not to accept amendments concerning the scope of the regulation , the benefits covered , the changes in the competent authority and so on .
Our aim is to deal with this report most speedily so as not to give the Council any excuse for not moving rapidly to the conclusion of its initial debate on overall simplification - again a point raised in the joint resolution .
That is also the primary reason for my not accepting the amendments tabled in the name of the PPE , although I also have difficulties with the content of one or two of them .
Amendment No 8 , for example , deals with occupational pensions which are not state-provided benefits and therefore currently outside the scope of the regulation .
I also consider that Amendment No 10 might be regressive in some Member States , as it proposes a general condition governing entitlement to unemployment benefit .
I accept that certain of the proposed amendments touch on some important issues and Parliament recognised them in its vote on the report on frontier workers last month - again , as recalled in the joint resolution .
Such workers are of course an issue for accession countries .
We are aware that free movement both to and from those countries depends to some extent on successful coordination of the social security systems .
Much of the debate about free movement tends to neglect the fact that people from current Member States wish to work and establish themselves within the accession countries , and hence our interest in the state of those negotiations .
Personally , I strongly support the Commission 's proposals to include third-country nationals in the regulation and to do so on the legal base it has proposed .
Parliament should be involved in codecision on this issue , as it now is on matters relating to coordination of social security in general .
The inclusion of third-country nationals seems to me to be recognition of the principle of equal treatment of those who contribute to the economic and social life of the Union .
The joint resolution recalls the Tampere Summit when Member State governments stated that the legal status of third-country nationals should be approximated to that of Member State nationals .
I was at a European Union migrants ' forum conference representing the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs soon after that statement was made .
It was welcomed as a strong indication of the Union 's desire to be anti-discriminatory in its actions .
I regret that the Council cannot yet uphold the proposed legal base and live up to the hopes it has raised in the EU 's so-called " 16th Member State " of third-country nationals and among those of us who wish to see them treated fairly and equally .
To sum up , I would urge Parliament to move to a rapid conclusion on my report so that we can turn our full attention to the much-needed simplification and modernisation of the whole of Regulation 1408 / 71 to make it more inclusive and effective for all of those covered by a social security scheme .
Mr President , the issue we are addressing today , has divided this House and has evoked some strong emotions , particularly for the rapporteur , although she is hiding them well .
It has had the same effect on my fellow MEPs of the socialist group , with whom I usually manage to come to an agreement very quickly whenever I mention frontier work .
I therefore wonder whether there is a fear of getting in the way of our own Social Affairs Ministers , or does it , Mrs Lambert , amount to a well-intentioned difference in political strategy ?
Every year , we receive from the competent committee a report on Regulation 1408 , which attempts to coordinate the social security of frontier workers .
This contains amendment proposals , in order to bring this regulation up-to-date . For years , the EP has used this as an argument to extend our wish-list without causing any division in the House .
Unfortunately , Mr President , despite all the resolutions , the Council of Ministers has never taken the trouble to so much as glance at Parliament ' s proposals .
I should also therefore address the European Commission in my lament today .
For as early as in 1998 , the Commission , which is , after all , the originator of legislation and guardian of the European Treaty , made an excellent proposal to modernise , adapt and extend the regulation .
But the Council is playing the same game with the Commission , unfortunately .
The Commission proposal has been , and is being , discussed and is the subject of debate , but we have been awaiting a concrete result for the European Commission for the past three years .
I would ask Commissioner Solbes Mira whether this might not be a reason for joining our camp now , rather than waiting patiently for the moment when the Council , in its great wisdom , will take a decision ?
I have also listened very carefully to the chairman , Mr Rocard , who I value greatly .
I have heard his passionate plea before the Council for the recognition of the rights of the European Parliament and for Parliament to be able to play that role .
I do not need a plea for this .
The EP has a role to play in this procedure .
We are co-legislators , Mr Rocard , so that role has already been carved out for us .
Could I therefore also express my deep disappointment at the words which Minister Danielsson spoke a moment ago .
He has given any response to what Mr Rocard has said .
None whatsoever .
They may be in favour of debates and of adapting and extending regulations , but how they intend to bring this about , or what the timeframe is , is a mystery .
I wonder whether this House cannot even expect an answer to this , and I therefore wonder , on behalf of all those who face those commuting problems on a daily basis , whether we , the Commission and Parliament that is , should not make use of our powers and invite this Council around the table to establish what we can do with the proposals which we have tabled .
Mrs Lambert , there is absolutely nothing in them which is even slightly peculiar .
We mention pensions , and the Commission comes back with the proposal .
The same is true for unemployment and medical expenses . This is all enshrined in proposals which the European Commission has also made at the request of Parliament .
There is , therefore , nothing out of the ordinary in them , Mrs Lambert . I suggest you have a look at your own dossier and you will find that it is better to join our camp and to ensure that we can get this Council to join us at the negotiating table .
I would have been quite happy to tell my group tomorrow that we have received nice pledges , but nothing came of them , and that is for me a reason to call on everyone once again : let us ensure that we now get to talk to them and I hope that the Commission ' s reply will also be another acknowledgement of Parliament ' s plea .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make two points .
The first of these concerns Mrs Lambert ' s report , which is sensible and pragmatic and contains the necessary changes in the light of the annual updates .
This is a technical report and the Group of the Party of European Socialists thinks it right and proper that it has been separated from our political reports .
For this very reason , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , I do not understand your outburst .
I think you are getting worked up about a report which really does not warrant it and that you are putting the rapid harmonisation of legislation in jeopardy .
The position we have adopted , which is one we have held for the last six years and more in our committee , is , quite understandably , to secure the right to freedom of movement , the rights of frontier workers and also the rights of third-country nationals whose families are in Europe , as quickly and as comprehensively as possible .
That is why the position of the Council seems to me somewhat lacking .
But our motion for a resolution , which we tabled together with the other left-wing groups of this House , contains a clear and , I think , urgent request for the Council to lay the directives , the regulation and the revision of the regulation on the table by the end of the year .
From what I have heard , I am convinced that the Belgian Presidency will follow suit .
Mrs Ria , I regret , therefore , your zigzag course . When we look at your proposals , we find they do not tally with what you have said .
For instance , in Amendment No 1 on paragraph a , why did you remove social security ?
We all want social security to remain a component ; we do not want only economic interests to be to the fore .
In the case of Amendment No 4 to paragraph 1 , you have removed third-country nationals .
That is a big problem .
It has always been close to our hearts that we are dealing not only with the citizens of the European Union but also with workers and people from other countries , who are legally resident in our countries .
That is why we expect you to include these groups of people .
You can be sure that this problem will return to haunt us at the time of enlargement - but probably sooner - namely when the glaring deficit in qualified workers , which will make itself felt in all 15 Member States , is all too apparent .
We cannot restrict legal status to workers ; we must also include workers ' families .
Mr President , we are all aware , of course , that Mrs Lambert ' s report is ill-timed , because it concerns a technical amendment .
We know .
We all do .
However , because it has taken the Council , or Commission , such a long time to pluck up the courage to assess this regulation and to include it on the agenda , this was simply a cry from the heart from people who believe that it should at long last be included on the agenda so as to make it possible to hold a broad , political debate using sound arguments .
Mrs Lambert said that discrimination must be prevented .
I could not agree more , and everyone should support this view .
However , as Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has already indicated , frontier workers are still being discriminated against , and the Left has no intention of doing anything about this .
Do not ask me why .
I would urge them too to roll up their sleeves in this area , as these people are still being discriminated against .
That is my first point : we are drafting a directive which evidently has a discriminatory effect , especially in terms of frontier workers .
Something must be done about this .
There is also another point , which is possibly of even greater importance , namely the future of the Union .
We are now addressing the subject of interest at European level , and we are currently controlling the economy centrally , from Brussels .
This is to be welcomed .
What has not been tackled yet is the mobility of workers , since each Member State has its own wishes and legislation .
This will be a threat to the European economy in due course .
It is vital that mobility is established .
As far as frontier workers , as well as people on secondment , are concerned , I am of the opinion that they should be given a choice .
When I see how journalists who are stationed in Brussels for five years have to return home because they would otherwise have to surrender their pensions , I consider that the European Union is behaving quite outrageously with its legislation .
Certainly if this period is reduced to twelve months .
I therefore believe that the employed should have far more freedom of choice , leading to a widening and improvement of worker mobility .
I believe that a ) not discriminating any longer , at any level , represents a positive step forward for us and b ) that this will benefit the European economy .
Mr President , the annual adaptation of Directive 1408 / 71 , which we are dealing with at the moment , is a technical matter .
The likelihood of implementing fundamental changes at the moment is therefore rather slim , although these changes are desperately needed , as everyone is all too aware .
My group would therefore argue in favour of a resolution which has been tabled jointly with the PSE , the ELDR and GUE , as was indicated a moment ago .
First of all , the Council should adopt the Commission proposal for extending the directive ' s scope , in order to cover third-country nationals who reside in the EU lawfully , for they are clearly being discriminated against at present .
This is in contravention of the Charter of Fundamental rights and Article 12 of the Treaty , and clashes with the concept of the Citizens ' Europe .
' Citizens ' Europe does not only refer to the European citizen , but also to all citizens in Europe .
I hope that the Council will commit itself to a so-called inclusive approach .
A second important point , which has already been made , concerns frontier workers .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and , in actual fact , Mrs Van Lancker before her , as well as others , have already made huge efforts in this respect .
Time and again , Parliament has asked the Council and the Commission to lift the barriers in terms of taxation and social security for this group , but so far to little or no avail .
It is therefore high time that legislation was drafted in this field .
But there is a time and place for everything .
The place is this Parliament , but the time , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , is not now .
It would be short-sighted to try to improve the position of frontier workers or third-country nationals in the present technical amendment without any chance of success .
Not only will this slow down the completion of this resolution , it will also slow down the much-wished-for , wholesale reviews .
Let us not pursue a defeatist strategy , but rather focus our efforts on actual improvement .
Mr President , there is no option but to agree with the idea that any person with the right to move freely within the European Union should be protected by a social security system , regardless of whether they are employed or unemployed .
The European Union must indeed guarantee equal treatment for third-country nationals legally resident within a Member State territory , according to the Tampere Conclusions .
It must also , however , grant the same rights to the people who , driven by the increasingly restrictive policy on identity papers , visas and asylum rights , are forced to work in unacceptable conditions , without social protection .
At this time when 700 " immigrants in an irregular situation " in Spain are on hunger strike , we need a policy to regularise their situation throughout Europe .
The report makes reference to freedom of movement , but establishing genuine freedom of movement would entail putting an end to the requirement to declare entry into European territory and doing away with the Schengen Information System and the Eurodac system .
Finally , truly fair treatment would entail equal access to public sector jobs , and equal wages and social rights , as well as to European citizenship based on residence and not on nationality , with , consequently , the right to vote and the eligibility of immigrants that are third-country nationals .
Mr President , I come to this debate today with a lot of reservations because of some of the comments made by other speakers in a previous debate .
In particular when we speak about the free movement of workers , as was pointed out in the two previous debates on Lisbon and on the Lipietz report , the free movement of workers is not just about internal barriers .
It is not just about lack of social security protection .
It is also about lack of recognition and about hindrances at national level whereby the internal market is not completed .
It is about lack of recognition of qualifications .
It is about lack of opportunity for training and also a lack of opportunity for knowledge of what opportunities and what rights are available to people .
So when we speak about the free movement of workers and when we speak about updating regulations we should be clearer in our focus on two points , namely that , firstly , in Nice the governments decided that this should be done by unanimous voting , not by qualified majority voting , and secondly that there should be no discrimination - either positive or negative - against any worker who is legally resident within the Member States of the European Union .
My Group will therefore be supporting the resolution from the PPE-DE Group .
Mr President , I would like to extend warm thanks to Mr Rocard for his question and moving speech .
As for the rapporteur , I would like to say that perhaps it would have been better for her to occupy a seat in the Council section rather than our section as far as the defence of Parliament ' s interests is concerned .
After all , the free movement of persons is still very badly regulated in Europe .
The brochure seems to be painting a rosy picture , but the reality is very different indeed .
People who make use of the free movement of persons are brought down to earth with a shock .
Just ask journalists in Brussels , for example .
They are now being covered by Belgian social security , but lose all their rights elsewhere .
They are left with the choice of paying twice or else leaving , unless the Belgian government shows mercy .
Journalists are , of course , a group of people who can fend for themselves to some extent ; others fare much worse .
I would like to cite the example of a Swedish lady who lives in the Netherlands , is insured in the Netherlands , returns to Sweden but cannot benefit from the health care system there because the Netherlands refuses to include the so-called private patients in the regulation .
Examples of this are legion .
People who experience this kind of treatment end up in a Kafkaesque situation .
Who are the architects of this system ?
They are in the Council and are keen to keep things as they are .
This is also evident from the replies .
The question now arises as to whether we want to change this or not ?
We have had precious little opportunity to do anything so far , for the only right Parliament has had has been advisory .
The only thing we could do if extremely bad changes were announced was to settle for a recommendation which prevented discussion in the Council .
We now have another right : that of codecision .
That is why our group is of the opinion that we should use this right at long last to force a dialogue with the Council .
That is exactly what the rapporteur has tried to prevent with all his might , with all possible means , and backed by the UK representatives .
I believe that that is not right .
This is today ' s topic of discussion .
That is why we are in conflict , and not so much in terms of the objectives .
There are naturally always differences between the way in which the one amendment would have been worded compared to the other , but they boil down to the same thing .
It is extremely odd that if we discuss a legislative matter , we at the same time want to express our true interests in the form of a resolution .
If we were to adopt this approach in other codecision matters , we would not make much progress .
This morning , we managed to conclude quite a few codecision matters successfully , and I do not believe that there is a resolution in these , the exact meaning of which would need to be reiterated .
That proves just how odd this procedure is here today .
That also proves that we are on the wrong track .
Someone might say that perhaps this is the last time .
I do hope so .
I hope that this will prove to be the case in a year ' s time .
If that is so , Council , you will really need to watch your step , because you will be unable to continue in the same vein .
You will really need to look after those ordinary people who are continuously at the receiving end of your stipulations .
Then , there will be no need to give less consideration to the interests of the bureaucracies which so far , the parties to the Left have valued more than the interests of the electorate and the people they represent .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by saying that I empathise with many of my fellow MEPs , including those occupying the EPP benches , in terms of their feelings of anger and even frustration , and I also share these feelings , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
We have cooperated for years in order to break the deadlock in the issue of the free movement of persons and hence of frontier workers .
It is utterly disgraceful that the European Commission ' s proposal on coordination and extension is , after so many years , still on the Council ' s table , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
To tell you the truth , Mr Danielsson , I had hoped from the bottom of my heart that you , on behalf of the Swedish Presidency , would have shown the greatest commitment to ultimately making decisions , and to at least producing a timeframe indicating when a decision would be taken on this important regulation .
I happen to know that the Belgian Presidency is very much prepared to reach political agreement on the content of this dossier and on the timing .
Mr Danielsson , I believe we need this , but we cannot do this , of course , without Sweden ' s strong commitment .
Our group is also of the opinion that pressure should be stepped up .
But our group does not believe that the annual technical amendment , Mr Pronk , is the right way to achieve this .
It does not move the issue on frontier workers along one inch , not even if we call on Parliament ' s codecision . You are all too aware of this .
Quite the reverse in fact .
A number of vital adjustments which are equally important , such as the situation of the Belgian frontier workers who should be able to enjoy supplementary French pensions , Mr Pronk , are under threat in this dossier .
The best approach is to continue to form a united front in these issues and not to use this directive to pull cheap party-political stunts at the expense of frontier workers .
This is not why we pursue this strategy .
Whatever the case , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I believe that the Belgian Presidency and the Swedish Presidency should facilitate a speedy breakthrough in this issue .
In fact , it should be possible for the final discussions in the Council to coincide with the prospect of a conference on frontier work , which the European Commission has promised us .
I hope that this will at least win over the hesitant Member States and that we will have clarity in this matter by the end of this year .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that the best line of attack is not a divided one , for this is not the impression we want to convey to the Council .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , something which worries me a great deal is the fact that the Council apparently does not intend to extend the scope of the regulation on social security to include third-country nationals .
At least , that is what I could gather from the whole dispute regarding the legal base .
I have to tell you in all honesty - and I echo Mr Rocard ' s view on this - that this is diametrically opposed to the conclusions reached in Tampere , where it was decided that third-country nationals should be given equal treatment , and it is obvious that this Parliament will not accept this unacceptable discrimination .
But if I can ask you something : I would very much like to know how Sweden , not only as the country holding the presidency , but also as a Member State of this European Union , intends to break the deadlock in this issue and how you stand on the extension to include third-country nationals .
Mr President , I also wish to emphasise that people ' s opportunity to move freely to another EU country and work across frontiers is one of the major advances in European cooperation , and I believe we can all appreciate that it is only right and proper for people who obtain work in another EU country to be able to retain their social security rights .
Our framework - Regulation No 1408 / 71 - whereby countries ' reciprocal agreements ensure that people also have these rights in practice has become more and more complex throughout the years and , what with this and general bureaucracy , it is often no simple matter at all to move from country to country .
That is something we must change , and I therefore think it is right to call for more progress in the work on simplifying the regulation , as proposed by the Commission at the end of 1998 .
The question arises as to whether , in addition to simplifying and improving the regulation for EU citizens , we can also ensure that it will be possible for third-country nationals engaged in active employment and resident in EU countries to be covered by the regulation .
Several countries , including Denmark , have opposed the Commission ' s proposal by referring to the legal basis , Article 42 , which of course only covers EU citizens .
At the Nice Summit , Denmark fought hard against changing Article 42 and against majority voting in connection with Article 42 .
I understand that work has been done on possibly seeking another legal basis , for example in terms of legal cooperation .
I would urge that it not all be allowed to collapse in legal wranglings and problems concerning the legal basis , for Danish business too will have an interest in a solution ' s being found to this problem so that , for example , foreign experts legally resident in Denmark can be posted to another EU country for a period and retain their social security rights and so that we can have experts over to Denmark from other EU countries .
Mr President , I should like to raise a point in connection with the application of social security schemes which has upset workers in my country and in every other country , and that is the future of social security .
Big business and the European Union , in their full frontal attack on everything the working classes have struggled and fought for , have now set their sights on social security .
They are using groundless arguments , such as longer life expectancy and the allegedly excessive cost of labour , in order to introduce measures such as increasing the retirement age , reducing employers ' contributions and replacing insurance funds by private , profit-making companies .
This , together with the continuing privatisation of the health system , means yet another burden on the workers , a lower standard of living and huge profits for the monopolies .
The working classes in Greece have already mobilised in the face of this attack .
They are ousting the trade union leaders who have been bought off and who are being dragged into so-called social dialogue with so-called social partners , and they are organising their resistance and counter-attack .
Similar action is being taken in other countries .
The Communist Party of Greece hereby declares from this tribune that it will do everything it can to support this movement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened to this debate with great interest .
The Council fully understands the frustration apparent in many of the speeches in this debate .
I can understand why you think that the work on Regulation 1408 which has taken place since the Finnish Presidency in 1999 has seemed extremely long drawn out .
I would nonetheless repeat what I said in my introduction .
This is technically a complicated issue and it has been necessary to take the time to test the Council ' s reactions and to provide the Council and the Commission with the opportunity to consider , reflect and create a foundation for future negotiations .
However , we Swedes have high hopes that , in the next six months , the Swedish Presidency will be able to complete this technical work .
If we succeed , and we are hopeful that we will , this will allow the forthcoming Belgian Presidency to move on to a strategic discussion on the proposal to simplify and modernise Regulation No 1408 .
Both the Swedish Presidency and the forthcoming Belgian Presidency want to break the vicious circle in which the Council has found itself on this issue .
We believe this is extremely important .
We hope to be able to agree on a continued timetable for the work .
The Council and the Commission may need a mandate in which the working method and approach are clearly stated - whether the proposal is to be divided up , whether certain sections are to be omitted entirely , whether we are to try to simplify the regulation further and if so , how , etc .
I am hopeful that we will not need to repeat this debate many more times and that the Council will be able to return with better news than I can provide in this debate .
Let me finally say the following in answer to Mrs van Lancker ' s question on what the Swedish Presidency intends or would like to do to tackle the problems of discrimination .
In this I will remove my Council hat and put on my national hat .
In brief , as we see it , the only way to tackle these problems in the long term is to agree on qualified majority voting on Article 42 .
We did not succeed in Nice , but we do not intend to give up .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Mr Rocard for his support for the Commission proposal to extend Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 to third-country nationals .
The Commission also thanks him for his support for Articles 42 and 308 of the Treaty as suitable legal bases for this objective .
An extension of this nature , in my opinion , is fully consistent with Community policy , particularly if you take into account the conclusions of the Tampere European Council on the situation of third-country nationals who reside legally in the Member States .
The Commission therefore regrets the fact that the Council has not yet been able to support this and other Commission proposals to amend the Regulation and , in particular , the global proposal to simplify and modernise it .
We are delighted at what we have just heard Minister Danielsson say in this respect , and we hope his wishes come true over the next few months .
The Commission insists that the Council should intensify the debates on the proposals mentioned and is grateful for Parliament ' s support on this matter .
This leads me to Mrs Lambert ' s report ; I offer her my most sincere thanks for her highly constructive contribution to the Commission proposal .
Our proposal is a technical proposal , aiming as you well know at filling gaps in legislation due to changes in national social security laws .
Community coordination of national social security systems is a means to foster the free movement of workers , and in order to guarantee that this coordination works properly the amendments to national legislation also require the amendment of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 ; this is basically what it is about .

The proposals made by Mrs Lambert , whom we thank for her support , are very useful since they clarify the Commission ' s original proposal and make it more specific .
I can agree fully with the proposals contained in Amendments Nos 1 to 7 in the report .
I also agree with the general idea that underlies the two additional amendments that have been tabled in the House , Nos 9 and 10 .
Their aim is to extend the right to sickness benefit to frontier workers , and if I have understood correctly , to expand the Regulation to cover early retirement benefit .
In fact the Commission included the same provisions in its 1998 proposal for the simplification and modernisation of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 .
The amendments that concern us now , however , propose a substantial change to the Regulation and clearly go beyond the technical nature of the update proposed by the Commission , and in my opinion the debate on the technical update should not be confused with a debate on the substantial amendments .
Therefore the Commission cannot accept the other additional amendments on supplementary pensions .
With regard to Amendment No 8 , I should like simply to underline the fact that the Commission has agreed to submit a proposal this year on its transferability .
To sum up , therefore , we can accept Amendments Nos 1 to 7 , but we cannot accept Amendments Nos 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 and 13 .
May I thank you all , and especially Mrs Lambert , for your general support for the Commission ' s proposal .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I have received three draft resolutions submitted under Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Questions to the Council ( B5-0007 / 2001 ) .
First Mr Alavanos has a point of order .
Mr President , it is a point of order based on Annex II to the Rules of Procedure .
I tabled a question to the Council for February 's Question Time on " the responsibilities of Mr Solana and the Balkan syndrome " under Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure .

I have received a letter from Mr Correa in the Division des activitÝs des deputés , which says that the President instructs me to inform you that your question number such and such has not been entered for Question Time because questions are only accepted on condition that they do not contain assertions or opinions .
Annex ÉÉ to the Rules of Procedure does indeed state that questions must not contain assertions or opinions .

However , I see here , for example , that Mr Gahrton 's valuable Question No 3 states : " Unfortunately , the Finnish , Portuguese and French Presidencies chose to disregard Parliament 's recommendation . "
Similarly , question no .
7 by Mr Nogueira Román states : " In view of the reprehensible inertia of the Spanish authorities , what steps has the Council taken to put an end to this tragic situation ? "
Not just opinions , but opinions on the liability of European Union government authorities for the deaths of immigrants .
Having said which , I think that this intervention and the withdrawal of my question on Mr Solana are unacceptable and I would ask the Bureau as a whole to reconsider and enter it on the next agenda .
It does not contain any more opinions or assertions than most questions tabled by Members .
I must tell you , Mr Alavanos , as you already know , I am the President of the sitting and that , before the sitting , in accordance with Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure , it is the Presidency of Parliament , in this case Madam President , who has the power to accept a question or not .
You have read out certain criteria ; then the criteria are applied and that is where there may sometimes be disagreement .
I shall pass your point on to the President of Parliament because I am not a court that can judge even your arguments of unfair treatment today .
I have listened carefully to your legal and political arguments on the matter and I shall pass them on .
As you know , you too can also use whatever means you find appropriate to achieve the fullest transparency so that the criteria can be interpreted as clearly and extensively as possible .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 1 and 2 will be taken together .
Question No 1 by ( H-0015 / 01 ) :
Subject : Crisis management Can the Council clarify one aspect of the EU 's new defence policy which has not been made plain in the debate in Sweden : will military intervention by the EU 's planned rapid reaction force always require a United Nations mandate ?
Question No 2 by ( H-0022 / 01 ) :
Subject : UN mandate for peace-enforcement operations The Swedish Defence Minister , Björn von Sydow , wrote in the Sydsvenskan newspaper on 7 January 2001 that ' ... Sweden will take part both in humanitarian and civilian measures as well as in peace-promoting and peace-keeping operations .
Within the EU , we are agreed that our actions will be in keeping with the principles of the UN Charter .
This means that a UN mandate is required for peace-enforcement operations . '
Where in documents adopted by the European Union is it unequivocally stated that peace-enforcement operations by the EU require a UN mandate ?
As the EU develops its common foreign and security policy , of which the common European security and defence policy is a vital element , the EU undertakes to maintain peace and strengthen international security in line with the principles of the UN Charter , the principles set out in the Helsinki Final Act and the aims of the Paris Charter .
This responsibility is stated in Article 11.1 of the Treaty on European Union .
It has been confirmed by the Council in drawing up the framework for strengthening the common European security and defence policy since the European Council in Cologne in June 1999 when this process was set in motion .
In addition , in the conclusions from the European Council in Helsinki , and recently in the Military Capabilities Commitment Declaration , which was presented after the conference held in France in November 2000 and which accompanied the presidency ' s report to the summit in Nice , it was emphasised that ' the Union recognises the primary responsibility of the United Nations Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security . '
Thank you for your answer , but my question was about the UN mandate .
Mr Danielsson said nothing about this . Instead , we received a report on the fact that the EU will act in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter .
But what about the mandate ?
Is a mandate needed ?
We must have a clear answer to this .
Is it the case that the EU needs a UN mandate to intervene with its planned rapid reaction force , i.e. a positive decision from the UN ?
That is my question .
I believe it is extremely difficult to be any clearer than the European Council in its conclusions from Nice .
I once again refer to the ' capacity declaration ' .
I do not think it is possible to be any clearer than that is .
It states that everything done with regard to the common European security and defence policy must be carried out in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter .
Let me stress what is already well known to Mr Schmid , that it is also the case that all measures taken within the framework of the common European security and defence policy are a type of intergovernmental cooperation , which means firstly that there should be agreement among the Member States and secondly that there should be the opportunity for individual countries to decide for themselves the extent to which they want to participate in such operations , if at all .
We also know that in a number of Member States , depending to some extent upon national tradition , various forms of reference to the UN Charter are required for the country to take part in an intervention .
As such , it is a case of belt and braces regarding this issue .
I believe we can sleep soundly in our beds .
European crisis management will be carried out in line with the principles of the UN Charter .
I think Lars Danielsson is doing what is known as a Dinkelspiel , i.e. he appears to be answering the question , but is avoiding giving a proper answer .
We have asked a very clear question about whether an absolute mandate is required for military action .
It is not about the general principles .
It is not about spirit or other higher values .
It is about the concrete fact of having an express mandate from the UN for military action .
There are two possible answers to this question : No , no absolute mandate is required , even though it may be desirable .
Or yes , such a mandate must be obtained .
I would like to be given a yes or no answer .
I believe that the regulations surrounding the common security and defence policy fully guarantee that all measures taken within the framework of that policy will be taken in line with the principles of the UN Charter .
This is sufficient for the Swedish Government , and it is clearly sufficient for all the other governments in the Council .
However , I realise that this is not sufficient for Mr Sjöstedt and Mr Schmid , for which I am sorry .
However , I believe that we can rest safe in the knowledge that all the measures we might need to take within the framework of the Common Security and Defence Policy will follow the principles of the UN Charter , and not of course forgetting those of the OSCE .
I think that should count for a great deal .
Mr President , I heard Mr Danielsson say that it would be difficult to be clearer than he had been in his answers .
I would also say that it is difficult to be the Swedish President-in-Office of the Council for , as my fellow MEP Mr Sjöstedt said so clearly , there are two possible answers to the question that has been asked , and they are either yes or no .
Instead , Mr Danielsson comes out with a long explanation to the effect that the operations are in keeping with the UN Charter .
I have never heard any head of state or any representative of an international organisation maintain that what they were doing was contrary to the UN Charter .
They always maintain that it is not . However , it is very interesting that , after four successive attempts to obtain a clear answer to the question that has been asked , we cannot obtain such an answer .
There are , as likely as not , people who draw the conclusion that no UN mandate is required .
And that is a scandal .
Scandal or not , I can only assume that there is a fundamental difference of opinion .
There is a view widely held in Europe that we need to develop better instruments for preventing and managing crises which may arise in and close to Europe .
We need to do this in the spirit of the UN Charter and in accordance with its principles .
We need to do it in line with the OSCE ' s principles .
There is major support for this view .
Then there is a small group , of which we have heard a few representatives , which wants to try by all possible means to block this development towards stronger and more stable peace and security in and around our continent .
I can only regret that we cannot really agree on this important issue .
I feel safe in the knowledge that everything carried out within the framework of the common security and defence policy will be fully compliant with the principles of the UN Charter .
Question No 3 by ( H-0031 / 01 ) :
Subject : European Parliament recommendation on the establishment of a civil peace corps On 17 January 2001 , the European Parliament delivered its opinion on a proposal for creating an EU rapid reaction facility , pointing out that priority must be given to non-military crisis management and citing as a suitable way forward the recommendation it made to the Council in spring 1999 that a civil peace corps be established .
Unfortunately , the Finnish , Portuguese and French Presidencies chose to disregard Parliament 's recommendation .
Will the Council therefore state what initiatives the Swedish Presidency intends to take to comply with Parliament 's unanimous recommendation ?
Conflict prevention and crisis management employing all civil and , if necessary , military instruments is an extremely important priority for the EU .
This has been reflected in the conclusion from the European Councils up to and including the Nice Summit .
The Swedish Presidency is actively proceeding with the task assigned by the European Council in Nice .
The work is quite complicated both in the civil and the military spheres as the EU is creating new resources and structures .
The work in the civil sphere is currently focused on achieving the concrete aims established at the European Council in Feira , i.e. by 2003 to be able to mobilise up to 5 000 police for international assignments across the spectrum of operations to prevent conflict and manage crises .
It must be possible to mobilise 1 000 police within 30 days .
The work in other prioritised areas , as established in Feira - particularly with regard to strengthening the rule of law , but also rescue services and civil administration - will continue .
In addition , the Swedish Presidency has clarified the fact that it is appropriate , as the EU ' s civil crisis management continues to develop , also to establish other areas within the framework of civil crisis management in which EU resources may need to be developed or used more effectively .
Such areas may include expertise in democracy and human rights plus monitors and observers of various kinds .
Mechanisms for improved cooperation with voluntary organisations which participate in conflict prevention and in initiatives to promote peace after a conflict , such as improvements to the EU ' s diplomatic instrument for conflict prevention , will also be drawn up in the European programme on conflict prevention , which is expected to be approved by the European Council in Gothenburg .
Alongside this , the EU has reformed and concentrated the work of its monitoring missions and placed it under the control of the Secretary-General .
Moreover , the monitoring mission recently showed its value when it was deployed in Presevo Valley .
All this work is moving in the same direction , and has the same aims , as the European Parliament ' s recommendation on establishing a civil peace corps .
The Council prefers to complete the aforementioned work , i.e. an operational capacity in the field , before the end of the year with the aims and deadlines set out by the European Council .
The Council will then be better able to assess what other arrangements might be warranted or necessary .
Mr Danielsson appears to be trying to incorporate an old Swedish expression into general EU jargon - you see , I do not think there is a good translation of ' goddag yxskaft ' [ literally ' hello , axe handle ' ] .
Mr Danielsson ' s replies to question after question are like the complete non sequitur ' goddag yxskaft ' .
My question was also one with a yes or no answer .
I did not ask about police and a host of other pleasant or less pleasant , friendly or less friendly measures for civil crisis management .
I asked a question about the recommendation , adopted by Parliament and passed on to the Council , for the Council to initiate a pilot study on a possible European peace corps .
Does the Council intend to take any initiative on the basis of this recommendation ?
Yes or no ?
It is very easy to answer yes or no .
But perhaps I should interpret the reply as a no , as with the previous question to which the answer was in fact no .
In that case , Parliament , having unanimously adopted this recommendation , will draw its own conclusions as to how the Council intends to work with Parliament .
I understand that my long reply was somewhat too comprehensive for Mr Gahrton .
Let me therefore try to summarise it as follows :
No now .
Yes possibly later .
Question No 4 by ( H-0018 / 01 ) :
Subject : Turkey and military crisis management Does the Council consider it appropriate to include Turkey in cooperation on military crisis management when , at the same time , Turkey violates human rights in its own country , occupies the northern part of Cyprus and conducts offensive operations in northern Iraq ?
Turkey was accepted as an applicant country at the European Council in Helsinki in December 1999 .
Human rights in Turkey plus the Cyprus issue are therefore dealt with within the framework of the accession partnership with Turkey , about which the Council reached political agreement at its meeting on 4 December 2000 .
As we all know , Turkey is also a member of NATO .
The presidency report on the Common Security and Defence Policy , which was approved by the European Council in Nice , confirmed that the EU project is of an open nature .
It contains arrangements for the EU ' s military crisis management which enable consultation with , and participation of , European NATO members which are not members of the EU and other countries which are candidates for accession to the EU .
The principle of the EU ' s independence in decision-making must , of course , be taken into account in this openness .
In addition , in the conclusions from the European Council in Nice the EU reiterates the importance attached to being able to call on NATO ' s funds and resources when necessary , in line with the Washington Summit Communiqué .
In such situations it is vital to ensure approval from all NATO members of guaranteed access to NATO ' s planning capacity and assumed access to previously identified NATO resources .
In contrast to my other Swedish fellow MEPs who have spoken , I take that as a yes .
It is appropriate for Turkey to be involved , while the discussion on the other aspects taken up in my question will be continued elsewhere .
I found it particularly interesting to hear the Council ' s representative mention the close link between NATO and the EU ' s military crisis management cooperation .
It is not that common - particularly in our home country Sweden - to emphasise this link between the EU and NATO .
This is also sometimes the case with regard to military cooperation .
I would also like to take this opportunity to express my extreme irritation with the answers which my Swedish Left Party colleagues received , namely that there should be only a small group to discuss UN mandates , neutrality , non-alignment and Turkish involvement in crisis management .
I would not say that the majority of the Swedish people is a small group .
I also know that these issues are being discussed in all Member States .
I have a supplementary question concerning the forces which are to make up the EU rapid reaction force .
It is a fact that the British forces and others have weapons which employ depleted uranium and that it will also be possible for these weapons to be used by the EU crisis management force .
Does the presidency have any views on the appropriateness of this ?
I believe we had the opportunity of discussing this last time I had the honour of taking part in question time in this House .
I also believe that I answered this question on that occasion .
Generally speaking , we all know the importance that not only Parliament but also the Council attach to obtaining full clarification as quickly as possible of environmental and other problems which may arise due to depleted uranium .
Mr Sjöstedt must accept responsibility for his statement .
I cannot verify it .
Obviously , it is up to each Member State to decide what equipment , etc. they will use in a European crisis management situation .
Question No 5 by ( H-0023 / 01 ) :
Subject : Long settlement procedures following road accidents in third countries In its answer to question E-2656 / 99 the Council said that ' the problem of long settlement procedures concerning road accidents in third countries has been recognised by the Institutions of the EU and they have been prepared to tackle the problem with the proposal for the fourth motor insurance directive ... '
However , the fourth directive affords no solution to settlement procedures currently under way .
What initiatives will the Council take to achieve a ' rapid , fair and reasonable solution ' for the victims of road accidents in third countries ( in this case : Switzerland ) currently involved in settlement procedures ?
I will be brief .
As the honourable Member rightly points out , the Fourth Motor Insurance Directive does not solve disputes already underway , partly because of the prescribed implementation period .
In the absence of proposals from the Commission , the Council is unfortunately unable to deal with problems of disputes already underway .
I would , of course , like to thank Mr Danielsson for his brief reply , but it does not really help me .
Mr Danielsson , I hope you appreciate the gravity of this matter .
I realise that the fourth framework directive cannot offer any direct solace , but some voluntarism on the part of the Council would be in order .
The directive affects hundreds of citizens who cannot be remunerated , who suffer a great deal , and a certain level of voluntarism would not go amiss in my opinion .
I would remind you of previous action taken .
On one occasion , the French President , Mr Chirac , flew to Bern to protect the export of 50 000 bottles of champagne and to galvanise the Swiss Government into action .
I also remember a similar case , where Belgium took action to protect Belgian citizens .
The Belgian Foreign Minister , Mr Michel , has since got involved .
I would therefore really appreciate it if the Council could generate some activity here and ensure that we can in some way help the European citizens , who genuinely become the victims of the bad handling of affairs between the European Union , the insurance companies and the Swiss insurance companies .
I am telling you , this is really about people who suffer from this state of affairs .
I have personally met people who have been fighting for their cause for over eighteen years .
This is unacceptable in my opinion .
I am the first to agree that the problems highlighted by Mr Staes are real and serious .
However , it is currently the case that , in the area discussed by Mr Staes , the Council can only act on proposals from the Commission .
We are currently awaiting such proposals .
I can however promise , for my part , that when the Swiss President visits Stockholm on Friday I will refer to the debate we have just had and point out that this is a problem which has clearly attracted interest in the European Parliament .
However , I shall do this on my own behalf , not on behalf of the Council .
Question No 6 by ( H-0026 / 01 ) :
Subject : Swedish Presidency 's rules on public access to information Will the Council give an assurance that Sweden will also be able to maintain its rules on public access to information and freedom to pass on information to the full extent while holding the Presidency-in-Office of the EU ?
According to Community law , national laws are not harmonised where they apply to Member States ' documents .
As Mr Bonde no doubt knows , Parliament and the Council are currently debating a proposal , based on Article 255.2 of the Treaty on European Union , for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council regarding public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
This proposal was tabled by the Commission on 21 February 2000 .
Mr President , it is precisely this proposal which means that , when a document is delivered from Sweden to the Commission , it is no longer Sweden that decides that it can be made public but , rather , the new rules that decide that it can be confidential . In this way , it will be prohibited , where such documents are concerned , to exercise the right to freedom of expression and public access to documents under the Swedish constitution .
And we shall , of course , be seeing the first real test of that kind of potential conflict on 6 March when Bernard Connelly ' s case is heard at the European Court of Justice .
The Court will adopt a position on whether what counts is the interpretation of the Council of Europe , Sweden and Denmark and a few other countries of officials ' right to express opinions , or whether it is , instead , the advocate-general ' s restrictive interpretation that counts .
That conflict will be clearly decided then and there , and that is why I should like to see a commitment from the Swedish Presidency that it will not under any circumstances agree to a situation in which either the regulation concerned or any other authority is able to restrict either officials ' current right to express opinions or the public ' s current right of access to information .
As the honourable Member Mr Bonde well knows , intensive discussions are now underway between Parliament , the Council and the Commission on the issue of making documents public .
Mr Bonde is fully aware of the deadline set for this work .
The aim is for us to come to an agreement by 1 May 2001 in line with the provisions set out in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I am convinced that the end result of this process will be increased openness in the EU Institutions , thanks to a large extent to the serious work done by this House on operating in a spirit of openness .
Therefore , as a representative of the presidency , I look forward with a certain amount of confidence to the no doubt difficult but very important discussions to be carried out in this area .
I am extremely moved by , and grateful for , Mr Bonde ' s concern over Swedish legislation .
I can assure you that the Swedish government will not accept any change whatsoever to Sweden ' s Freedom of the Press Act .
I ask Members to try to formulate a question , even though they will of course argue their point ; do not just make a statement or expound a doctrine to the Council , but ask a question instead , as the Rules of Procedure require .
Mr Bonde asks an important question .
I think I can give a clear answer and possibly help Mr Danielsson a little for , in several interviews last Christmas , I heard the Swedish Prime Minister state that any changes to the Constitution of Sweden , in this case Sweden ' s Freedom of the Press Act of 1766 , would create a domestic political crisis .
Prime Minister Persson wants neither to have a domestic political crisis nor to change the Freedom of the Press Act .
I would like Mr Danielsson to confirm that it is the Prime Minister ' s absolute intention that the Constitution of Sweden will not be changed in any way .
I thought that is exactly what I just said , i.e. that the Swedish Government will never accept any changes to the Freedom of the Press Act .
In addition , I think that that debate might perhaps best be continued in a more national context .
However , Mr Schmidt need not worry .
Question No 7 by ( H-0027 / 01 ) :
Subject : Tragic deaths of African immigrants on the southern Spanish coast Every week , men and women trying to enter Europe in search of work are drowned along the Andalusian coast of southern Spain . In view of the reprehensible inertia of the Spanish authorities , what steps has the Council taken to put an end to this tragic situation ?
The honourable Member ' s question applies to the Council ' s initiatives for Member State control of external sea borders and to the measures which can be taken in the country of origin to prevent illegal immigration and to stop trafficking operations .
Measures to improve the effectiveness of Member States ' control of airspace and external sea borders have mostly been drawn up within the framework of the Schengen cooperation and , now that the Treaty of Amsterdam has come into force , have now been incorporated into EU legislation .
These measures are carried out by the Member States themselves , but the Council monitors actual implementation through its relevant subordinate bodies .
Practical measures are carried out in cooperation with selected African states , for example , to prevent illegal immigration , by air or by sea , based on the decision of Schengen ' s Executive Committee of 18 December 1998 on a coordinated initiative from the document advisers .
In a decision on 28 April 1999 , the same executive committee also approved a plan for mutual placement of liaison officers to offer advice and support when security and control assignments are carried out along external borders .
In addition to issues concerning the Schengen acquis , illegal immigration to the EU constitutes one of the major issues being dealt with by the Council , based on conclusions from several meetings of the European Council - Tampere , Feira and Nice to name but a few .
As the honourable Member no doubt knows , the European Council obliged the EU to intensify cooperation to combat trafficking in human beings following the tragic events in Dover last year .
After the conclusions from the European Council meetings , which emphasised the importance of controlling migration flows , the Council has discussed both operational measures and regulations for combating trafficking in human beings .
In this regard , the Council adopted resolutions on 30 November last year which contained various operational measures to combat illegal immigration , such as the exchange of information on observed migration flows , the optimisation of the early warning system , the transfer of information on illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings and the coordination of the network for Member State liaison officers in the countries in which the illegal immigration originates .
With regard to the basic causes of flight or migration from a number of African countries , we refer you to the action plan for Morocco which was approved by the Council on 11 October 1999 and of which Parliament is hopefully aware .
Within the framework of implementing the action plan for Morocco , and as the EU is aware that the action plan must be implemented through partnership and cooperation with the Moroccan authorities , a delegation from the EU under the leadership of the presidency made a second visit to Rabat to open a dialogue with the Moroccan authorities .
The message which the presidency wished to get across during this visit , which took place on 3 October last year , was that the action plan for Morocco was the result of work originally started by the Member States and the Commission and that it was now time to ask for the reactions of the Moroccan parties and to make the necessary adjustments of the action plan so that it could be implemented jointly .
I believe that the Moroccan authorities welcomed this course of action and the idea of opening a dialogue with the EU on immigration issues .
This dialogue will take place within the framework of the association agreement with Morocco once agreement has been reached on setting up a working party on social and migration issues .
The Council ' s subordinate bodies are currently looking at a proposal from the Commission on this matter .
Mr President , I should like in fact to reformulate the question .
Mr Danielsson , I see this question as a political question , which it is ; but most of all as a humanitarian question .
You have just mentioned the Dover tragedy , which all Europeans regret , but I must say - and I have direct experience of this problem , even though I do not live in southern Spain - that there in Andalusia and also sometimes in the Canary Islands we experience a Dover every week .
What is happening in southern Spain is much more serious than Dover , Mr Danielsson , and I believe it requires some interference , if I may use this expression .
In Austria , the European Member States interfered when faced with the threat of xenophobia .
I believe this question is so serious that it requires some special action .
I am grateful for your answer , which was otherwise full and informed , but I believe a far more serious intervention is needed .
Every week , hundreds of people are detained on the Spanish coastline and every week people die , often pregnant women , and as I said the other day , children too .
Have a look at the photos that appear in the Spanish press ( I am just finishing , Mr President ) , Mr Danielsson , and you will be shocked .
Therefore I ask you to go beyond your clarifications and tell me what explanations you are requesting from the Spanish authorities and whether you will demand from them not just political measures but humanitarian ones too .
I really want to emphasise that the fact that I mentioned the catastrophe that took place in Dover was not in any way intended to diminish the events that have unfortunately occurred off the coast of Spain recently .
This is a problem that must , of course , be dealt with wherever in the Union it occurs .
The work on this problem must consist of two elements .
One element involves fighting the criminality that is associated with trafficking in human beings and the like .
However , it is perhaps even more important to carry out preventive work , namely to work in the way that the Council has chosen to do in the case of Morocco .
We have gone to the source , so to speak - to the cause of these types of migratory flows , and we have tried to put right the underlying problem .
I am convinced that with joint efforts we can achieve success .
This is an important issue under the Swedish Presidency .
I also believe that it will be an even more important matter under the Belgian Presidency , when matters of asylum and migration and that which was achieved at the Tampere Summit are to be evaluated .
We are working actively on this issue .
Mr President , when a question is asked seriously accusing the Spanish Government of inertia in relation to the death of immigrants in the Straits of Gibraltar , it shows the inanity and irresponsibility of those who use a tragedy to try to discredit their own Government in this House .
You see , the Spanish Government , through the Civil Guard , has intercepted 133 leisure craft and 2 300 dinghies in five years , resulting in 203 immigrants dead , over 200 missing and 377 rescued , and I underline rescued , all coming from Morocco .
The Spanish Government , through the Civil Guard , has implemented an information system to prevent shipwrecks in the Straits , at a cost of 13 600 million pesetas , for which Spain has requested European Union funding .
The Spanish Government has pushed forward the Action Plan on Morocco , as mentioned by the Council representative , which this Parliament approved with a budget line of EUR 10 million .
I was the rapporteur for that plan .
Now , Mr President , comes my question : when will the Council submit a progress report on the action plan for Morocco to which he has referred ?
Let me say that of course I have the greatest respect for all the measures that the Spanish government is taking in order to put right this difficult problem .
However , it is not for the president of the Council to comment on efforts by individual Member States .
As I said in my original answer , the Council is in the process of implementing an action plan for Morocco .
The dialogue to which I referred , which was introduced to the Moroccan authorities through visits , will hopefully provide concrete results as soon as possible .
The answer to the honourable Member ' s question is , therefore , that the Council has already started implementing the action plan .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , this issue does not just concern Spain .
For instance , yesterday I got a call from a road haulier from the top of whose lorry immigrants had cut a way in through the cover during the crossing .
The British border authorities then arrested these immigrants and the haulier had to pay a fine , although he was unaware immigrants were on board .
I therefore put the following supplementary question : what is the Council Presidency thinking of doing to get to grips with this type of activity ?
As the honourable Member will , I am sure , understand , it is not possible for me to comment on a specific individual case .
I can therefore only remind the house that within the framework of the Schengen regulations there is what is known as carrier ' s liability .
This means that the person who transports , and thus trafficks in , human beings , knowingly or unknowingly , can be held liable in various ways .
However , I would like to say that the fundamental discussion on these matters took place as recently as the other week in Stockholm when the ministers for justice and the interior met informally .
Although opinions concerning the methods to be used to put this problem right differ slightly in the Council , there is - as I said earlier - a common resolve to give priority to asylum and migration matters in the immediate future within the framework of the cooperation relating to the third pillar .
Mr Nogueira , I am going to let you speak , but first listen to me as President of this sitting : it is not a matter of there being parliamentary debates between Members who ask questions quite legitimately and who naturally each argue their points according to the best of their knowledge and also according to their opinions and interests .
Therefore I ask you to make a point of order .
Excuse me for judging your intentions but I imagine we may get into some reflections at cross-purposes which are not the subject of this debate .
Mr Nogueira has the floor .
Mr President , I understand you are performing your job and I shall therefore try to follow your instructions .
I simply wish to point out here , Mr President , that the country holding the presidency at the moment is Sweden and not representatives of the Spanish Government in this House , who should confine themselves to speaking as Members and not as representatives of that Government .
In any case , given that the Spanish Government will be presiding over the European Union , I believe , within a year , I hope by then it will have taken the humanitarian measures that are required in view of the Andalusian problem and the thousands upon thousands of immigrants who are suffering from the xenophobia that the Spanish Government is practising right now through the Immigration Act .
Ladies and gentlemen , I consider there should be no representative of the Spanish Government or of the various oppositions to the Spanish Government in this House .
I ask you not to make such affirmations , since it is not even laid down that there may be any and they are rejected in the formulation of the initial question itself .
We can consider this incident over , as is natural .
Mr Hernández Mollar has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , a point of order just to say that I do not represent a party or even a Government : I represent Spain .
And as a representative of Spain , when reference is made in this question to the authorities of the Spanish state , I am within my legitimate rights to defend my country , something that others do not do .
You are both protected by your legitimate rights .
I am not going to allow any more points of order .
There will not be a debate on this .
Note also that both Mr Nogueira and you are according to the law representatives of the Spanish people .
That is what the Treaties say and we all know it .
You are not representatives of either the State or the Government but of the electoral district that elected you , which coincides with the Kingdom of Spain ; this is your official title .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 8 and 9 will be taken together .
Question No 8 by ( H-0032 / 01 ) :
Subject : Women and Taliban fundamentalism What political measures is the European Union offering to women forced to endure the cruel Taliban regime ?
According to its information , how many women are subjected to this fundamentalist regime ?
Will the Council appeal to Afghanistan ' s neighbours to leave their borders open to Afghan refugee women ?
Will the European Union then grant financial support to those countries which admit refugee women ?
Question No 9 by ( H-0052 / 01 ) :
Subject : Human rights : oppression of women in Afghanistan What further steps will the Council take with a view to alleviating the appalling oppression of women in Afghanistan under the Taliban regime that so ruthlessly denies them their basic human rights ?
The Council fully shares the honourable Members ' commitment in the matter of the suffering of Afghan women under Taliban rule .
The Council regrets that the sad reality in Afghanistan shows that , so far , the Taliban have been unreceptive to arguments and pressure from outside , despite the efforts of the Union and of the international community .
Both parties to the conflict are continuing their military operations and a political solution to the conflict still seems far away .
There is a pressing need to improve the outrageous situation in respect of human rights but , under the conditions that prevail in the country , the prospects of an improvement are , unfortunately , not particularly bright .
The Taliban control around 90 % of the territory of Afghanistan .
Since the military situation in the country is changing all the time , however , the Council has no precise information on the number of women living under the Kabul regime at any given point in time .
Moreover , the catastrophic situation in respect of humanitarian circumstances and human rights in the country has led to massive emigration of refugees to neighbouring countries , particularly Iran and Pakistan , making it even more difficult to make an assessment of the population situation in Afghanistan .
The Council has often taken up the issue of the critical situation of the Afghan refugees with the host countries in the area and will continue to do so in future .
The Community and several of the Member States will also continue to provide humanitarian aid to the Afghans when the circumstances permit .
The majority of this aid benefits women .
The recently updated common position of 25 January 2001 forms the basis of the Union ' s policy in respect of Afghanistan .
The Union is continuing its efforts to bring about lasting peace , to get foreign intervention to cease and to encourage internal dialogue in Afghanistan .
In particular , the Union emphasises the importance of encouraging respect for international humanitarian law and human rights , including the rights of women and children .
The Union will therefore continue to call upon all parties to recognise , protect and promote all human rights and basic liberties and to respect the general declaration of human rights that Afghanistan has in fact signed .
We will continue to call upon the Afghan factions to cease their discriminatory policy and to recognise , protect and encourage equal rights and dignity for men and women , including access to education and health facilities , employment , personal safety and the absence of injustices and persecution , as well as emphasising the negative consequences that discriminatory policy will have for active supply of aid .
The Union will continue to support the proposal by the Secretary-General of the UN for civil human rights observers and will also continue to support such aid programmes in Afghanistan as integrate equality issues and actively attempt to encourage the participation of both men and women on equal terms .
Finally , we will be attaching particular importance to human rights when it comes to the international coordination of humanitarian aid to Afghanistan .
The Council hopes that the latest sanctions , based on UN Security Council Resolution No 13033 , which the Council is currently discussing in order to adopt the corresponding common position and regulation as soon as possible , will contribute to reducing foreign involvement and encourage a negotiated solution to the Afghan conflict .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I appreciate your reply but it does not go far enough .
Will you recommend the adoption of effective emergency measures to combat the current situation : the scourge of hunger , the scourge of cold and the scourge of diseases ?
I can put it as brutally as today ' s media : 120 children die of cold , barefoot , in temperatures fifteen degrees below zero ; over 10 million , almost 11 million women survive without a right to health care , without a right to education , without a right to work , in subhuman conditions .
We need something more than understanding , as you must realise .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , will you not recommend that some emergency measure should be adopted ?
How many more children will have to die of cold ?
How many million women will have to live without rights or freedoms ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
As I mentioned previously , the Council had the opportunity to discuss the common position on Afghanistan at its meeting at the end of January .
I can assure you that , in the discussions concerning the situation in Afghanistan , the Council , too , is aware of the dreadful witness accounts to which the honourable Member refers .
I see three paths along which the Council and the Union must proceed .
First of all , we must continue with generous humanitarian aid in order to alleviate suffering , particularly suffering by Afghan women and children .
Secondly , we must continue to exert pressure on the Taliban regime so that it ceases its systematic crimes against human rights .
Thirdly , we must give Afghanistan ' s neighbouring countries more advice and support so that they are better able temporarily to accommodate the refugees - primarily women and children - who are forced to leave Afghanistan .
Mr President , thank you for allowing me to put a supplementary question on behalf of my colleague , Mr MacCormick , who is accompanying the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland on an official visit here to Parliament today .
Mr President-in-Office , do you accept that this is a new and profoundly oppressive instance of the subordination of women and their seclusion into private life ?
For many years women in Afghanistan enjoyed a fully public existence , participating in the professions and in the world of work and dressing appropriately .
Sometimes it is said that appeals to human rights involve imposing western values on non-western cultures .
That is false , and this particular case in Afghanistan shows it to be so .
Does the Council agree that what is needed is a restitution of women 's human rights and of the fundamental respect that they are due ?
Surely more is needed than has been offered in the statement today .
Unfortunately , the honourable Member is , of course , right in his description of the fact that the situation in Afghanistan has clearly worsened in recent times .
We are facing a situation of inhuman suffering for women and children .
As I mentioned previously , the Council made an assessment of the situation at the end of January in the light of the information that was then available .
If developments continue in the wrong direction , the Council must , of course , continue to assess what can be done .
It is our hope that the clear message that was sent out , for example , by the recently adopted resolution in the UN Security Council , together with international efforts - which as we know do not just involve the Union but also a large part of the international community - will gradually produce results .
I can assure the honourable Member that the issue is being monitored very intensively by the Council so that we shall be able to take the measures that the situation requires .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 and 16 will be taken together .
Question No 10 by ( H-0040 / 01 ) :
Subject : Transport and integration What plans has the Transport Council for developing indicators and monitoring , implementing and creating a timetable for further measures for its strategy for integrating the environmental dimension into its policies as required by the Helsinki conclusions ?
Question No 11 by ( H-0041 / 01 ) :
Subject : Energy and integration What plans has the Energy Council for developing indicators and monitoring , implementing and creating a timetable for further measures for its strategy for integrating the environmental dimension into its policies as required by the Helsinki conclusions ?
Question No 12 by ( H-0042 / 01 ) :
Subject : General affairs and integration What plans has the General Affairs Council for developing a comprehensive strategy for integrating the environmental dimension into its policies , with a set of indicators , a timetable for further measures and follow-up and monitoring as required by the Helsinki conclusions ?
Question No 13 by ( H-0043 / 01 ) :
Subject : ECOFIN and integration What plans has the Economic and Financial Affairs Council for developing a comprehensive strategy for integrating the environmental dimension into its policies , with a set of indicators , a timetable for further measures and follow-up and monitoring as required by the Helsinki conclusions ?
Question No 14 by ( H-0044 / 01 ) :
Subject : Parliament and integration process How will the European Parliament be consulted about the comprehensive strategies being developed by nine Councils for integrating the environmental dimension into their policies as required by the Helsinki conclusions ?
Question No 15 by ( H-0045 / 01 ) :
Subject : Coherence of integration plans How is the Council ensuring coherence between the comprehensive strategies being developed by nine Councils for integrating the environmental dimension into their policies ?
Question No 16 by ( H-0046 / 01 ) :
Subject : Industry Council and integration What plans has the Industry Council for developing a comprehensive strategy for integrating the environmental dimension into its policies , with a set of indicators , a timetable for further measures and follow-up and monitoring as required by the Helsinki conclusions ?
The record number of questions means that this will be , if not a record length answer , then at least as detailed an answer as possible .
The Council is pleased to tell MEPs that the environmental protection requirements under article 6 of the EC Treaty are to be integrated into the elaboration and implementation of the Community ' s policies and activities , particularly with a view to encouraging sustainable development .
The strategies for incorporating environmental dimensions into the Council ' s activities will be established ahead of the European Council meeting in Gothenburg in June of this year .
At this stage , therefore , it is a touch early to report on the details of all these strategies .
The Presidency and the Commission are currently working intensively on these matters in the various Council constellations concerned .
In December 1999 in Helsinki , the Council established the timetable for the European Council in Gothenburg and called upon the Council to complete its work on incorporating the environmental dimensions into all the Council ' s activities by producing overall strategies , if possible accompanied by a timetable for the measures to be taken and a set of indicators for the sectors concerned .
Once these strategies have been established , they should help with carrying out the commitments under the Kyoto Protocol , supplement measures at national and regional level and emphasise the need for closer cooperation between different areas of sectoral policy .
Hopefully , the important role that these strategies will play for the implementation of sustainable development is therefore obvious .
The implementation and follow up of all this work has been entrusted to the Commission and the Council .
Internally within the Council , the various bodies that prepare the considerations have a duty to use the various steps of the traditional decision-making process to ensure good coordination in order , as best as possible , to meet the challenge set by the European Council .
The participation of Parliament will be ensured in accordance with the provisions of the treaty .
It must be stressed that the Council shares the view of MEPs and is prepared , together with all the political and economic players in this area , to ensure success with a holistic approach when it comes to environmental matters within the various policy areas concerned .
Concerning the integration of environmental dimensions and sustainable development in all sector policy , much can be said concerning how and to what extent the Council is applying the provisions of article 6 of the Treaty .
Without dealing with this matter exhaustively - which is not possible because it covers an incredibly wide area - I would like to emphasise some of the most relevant aspects of the situation .
First there is energy policy , which the Council considers to be one of its highest priority areas .
The Council is fully contributing to the three important objectives emphasised in the programme of the Swedish Presidency for this six months .
In this respect , the Council would remind MEPs of the Council ' s conclusions of December 1999 , which already contain a detailed preliminary set of indicators covering the area of energy in general , including the environmental consequences , the energy market and energy efficiency .
The application of these conclusions and the set of indicators is to be evaluated at two-yearly intervals .
In addition , a final decision is expected this year on the directive on the promotion of electricity from renewable sources of energy .
To prepare the way for the European Council meeting in Gothenburg in June , the Council will discuss a communication concerning the integration of the environment dimensions and sustainable development into energy policy , as well as the proposed sixth action plan at Community level for sustainable development .
Both are to be presented by the Commission in the next few weeks .
A number of measures are to commence within the framework of the action plan for increased energy efficiency based on the priorities established by the Council at its meeting on 5 December 2000 .
Where the industrial side of this overall strategy is concerned , the Council would remind MEPs that , in the report to the European Council in Helsinki , it was emphasised that a strong contribution was required from the industrial sector in order to strengthen sustainable development in the economic area .
At the same time , it set out once again the key role that this sector has in respect of improving the competitiveness of European industry and its capacity for innovation in order to encourage employment within industry and related sectors .
The horizontal nature of this issue calls for better cooperation and exchange of information between all the parties and decision-makers concerned .
Once again : hopefully , the conclusions that will be established at the European Council summit in Gothenburg will be of very great interest .
To show , through a concrete measure , the extent to which the Council is attempting to maximise the integrated strategy when it comes to environmental matters , the Council intends to draw up certain conclusions at the Council meeting in May at which both energy and industry ministers will gather together in order to take this work further .
Finally , as far as economic and financial matters are concerned , the Council wishes to inform MEPs that , at the European Council summit in Nice , the Council submitted an initial report concerning how environmental dimensions can be integrated into the economic policy of the Union and its Member States .
In this area , the Gothenburg Summit will once again follow up this report and , in particular , will investigate how a European strategy for sustainable economic development can be elaborated in which environmental dimensions are taken into consideration .
The Ecofin Council will undoubtedly be urged to apply such a strategy within its area of authority as soon as the European Council has approved such a strategy .
Mr President-in-Office , thank you for such a comprehensive answer to seven questions .
I would like just briefly to follow up one aspect , which I do not think you really touched on .
What ideas and proposals have you got to continue the process of integration into subsequent EU presidencies ?
Given the momentum of the Cardiff process and the fact that this is all beginning to happen now , it is going to be quite a lengthy process and is not going to happen overnight .
I would be interested to know what provisions you are making for the future .
The honourable Member raises a very relevant question .
As I mentioned , we in the Swedish Presidency - in close cooperation with the Commission - are currently involved in work in which we are preparing the conclusions of the European Council meeting in Gothenburg in June .
It is on that occasion that we will hopefully be able to answer the questions put by the honourable Member .
The Cardiff process , as it is known , is a new way of working as far as the European Union is concerned .
We now have experience from a number of Council constellations .
Some have done very good work , whilst others have perhaps been less successful .
We are now attempting to gather together all this experience and formulate the strategy and the ideas and proposals that the honourable Member is looking for .
I expect that , in good time before the European Council summit in June of this year , we will be able to come back to this House with a more concrete account of the thoughts that the Council has and in order to listen to the viewpoints that Parliament and its Members may have .
I would therefore beg your indulgence and ask to be given opportunity to come back to this important debate , which after all concerns one of three priority areas for the Swedish Presidency , namely the environment .
Mr President-in-Office , thank you for that very wide-ranging answer .
Unfortunately , one of the problems of wide-ranging answers and short times is that you get breadth but you do not get depth , and I would like to ask for a bit more detail .
I do find it quite extraordinary that you say it is too early to talk about the detail of some of these plans , given that the Gothenburg Summit is not far away .
I wanted to focus in particular on the General Affairs Council .
You will know that this is the only Council that has not produced any documents in line with the Council 's requests , so I would like to know when we might see some more detail on that in particular ?
Will we see a draft before Gothenburg .
If we do not have any detail on the General Affairs Council plan , can you at least say what kind of structure and shape it will take , what indicators it will be using and the follow-up and monitoring ?
The honourable Member refers to the Council constellation in which it is possibly most difficult to find the concrete framework demanded by the work on sustainable development .
I do not believe that it is any coincidence that it is precisely the work in this Council ( General Affairs ) that is taking the longest .
That is the reason why unfortunately there is not that much to report as yet .
The honourable Member thinks there is very little time left before the Gothenburg Summit .
I , on the other hand feel , think it feels as if there were an infinite amount of time left .
I am absolutely convinced that we will be able to come back and be even more concrete in respect of the ways in which the General Affairs Council can integrate environmental dimensions and the principles of sustainable development in its work .
However , I hope that we can have a common understanding that it is precisely in the matter of the General Affairs Council ' s activity that it is most difficult to find the concrete framework that I believe we all want to have .
Mr President-in-Office , thank you for your reply .
However , I would like to add my voice to the concern expressed here that there is not too much time left before the Gothenburg Summit , in terms of preparation to integrate environmental issues into various policies , something which came out of the conclusions of the Helsinki Summit .
In fact , I am very worried about how this process is to move forward .
Some who have spoken of sustainable development think the aim is somehow to make the environment a relative issue , the economy appearing to take priority over the environment .
I would like you , Mr President-in-Office , to explain your purpose regarding this matter .
At present , the sixth environmental action programme is being drafted in Parliament and this should be the ecological pillar of this programme of sustainable development .
Are you going to demand that this will in fact be the case , or is this ecological aspect just talk ?
The action plan for sustainable development is after all to be presented by the Commission .
The question should therefore , in the first instance , be put to the Members of the Commission .
However , since the question is nevertheless such an important part of the Swedish Presidency , I cannot refrain from nonetheless giving the viewpoints of the Swedish Presidency concerning the components that the strategy for sustainable development should include .
I believe it is incredibly important that , in the strategy which we hope will be adopted in Gothenburg , we will clearly include three elements that should form part of the concept of sustainable development .
These should be the ecological element , the economic element and the social element .
We know that two of these elements , namely socially sustainable development and economically sustainable development , will be discussed as early as the Stockholm Summit .
We intend to supplement the discussion in Stockholm of these two elements with ecologically sustainable development , so to speak , and then make this into a common strategy that can be adopted at the Gothenburg Summit .
Once again , however , I would like to point out that it is the Commission that is in the driving seat here .
We have every confidence in the Commission ' s ability to produce a strategy for sustainable development that makes Europe become even greener .
As a co-sponsor with my colleague , Mr Watts , of amendments which were put forward in the trans-European networks on a strategic environmental impact assessment some four years ago at least , I find it quite surprising that it is said to be too early to talk about a comprehensive strategy in this particular direction .
If it is too early to do that , surely the Council can provide us with some information about how it will properly coordinate this comprehensive strategy - when it comes into existence - across the various Councils .
I think I have partly indicated the answer to these questions already .
Obviously , each Council constellation is doing its work in this area .
In the order that was established in connection with the European Council meeting in Cardiff , there are a number of factors that each Council constellation must observe in its work and which are then put together .
As I have already pointed out , the framework will then be the strategy that the Commission will present .
It is therefore a case of putting together the Council ' s various strategies depending on which constellation is concerned .
These strategies have been drawn up in accordance with the template decided on in Cardiff , whereupon the Commission ' s work remains to be done .
For obvious reasons , I cannot go into more detail about how the Commission will draw up its strategy , but must instead ask that the question be put to representatives of the Commission .
I too should like to thank the President-in-Office for his answer .
I refer to the Transport Council and in particular to the latest report on the concrete implementation of the strategy , which showed a distinct lack of progress on many fronts in the transport field .
The strategy raises serious concerns about the transport implications of enlargement , but the report did not suggest much in the way of concrete measures .
What concrete measures does the presidency propose ?
Such measures are essential if transport is to be fully taken into account in the enlargement process which , it is to be hoped , will result in environmentally sustainable policies .
It is after all not just E for ' environment ' that is a priority task of the Swedish Presidency , but also - as the honourable Member is surely aware - E for ' enlargement ' .
The transport chapter is one of the most important chapters within the framework of the negotiations with the applicant countries .
These negotiations are based in the first instance on the existing common regulations , but this still leaves us opportunity to point out to the applicant countries the important issues concerning sustainable development that the Council is in the process of discussing , in this case in the area of transport .
The principles are thus discussed in conjunction with the negotiations with each applicant country on the transport chapter .
Mr President , this question of sustainability is indeed of great interest and the priority of the Swedish Presidency is welcome .
But what our citizens want to know is what is the Council planning to do to ensure the public dissemination of the results of the Cardiff process to all citizens and governments of Member States and accession countries ?
I do not think the Council has been particularly active in the past .
I know that the Swedish Presidency wants to change that and involve citizens more extensively and be more transparent .
I want some information about that and specifically about the Industry Council .
The Council is committed to a full-blown strategy by 2004 .
What short-term targets or actions and indicators will be needed to ensure its full development ?
How will the external impact of the industry strategy be evaluated ?
You have also referred at length to energy .
Energy efficiency is an important priority .
We have a report about to go before this House in Brussels .
Will you take any steps on the action plan for energy efficiency ?
The honourable Member has put three very extensive questions .
I will attempt to answer them as briefly as possible .
It is absolutely correct , as the Member points out , that the Council and the Commission need to devote more energy to disseminating the results of this work to the public .
Within the framework of the general efforts by the Swedish Presidency to increase openness , we plan to ensure that , after the Gothenburg Summit , the results of the Council ' s discussions are disseminated widely through the Internet , through attempting to ensure that the decisions that are taken are disseminated and put in terms in which citizens can understand them .
I know from the good contacts that we have had with the Commission that the Commission is also planning fairly extensive activities in this area .
As far as concrete indicators in the area of transport are concerned , I would ask the Member if we might return to this when , in April , the Council has adopted a resolution that concerns precisely integration in this area .
There are great many concrete plans , but the Council has not yet had opportunity to discuss this .
Consequently I must ask to be allowed to come back to you with more concrete news .
We expect the Council ( Transport ) to meet in early April of this year .
We shall then be able to obtain answers to the questions that the Member has put .
As far as the action plan for energy efficiency is concerned , it is the hope of the presidency that we shall be able to act on the proposal during the Swedish Presidency .
However , I would not dare to be more precise than this .
Question No 17 by ( H-0050 / 01 ) :
Subject : Inadequate enforcement of animal protection in Europe Yet again the media reports maltreatment of animals in the Member States .
Yet again there is a public outcry against such inconceivable cruelty . And yet again comes the Agriculture Ministers ' answer that it will be stopped .
In a report of 6 December 2000 on the situation regarding animal protection , COM ( 2000 ) 0809 / final , the Commission has demonstrated with terrifying clarity how animals in several Member States are subjected to inhuman suffering and how the competent authorities continually fail to carry out proper checks .
When will the Presidency , therefore , propose a substantial increase in resources to verify compliance with current animal welfare legislation , and appropriate , strict penalties for breaking the rules ?
The Commission report to which Mrs Paulsen refers deals in the first instance with transportation of animals .
The presidency welcomes the report , which commendably identifies a large number of problems in the Member States and also contains proposals for measures .
The report was presented on 6 December last year and has already , after having been dealt with both at working party level and in a meeting with the chief veterinary officers , been discussed by the ministers responsible .
It is now up to the Commission to present concrete proposals for measures , which the Commission has also promised in the report .
Once these proposals have been submitted , the presidency will start work in the Council working party as soon as possible .
I am very aware that the country holding the presidency does not control the agenda entirely itself .
However , initiatives can be taken in the matter of work in progress .
The Commission can also , so to speak , be pressed to produce proposals faster and more effectively .
In this context , I would like us to review the agricultural policy as such .
The export subsidies make the very worst transportation profitable .
There are many other subsidy systems that favour bad management of resources and the neglect of animals .
I know that there are legislative shortcomings , but it is better to force through the observance of laws that already exist than to wait for additional new laws .
I can only agree with what the honourable Member says .
We must not let the fact that we are waiting for concrete proposals from the Commission lull us into believing that we need not do anything but that we must wait for the Commission ' s proposals .
I can assure you that the presidency regards this matter as having the utmost priority .
Without in any way violating the restrictions that exist in the Treaty , we are leaning on the Commission with a certain amount of force to try to get better mechanisms for observance of the rules that currently exist .
Above all , improvements are required .
I believe we are entirely in agreement in this area .
The facts in this area are in many cases horrendous .
The Council and Parliament must continue to drive this forward so that we get proposals from the Commission - proposals that I am sure the Commission will present as soon as possible .
Question No 18 by ( H-0054 / 01 ) :
Subject : Radioactive pollution of the Aegean and Ionian Seas According to reports in the Greek press , as well as in the Turkish press , according to ' Le Journal du Dimanche ' , depleted uranium shells have been used by the Greek and the Turkish navies in exercises in the Aegean and the Ionian Seas for the last ten years .
The inhabitants of the islands and along the coastlines of these two seas , as well as the citizens of neighbouring countries , are concerned about possible radioactive pollution , because sea currents carry radioactivity beyond the area where the shells were fired .
Does the Council intend to set up an independent commission to investigate this matter and to inform the inhabitants of these regions and all the citizens of Europe about the real state of affairs so as to prevent an ' Aegean syndrome ' taking hold , whether or not it is justified ?
Does it intend to work towards this goal with the governments concerned ?
What preventive measures does it intend to take ?
. ( SV ) Let me first of all point out that the Council does not comment on documents - including articles in the press - that are put to the Council outside the institutional framework .
The Council would remind the House that , when it comes to radiological emergencies , under the current Community legislation the Member States have a duty to take the necessary measures to cooperate with every other Member State or other states that may be affected , as well as to notify the Commission and the Member States that are , or are at risk of being , affected .
In this respect , the Council would remind the honourable Member that it is the Commission that has authority when it comes to how the Member States are to apply the Community law in this case , for example through Directive 89 / 618 / Euratom on informing the general public about health protection measures to be applied and steps to be taken in the event of a radiological emergency and Directive 96 / 29 / Euratom laying down basic safety standards .
Moreover , the Council has not made any proposal that , if necessary , preventive measures beyond what is already specified in the Community law are to be taken .
Mr President-in-Office , I should like to hear your views on cooperation between this Member State and the institutions and what you think the European Commission could do .
I think that you too are aware , as is European public opinion following the Balkans syndrome , that we need to investigate promptly and take action to prevent other syndromes .
If there is no danger , then the public should be informed , because the Aegean and Ionian islands are worried that there may be repercussions not just on the health of the locals but also on tourism .
As I mentioned in my earlier answer , the question concerning the Member States ' observance of the rules that are relevant in this case is covered by the Commission ' s area of authority .
It is therefore not possible for the Council to comment on the question that has been put .
However , in very general terms let me emphasise that it is obviously important that matters concerning depleted uranium are considered and handled with great care and prudence and in accordance with the precautionary principle to which the Member herself made reference .
I would remind you of the important debate on this matter that we had in his Chamber approximately a month ago .
We are now awaiting the results of the various investigations that were discussed at that time in order to be able to debate the matter further .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed , questions that have not been given an answer will receive one in writing , with the exception of Questions Nos 28 , 30 , 40 , 42 , 43 and 44 , which were submitted too late according to the Council , and Question No 32 , which has been withdrawn by its author .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Reorganisation and winding-up of insurance undertakings
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0019 / 2001 ) by Mrs Peijs , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the reorganisation and winding-up of insurance undertakings ( 8975 / 3 / 00 - C5-0521 / 2000 - 1986 / 0080 ( COD ) ) .
Commissioner Nielson , thank you so much for taking over from your colleague Mr Bolkestein .
As the proposal is rather complex , I will not ask you any difficult questions this evening , which is just as well , I think .

On 23 December 1986 , the Commission presented the proposal concerning a directive on the winding-up and reorganisation of insurance undertakings to Parliament , and the proposal was adopted .
Approval at first reading by Parliament followed on 14 March 1989 .
The directive was to spend the next eleven years on a shelf at the Council of Ministers .
Two stumbling blocks were mainly to blame for this : in the first instance , the Gibraltar issue and the territorial implications this had , and secondly , the connection between Articles 10 and 11 .
The latter mainly concerned the connection between a guarantee fund for the policyholders and any preferential position they may have in bankruptcy legislation .
The latter was touched upon very briefly at the most recent reading , but fortunately , we managed to knock this on the head during a committee discussion in Parliament .
The second reading is now formally before Parliament .
This directive has the same goal as the proposal on the winding-up and reorganisation of credit institutions , namely the mutual recognition of legislation .
This directive guarantees that insurance undertakings are wound up or reorganised according to the principles of unity and universality .
This means that the insurance undertaking must be wound up in accordance with legislation applicable in the country where the insurance undertaking has its registered office by the competent authority in the same country ; this is what is referred to as the unity principle .
This competent authority must then involve all branch offices and sub-offices in the European Union in the winding-up process , irrespective of where in the European Union these are based .
This is the universality principle .
The directive must ensure that creditors are treated equally .
Irrespective of the country in which claims originate , the claims are always dealt with in the country of the registered office .
That is why creditors all have the same rights , and are no longer at the mercy of the country in which the claim is generated .
In contrast to the second reading of the reorganisation and winding-up of credit institutions , this directive is more consistent and is structured in a logical manner , in my opinion .
I would therefore recommend my fellow MEPs to adopt the Council ' s common position without any amendments .
And on this Valentine ' s Day , this seems a nice , unanimous position for the Council , the Commission and Parliament to hold .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Peijs , I would first like to wholeheartedly thank the rapporteur for her work and for her clear explanations , which once again spelt out to us what this directive is all about .
I would like to add that this directive covers the whole aspect of the creation of an internal market for financial services and is therefore to be welcomed , as we still have a great deal to do to strengthen , improve and consolidate this market and to remove existing blockades .
The common position has succeeded in bringing the rights of insurance undertakings into line with the legitimate interests of creditors . The common position is well balanced and , what is more , it is the result of lengthy negotiations to reach a compromise .
The Council has allowed eleven years to elapse .
In view of fact that the procedure has been allowed to run on for far too long , a speedy approval of the common position would be an important step in the interest of creditors and insurance undertakings alike .
To conclude , I would like to say something so as to avoid any misunderstandings .
Throughout the whole of Europe , it is exceptional for insurance undertakings to be wound up , as they are subject to very strict scrutiny , they are very well managed and relations between customers and management are good .
The lack of an EU legislative framework is , nevertheless , a potential risk and could lead to serious problems in isolated cases .
The idea and the need for a directive are therefore justified and the outcome is to be welcomed .
Mr President , the directive on the reorganisation and winding-up of insurance undertakings fills a major gap in the European Union 's financial services legislation .
It is a top priority in the creation of a fully integrated market in financial services , as pointed out at the Lisbon European Council .
It will ensure mutual recognition of legislation and proceedings as well as an appropriate level of protection for policy holders .
It will avoid conflicts of jurisdiction and the unequal treatment of insurance creditors .
The result will be quicker procedures and more protection for policy holders .
The Council ' s common position , which has been submitted for consideration to Parliament , is fully consistent with the essential objectives pursued in the Commission 's original and amended proposals .
It is also consistent with other legal instruments on winding-up and insolvency agreed within the internal market .
I would like to thank the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee and especially the rapporteur , Mrs Peijs , for their judicious and efficient handling of this file . They recommend that the text of the common position be kept as it is without any amendment .
They have considered that the objectives pursued in this area have been duly preserved through the common position .
They have understood that the difficult balance reached on this technically complex text , after so many years of discussion , should not be put in jeopardy .
I fully share their opinion .
The Commission invites the plenary to follow the recommendation of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee and to approve without amendments the entire text of the common position .
This directive symbolises European cooperation , and the calmness of this moment in the plenary does not , in my view , reflect the magnitude of what is actually happening here .
It is very clear that it takes a lot of time and seems very complicated now and then , but at the end of day our cooperation produces solutions to problems that can only be solved through systematic cooperation .
So the system works .
The debate is closed .
I am sure the serene attitude is due to the composure of the rapporteur .
The vote , if any , will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The Union and Macao beyond 2000
The next item is the report ( A5-0017 / 2001 ) by Mr Soares , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament : The European Union and Macao : beyond 2000 [ COM ( 1999 ) 484 - C5-0169 / 2000 - 2000 / 2099 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my report on the European Union and Macau was discussed twice in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy , which then unanimously approved it .
As a matter of fact , I had previously incorporated some conclusions from the opinion issued by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
In December 1999 , in other words , just over a year ago , Macau stopped being a special territory under the administration of Portugal , which it had been , peacefully and with the consent of the people , for 450 years . It is today a Special Administrative Region that is part of the People ' s Republic of China , in accordance with the Chinese principle of ' one country , two systems ' .
I wish to take this opportunity to say that there is a serious mistake in the report , in item No 9 of the explanatory statement , where it says , in repeating this principle , ' one system , two countries ' . The Chinese idea is completely the opposite - ' one country , two systems ' .
This is a mistake which still needs to be corrected .
As a Portuguese citizen and having enjoyed direct constitutional responsibility for Macau , I must state that Macau ' s handover from Portuguese administration to the Chinese was done consensually and with enormous goodwill under the terms of the 1987 Joint Sino-Portuguese Declaration , which is still in force today and which will remain so for the next fifty years .
This last year has also been peaceful and consensual , according to first-hand information that I have received from various sources and , in particular , from the Portuguese and Macanese who still live and work there .
I have already passed this information to the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
As we all know , the policy of the People ' s Republic of China towards Hong Kong and now towards Macau seeks to achieve a rapprochement between Taiwan and China and , eventually , to integrate it into China .
Despite the fact that there have been , and still are , minor and inevitable problems with this integration in the case of Hong Kong , a much larger , more populous and richer territory than Macau , albeit with a much more recent past , it is widely known that the these two territories have , by and large , enjoyed a relatively smooth transition .
As I pointed out , Macau was never a colony . It was a territory under Portuguese administration , by agreement between Portugal and China .
Following Portugal ' s ' Carnation Revolution ' , when I arrived for the first time at the United Nations in 1974 as Minister for Foreign Affairs , the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs said to me , ' Be careful , do not decolonise Macau , because Macau is not a colony and never has been . '
In 1949 , when Mao Tse Tung came to power , he said ' Portugal has spent 400 years in Macau without ever having waged war against China . ' This was a very important point for Macau , and still is .
Although Macau is not as rich as Hong Kong , its development in many areas in the last ten years has been extraordinary .
Formerly , gambling alone ruled , but today there is a very strong sector producing goods for tourists and toys and various objects , and many other industries , including the textile industry .
Relations between Hong Kong and Macau are and have always been excellent . It is worth bearing in mind , and I shall take this opportunity to remind Parliament , that every territory has its peculiarities .
They are all different and the European Union should therefore deal with them all as separate issues even though they are closely related .
These territories must not be lumped together , particularly in terms of the European Union ' s representation there .
Portugal has historically enjoyed excellent relations with the People ' s Republic , which are still improving at various levels . This year , there were several visits to Portugal by Chinese Ministers and by Portuguese Ministers to China .
Relations are still very close between Portugal and Macau .
The current Governor of Macau , Mr Edmond Ho , who was actually appointed by the Chinese Government , paid an official visit to Portugal this year . As a matter of fact , this was his first trip abroad .
Under the terms of the Joint Sino-Portuguese Declaration , the People 's Republic of China made a commitment to respecting the economic system and the political and legal system instituted by Portugal when it established the Special Administrative Region of Macau for the next 50 years .
As a founding member of the World Trade Organisation , Macau is a signatory to the International Pact on Civil and Political Rights and the International Pact on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights . It has a kind of economic and trade delegation called the Macau Economic and Trade Office .
I say ' kind of ' , because this delegation is not recognised by the European Union , since responsibility for foreign relations and defence lies with Beijing . In principle , the European Union is supposed to appoint its own permanent representative in Macau .
This is important and I believe that it has already been done .
Portugal left Macau with a complete , western-style democratic legal system , with political institutions that function well , with a Chief Executive appointed by Beijing replacing the former Portuguese Governor , with a Legislative Assembly of 23 members , independent courts and a Court of Final Appeal as well as an efficient police force .
The Joint Sino-Portuguese Declaration defines civil , political , economic , social and cultural rights , which have been respected , and the territory does not have the death penalty .
Portugal enjoys excellent relations with the People ' s Republic of China , as I said , and continues to have a considerable presence in Macau through its investors and businesses and in the civil service and the liberal professions .
There is a Portuguese high school in Macau which is thriving and where Portuguese continues to be taught .
Macau can and must retain its importance for the European Union as a centre for business and investment , not only in the territory itself , but also for the business that is traditionally entered into there with China and with other Asian countries .
Because Macau is a Special Administrative Region with its own cultural identity and a population that is mixed , although largely Chinese , the European Union can only gain by maintaining a presence there , for both of these reasons .
I must therefore insist that the European Union sends a permanent representative to Macau and that we step up economic , political and cultural relations between the European Union and Macau .
The European Union must not lose interest in Macau , because what happens over the next 50 years in this territory , which is under special jurisdiction , depends to a certain extent on the vigilance with which the European Union watches over Macau .
Mr President , with Mário Soares ' s particular knowledge of Macau and the close attention that he has paid to developments in the Special Administrative Region that has been created there , he has provided this House with an extremely important and timely document .
His report starts with an analysis of the institutional and legislative framework that has been designed for the region and of the potential of the modern democratic structures that these have lead to . The report takes account , of course , of the particular culture and the specific historical , social and economic bonds that underpin Macau ' s relationship with Portugal and the European Union on the one hand , and with the People ' s Republic of China , on the other .
In this way , the report outlines the expectation which the clearly positive changes in the Special Administrative Region have confirmed , even though we know that we cannot yet take account of as many tangible figures as we would like , in order to have a true picture of these first twelve months - in fact a very short time .
If , as we hope , and as the Soares report has already indicated , these positive aspects are fully confirmed , we must see this as the result not only of the careful preparation for the transfer of sovereignty on the part of Portugal and China , but also of the special commitment demonstrated by Macau ' s current authorities . These positive aspects are also , and it is important to remember this , the result of the truly outstanding action of the last Portuguese Governor of Macau , Vasco Rocha Vieira , on whose merits Parliament had the opportunity to hear the specially authorised statement by Commissioner Patten , in the December 1999 plenary .
The benefit of this action on the ground was to guarantee lasting respect for fundamental rights , amongst other things , and this was a serene and heartfelt fight without the histrionics that characterised the fight for which the Sakharov prize-winners were rewarded , and yet it was carried out with similar efficiency and with equally far-reaching effects .
The very positive aspects that I have just mentioned must not , however , lead the European Union ' s authorities to pay less close attention to later developments .
My justification for saying this consists of a few points , which are perhaps explained by the differences in outlooks .
We know that , in the meantime , changes have been made to the company code that are likely to clash with the rules on transparency in the field of invitations to tender . We also know that the Portuguese language is being used less , both at an official level and in schools and social situations .
There even appear to be signs of changes to electoral law and to certain aspects of public administration and the classification of civil servants , the health system and higher education .
It is to be hoped that these are superficial aspects that do not herald a moving away from the European Union and a diminishing of Macau ' s autonomy for the sake of practices employed in other countries in the region or for the sake of a watered-down situation that is less acceptable to China itself .
Nevertheless , the Soares report reiterates the need for the statute and the legal framework adopted for Macau to be fully respected , both with regard to fundamental rights and to the other rights and principles of democratic law that stem from the Joint Sino-Chinese Declaration of 1987 and the Basic Law of 1993 , the thrust of which it would be useful to summarise .
This law insists on the need to stimulate cooperation between Europe and Macau in all areas , because the importance of rapidly appointing a representative of the European Union to that Special Administrative Region is clear .
For these reasons , congratulating Mr Soares once again , I wish , in conclusion , to express my support and my praise for his report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I rise to speak for two basic reasons .
Firstly , to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Soares , on his excellent report , with which he honours this Parliament , and to highlight three points made in this report : firstly , the need for Europe to remain vigilant over the autonomy and specific character of the Special Administrative Region of Macau ; secondly , the need for the European Union to maintain a physical presence there through a representative ; and thirdly , the need for closer relations and dialogue with that territory , as Mr Soares made very clear .

As for my second reason , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my speech is intended to mark an important point in the debate on this report , because in addition to being a long-standing member of this House , the rapporteur is a former President of one of the Member States of the European Union with a history that honours us all , not only the members of his party or his compatriots , but all Europeans .
This report , which bears his stamp and his signature , increases the credibility of the European Parliament . It is worth highlighting that it is not only the contribution he has made in this document but also the active and resolute way in which he has always fought and continues to fight in this House to defend the highest values of the European project itself .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Macau is a unique case , a case which is culturally specific and pivotal in the historic relationship between Europe and China through the intermediary of Portugal .
We feel that preserving and valuing these links under the new framework initiated in December 1999 is a highly appropriate proposal .
The European Union is Macau ' s second largest trading partner and its third largest investor as a result of the trade and cooperation agreement that has already been in force since 1993 and of other one-off agreements between the European Union and Macau in various other areas .
Lastly , the Portuguese administration has made a huge effort , especially in the last twenty years , to modernise the territory and its infrastructures . In its negotiations with China , it managed to ensure the establishment in Macau of an institutional legislative framework , which is of particular importance from a European perspective , for the particular way in which we see Asia and the Pacific and in terms of our relations with the great nation of China .
The main quality of this report and of the motion for a resolution that we are now debating is that it has rigorously and punctually respected the timetable and has not let Macau fall into oblivion .
In saying this I am not detracting from the importance of the report .
On the contrary , I consider it to be extremely appropriate , precisely in order to prevent our documents in this area being interred in a graveyard for good intentions and ending up in a drawer or , even worse , in the bin .
Looking around the Chamber , one might think this was a Portuguese debate , but what I wish to state once again is that the 1999 handover also marked the fact that Macau became a European issue of the first order .
The timeliness of this Parliamentary report by Mr Soares exposes the main weakness of the Commission , which is not to have marked this fact . This clearly warrants our criticism .
First of all , it is unfortunate that a year should have passed without the Commission publishing the annual report on EU-China relations that it promised and which we were expecting . Secondly , it is also unfortunate that , as far as we know , no one has yet been appointed to take charge of bilateral cooperation in Macau , which runs counter to the announcement made over a year ago in the Commission Communication to the Council and the European Parliament .
We are all perfectly familiar with the reasons why we must maintain and improve bilateral cooperation with the new Special Administrative Region and it is not worth repeating them now .
I wish to congratulate Mr Soares on his excellent report and I hope that the Commission will now be able to make up for lost time and step up and better organise cooperation with Macau .
I hope that it will address the challenges facing us more actively and that it will duly reread and comply with its own communication of 1999 in time .
Mr President , I would like to commend the rapporteur on his excellent report .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on Hong Kong , the current status of the Macau Special Administrative Region holds obvious interest to me , and I have been fortunate enough to visit the region twice within the last year .
On the positive side , Macau 's economy has progressed significantly since the handover , enjoying a 4 % growth in GDP during the year 2000 .
Another positive development is Edmond Ho Hau-Wah 's stated intention of breaking up the casino monopoly and aiming to create an Asian equivalent of Atlantic City .
I welcome the fact that Macau 's crime rate has also improved .
Statistics show that the overall drop in crime is around 5 % and that the police have significantly reduced gang-related crime involving the gambling industry .
On the negative side the unemployment rate has reached 7 % causing unrest among workers .
Their fears and uncertainties have been compounded because of their belief that immigrants will pose a threat to future employment .
Macau does boast a sound education system but its economic dependence on gambling and textiles , and its failure to attract high-tech industries do not augur well for the future employment prospects of the young population .
Other worrying developments are the claims of police brutality made by Falangong practitioners who were refused entry to Macau during the visit of President Jiang and who were also denied the right to protest against the government 's crackdown on the group .
Furthermore , President Jiang 's plea to Macau 's government not to allow criticism of Beijing raises fundamental questions about the Chinese Government 's commitment to allow freedom of expression which is fundamental to the success of the one-country two-systems policy .
Overall , progress has been made since the handover and that progress can be described as satisfactory .
However , it is imperative , as also with Hong Kong , to continue monitoring to ensure that there is no erosion of democracy , human rights and freedoms .
I can assure the last speaker that this is not simply an issue of interest to the Portuguese .
It is an issue of interest , not only to the European Union , but to the world and those who want to see Macau and Hong Kong progress , so that basic freedoms are guaranteed and are not eroded by the country to which they have been handed back .
. ( DE ) Mr President , quite frankly , I thought I was going to speak after the Commissioner and so I have only just arrived .
I just wanted to tell you that I read this text with great interest .
I am of the view that the European Union should not underestimate this issue .
The thing is that we , as the European Union , live on this Eurasian continent and a large part of humanity is crowded into Asia .
For us , the relationship between Europe and its Asiatic partners is of strategic importance .
In this , Macao is of great importance because , in this region , a European cultural tradition has become intermingled with an Asian tradition and a whole host of thoughts about human rights and freedom has sprung up .
Despite its relatively small size , Macao has an extraordinary bridging function .
That is why I am of the view that we Europeans must never abandon Macao . We must also acknowledge that we are not entirely innocent in the fate of many people who lived there in the past and , possibly , of many who will live there in the future .
That is why we have an obligation which goes far beyond what Portugal generously took on .
I am pleased that Mr Cushnahan and I are speaking in this debate .
This gives us a chance to explain that this situation is not only a legacy of the former Portuguese colonial empire but an essentially European concern .
We as Europeans must recognise that Asia is our most important strategic partner and whatever brings the European body of thought closer to the Asian body of thought and vice versa , and whatever consolidates thoughts of democracy and the rule of law on the Asian continent , is not only in the interest of people living there but it is also a basic interest of the European Union .
Mr President , the European Commission welcomes Mr Soares 's report on the Commission 's communication ' The European Union and Macao beyond 2000 ' and we also welcome the draft motion for a resolution .
I am happy to note that Parliament and the Commission have reached similar overall conclusions on how to approach the future for Macao .
I welcome the positive developments that have occurred in the Macao special administrative region ( SAR ) over the past year since the handover .
We attach great importance to the people of Macao being able to continue to live their lives with the rights and freedoms they have enjoyed for so long .
We share Parliament 's view regarding the importance of the 1987 joint declaration and 1993 Basic Law as the main instruments for defining the status of the Macao special administrative region .
This is why the Commission has given its commitment to watching very closely the process of transition and to helping the smooth implementation and retention of the ' one country , two systems ' principle .
In the first year since the handover , Macao has established the required administrative institutions and adjusted to the new situation .
The government , the legislative council and the judiciary have all made impressive efforts to adapt to the new situation .
Macao has also been active internationally in its own right in areas such as telecommunications , civil aviation and investment protection , affirming its individuality and autonomy in areas covered by the Basic Law .
Like Parliament , we also welcome the fact that Macao has been provided with a modern legal system , including an express ban in the penal code on the enforcement of the death penalty .
A modernised legal system will be of great benefit when applying the Basic Law under the ' one country , two systems ' principle .
On our side , we will support their correct implementation where possible , including through our cooperation programme and particularly our legal cooperation project .
We share the view of the importance of the 1993 EU-Macao Trade and Cooperation Agreement remaining in force to strengthen relations .
We consider the agreement is fundamental to EU-Macao relations and is the basic requirement for the development of increased business cooperation , especially business-to-business links .
It is also the basis for improved cooperation in those areas where Macao has retained its autonomy .
We intend to develop our trade as much as we can and the situation is improving .
We will be supporting efforts to position the EU better in Macao by encouraging more investment by European companies and by helping Macau diversify its economic base when the time is right .
We are pleased that last year was good for Macao 's economy .
Economic growth was positive , reaching 4 % for the first time since 1996 .
The European Parliament report and the resolution call for a dynamic approach in the activities of the EU-Macao Joint Committee .
I can report that EU-Macao relations remain extremely good .
The Joint Committee held its annual meeting in Brussels on 30 June 2000 .
This provided an excellent forum for both sides to exchange candid views and detailed information on the work in progress of transforming Macao into a special administrative region .
They also discussed ways to improve and strengthen bilateral links , including through cooperation and trade and economic relations based on the recommendations of the Commission communication .
With regard to cooperation , the resolution calls upon the Commission to settle quickly the question of appointing a technical cooperation officer for Macao .
Here I would have liked to be able to report that the nominated technical cooperation officer had been appointed in November as had been planned .
Unfortunately the selected candidate withdrew at the final stage after a selection procedure that lasted several months .
We continue to consider the appointment of the technical cooperation officer very important .
All in all , the situation in Macao has been positive .
The Commission is finalising its first annual report on Macao and hopes to transmit it shortly to Council and Parliament .
Parliament 's report itself is timely , as its observations and recommendations will provide another source of advice to draw on when finalising the Commission 's first annual report .
As I have already mentioned , we attach great importance to maintaining the rights , freedoms and democratic principles of Macao and its people .
The Commission 's report will look closely at the full range of issues that have characterised Macao 's daily life during the first year of the SAR 's existence .
Finally I am pleased to report that the Chief Executive of Macao , Mr Edmond Ho will visit Brussels on 7 May 2001 .
I know that the Commission will be keen to discuss with him the most recent developments in Macao .
I hope that some of you will also have the opportunity to meet him .
I can assure Parliament that the Commission will continue to maintain an active watch on events in Macao , especially those regarding democratic principles and human rights .
The Commission remains committed to assisting Macao wherever possible and to helping it develop and realise its full potential .
We also remain fully committed to keeping Parliament informed of progress throughout Macao 's transition process .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
EC / Mexico Agreement ( economic partnership , political coordination and cooperation )
The next item is the report ( A5-0036 / 2001 ) by Mrs Lucas , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing the Community position within the EC-Mexico Joint Council with a view to the adoption of a decision implementing Articles 6 , 9 , 12 ( 2 ) ( b ) and 50 of the Economic Partnership , Political Coordination and Cooperation Agreement [ COM ( 2000 ) 739 - C5-0698 / 2000 - 2000 / 0296 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , my report refers to the fourth consultation of the European Parliament on the EU / Mexico Agreement .
Since it is also probably the last consultation for the foreseeable future it has particular importance .
The report concerns aspects of the agreement that are not covered by the so-called interim agreement , i.e. services , investment and aspects of intellectual property .
From a European perspective , the EU / Mexico agreement is generally seen as a milestone in the forthcoming relations with Latin American countries .
It has the largest scope of any agreement the EU has ever concluded with a third country , providing EC operators with more rapid preferential treatment than Mexico has ever before granted to any of its preferential partners .
Indeed , with this agreement , the EU has not only succeeded in achieving NAFTA parity but has actually achieved a result that goes beyond NAFTA privileges in a number of areas .
Among those are the ones that I focus on in this report .
However , I believe that some of these gains for the EU are being made at the expense of the people of Mexico .
Although my report approves the proposal for a Council decision , it does so with some reluctance and with a number of serious reservations and recommendations for reform which I should like to set out now .
First and most important is the issue of poverty in Mexico .
It is essential that the agreement more fully reflects the fact that Mexico has an ambiguous position in terms of its development status .
On the one hand , it is a member of the OECD and thus is considered to be one of the industrialised countries ; but , on the other hand , it is a country with 95 million inhabitants where well over half the population - 65 % - live in poverty .
That means it is absolutely essential to take seriously the coherence principle of the European Union .
To me , the bottom line must be that a reinforced economic partnership with Mexico and better access to Mexican markets must not contradict development objectives and must not exacerbate the existing asymmetry between the two parties .
It is therefore of considerable concern that in a significant number of places the agreement is likely to hinder , rather than to support , poverty eradication , human rights and sustainable development .
I will outline some of these in a moment .
A good example is the fact that the agreement foresees the almost total prohibition of performance requirements which will prevent the Mexican side from specifying the terms on which it would like to see trade and foreign investment .
That means that Mexico will not be able to ensure that trade and foreign investment support its own emerging markets and its own development objectives .
Looking at the agreement in more detail , starting with services : For the Commission , the negotiated trade package in services is : " of key offensive interest " .
Indeed the liberalisation covers very nearly all sectors .
So its terms and scope are very far-reaching .
But , more worryingly , it contains a stand-still clause which , by prohibiting Mexico from introducing any further standards and conditions in the future , could seriously damage the social and economic development and policy autonomy of this country .
Furthermore the agreement states that : " no mode of supply is a priori excluded from coverage " .
If that implies that education and health might be covered without safeguards , this is an area of further concern .
I am sure Members will recall that in the European Parliament in 1999 , in our response to the approach to the Millennium Round , we made a specific demand that health and education be excluded from the revision of the GATS .
It would therefore be inconsistent to include education and health in the EU / Mexico agreement as sectors that could be liberalised .
Finally , Mexican civil society groups believe that the Mexican negotiators went beyond their powers in making this agreement , since the agreement establishes the powers of the Joint Council to dismantle Mexican trade and services legislation , which clearly should be within the remit of the legislative power .
Parliament should support civil society in Mexico , which is asking for this unconstitutional provision to be changed .
On investment , the different economic crashes we have seen in Mexico make investment a particularly sensitive issue .
However , the definition of investment in the agreement includes direct investment , real estate and purchases of securities , and therefore seems to open the door to speculative movements and thus to further financial instability .
I could go on citing more problems that we can see in the area of intellectual property rights , on conflict resolution and , indeed , on human rights .
But to conclude in terms of where we need to go now , we need to have a clear statement from the Commissioner about the agenda of the Joint Council meeting on 27 February .
There are a number of key issues which I have raised which must be on that agenda .
I would like to know from the Commissioner present if and when we will get the agenda of this meeting , if he is going to include the kinds of issues that I have raised in my speech - and also in the report itself - and when we will get the results of that meeting of 27 February .
The Joint Council meeting must include the competences of the Joint Council along with the Mexican constitution , ensuring their compatibility .
It must include effective monitoring of human rights .
It must include a commitment to coherence and compatibility of trade measures and it must ensure that the European Parliament is closely associated with this agreement in all its future changes .
Mr President , before I begin my intervention on this report , I should like to ask that it be recorded in the Minutes that in accordance with Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure the explanatory statement in the report under discussion is the responsibility of the rapporteur alone and only reflects her personal opinion , not the opinion of the Committee on Industry . There is no reason why citizens should know our Rules and certain statements may lend themselves to confusion and give rise to misunderstandings .
Thank you , Mr President , and now I shall begin my intervention .
The proposal for a decision contained in the Commission proposal , which is the subject of the report we are beginning to debate , is the culmination of a long process that began in 1995 with the signing of a joint declaration between the European Community and Mexico . This declaration established some objectives that were to become an agreement that would replace the Cooperation Agreement signed in 1991 , in order to strengthen and enhance the political , economic and commercial relations between the European Union and Mexico .
The Economic Partnership , Political Coordination and Cooperation Agreement , also known as the Global Agreement , was signed in December 1997 .
Therefore , the Commission proposal on which Parliament has been consulted must be considered in the context of the Global Agreement signed by the European Union and Mexico - the most important agreement the European Union has ever signed , I think it is worth remembering .
This is also the context of the interim agreement dealing with the economic and commercial aspects of the Global Agreement , the aim of which was to allow negotiations to begin as soon as possible for the liberalisation of the commercial aspects of Community competence included in the Global Agreement .
With regard to the proposal for a decision with which we are concerned and the agreements it deals with , my Group sees them as being very positive because they strengthen the possibility for Community operators to act in spheres of particular interest by guaranteeing them access to the Mexican market on equal or even better terms than those enjoyed by NAFTA countries in the area of services , investments , payments and respect for intellectual property rights , with the resulting benefits and legal guarantee that all this may bring to the European Union .
These considerations by themselves would justify the unreserved approval of the proposal for a decision by my Group and , I hope , by this Parliament as well .
Furthermore , in addition to the economic advantages , my Group is well aware of the political benefits arising from the adoption of this proposal for a decision , and also that the European Union-Mexico Joint Council , which will meet at the end of this month , needs to adopt it , because only once it is adopted can the provisions on political dialogue and cooperation in the areas of education , combating poverty , and social and environmental matters come into force .
My Group in particular and this Parliament in general have always been highly sensitive to such questions , because they are the guarantee that the economic benefits which will undoubtedly accrue from the overall agreement will help promote a political system that is more democratic , more respectful of human rights and more in tune with social justice .
Mr President , as chairman of Parliament ' s Delegation for relations with the countries of Central America and Mexico , I wish to congratulate the participants on concluding the final stage of one of the most ambitious projects the European Union has ever undertaken .
I should also like to take advantage of the presence of the Mexican Ambassador to the European Union , the diplomat , Jaime Zabludovsky , to congratulate him on his active contribution to this agreement .
This agreement establishes the bases for closer relations between the European Union and Mexico .
In this respect , I should like to emphasise that , on this occasion , we have managed not only to obtain institutional declarations , but we have created a legal framework that will bring together these two peoples who share many common values , if both parties are able to take full advantage of the potential of this agreement .
To this extent , I wish to emphasise that , in addition to the mechanisms that have been established in the fields of political cooperation and trade , an instrument has also been created to boost and further cooperation in more than thirty different areas .
Almost three years have passed since Parliament delivered a favourable opinion on the interim agreement between the European Union and Mexico .
One year later , Parliament also expressed its support for the overall agreement , which was then ratified by the Fifteen Member States of the Union .
Throughout this period , we have witnessed the great changes that have taken place in Mexican society and which have culminated in what can be called a genuine celebration of democracy : last July ' s elections .
On this subject , I should like to take this opportunity to pay public tribute to President Ernesto Zedillo for his commitment to democratic reform .
I should also like to convey to the new leaders of the Mexican administration my sincerest hope that they will continue in the current direction and repay the trust that the Mexican people has invested in them .
To conclude , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we need to call for two things : firstly , we must ask the Commission , in the person of Commissioner Nielson , through the intermediary of the European Union delegation in Mexico , to undertake an assessment on the ground of the agreement ' s potential for trade and cooperation and to ensure that his results are distributed to the various parties concerned .
Secondly , we must once again ask the parties concerned in the Chiapas conflict to maximise their efforts in dialogue based on respect for democratic principles , so that an end can be brought to an anachronistic situation that has no place in modern society .
Mr President , I should also like to express our solidarity with the people of El Salvador , who have , once again , fallen victim to a natural disaster .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as the Nicaraguan writer Sergio Ramírez has pointed out , the political map of Latin America can be interpreted today by means of some diverse and highly contrasting landmarks .
One of these could be the ' tequila effect ' which has irradiated from Mexico since the last presidential elections , a genuine example of civic pride which , we trust , will have beneficial consequences to help shape the new political map of the United Mexican States . There we hope to see a separation of powers and guarantees that governments will alternate in power , and we are sure that the necessary interrelationship between economic modernisation and political modernisation will increasingly prosper .
Of course Mexico is a country of light and shade , like any country in the European Union .
That is why I noticed the excessively critical tone used by the rapporteur of this report in her explanatory statement regarding the social and economic situation in this Latin American republic .
I believe we should be careful in our statements and I am surprised by the rapporteur ' s doubts on questions of Mexican constitutional competences when dealing with trade in services .
With regard to investments , I do not think the assessments made are appropriate , since the degree of internationalisation of the Mexican economy in recent years has been remarkable , to the point where Mexico is the country that has most used the Community financial instrument known as the ECIP . This is clearly reflected in the growth in investment by foreign companies and in the free trade agreements , both the one signed with the United States and Canada and the recent one with the European Union .
In the latter case , Mexico has made a strategic effort to diversify its relations , which had focused so much on the United States , and this will moreover provide European goods with tariff treatment similar to that given to US goods , especially with regard to industrial products .
We shall obviously be voting in favour .
Mr President , in the short space of time available to me I must say that we consider the proposal for a Council decision that we are debating today to be positive overall , because at the time we were pleased with the signing and subsequent ratification of the agreement with Mexico , because we understand that it is an important - I might even say unheard-of - step in the relations of the European Union with a Latin American country .
But this agreement , like everything else in life , can be improved .
We understand of course that the agreement is a trading issue , but we feel there is a lack of concrete measures on the development of Mexico , our sister country .
Similarly , nowhere in the functions of the Joint Committee ( Article 44 ) did we find provision for a study of the repercussions of putting the association agreement into practice , something that we believe is frankly essential .
We also regret that there is not even a mention of the environment in this agreement , not even -as my colleague Caroline Lucas has pointed out - a reference to the Protocol on Biosafety within the sections on intellectual property .
Lastly , I must point out the profound inconsistency in the fact that , whereas in Mexico the agreement has been ratified by institutions elected by the people , in the European Union , which thinks of itself as a model of democracy , this agreement is not passed on directly for approval by this Parliament , which has been directly elected by the people of Europe , but it is simply consulted .
Mr President , our Group supports and appreciates the report by Ms Lucas as a positive contribution to the proposal made by the Council regarding the Joint Council meeting and its development .
The observations and recommendations on democratic transparency in matters as delicate as services , investment , intellectual property and conflict resolution are made out of respect for Parliament , the Mexican people and the Constitution of that country , and are also aimed at preventing any damaging effects on Mexican society .
The European Union is obliged to ensure that our relationship and agreement with Mexico do not help increase problems , as has happened with the usual United States intervention and , more specifically , with the worsening of the Chiapas situation , since this area is the focus of multinational interests .
Hence it is important that this agreement should succeed , since it would mean a different type of relationship between the European Union and Latin America , for instance in the forthcoming agreements with Mercosur and Chile , and it would be a major source of hope for the continent .
Mr President , this EU-Mexico agreement gives me an opportunity to say that it makes a lovely change for the European Parliament to be discussing free trade , something to which it usually pays just lip service .
When this agreement was completed , however , my first thought was lucky Mexico .
Here is a country which can enter into a trade agreement with the EU without having to join the club , without having to pay the membership fee or take on thousands of directives and regulations every year .
Why can 't the UK do the same I thought .
On another level I must highlight the observations of the rapporteur that there is an increased sensitivity amongst Members of Parliament about who makes the decisions on trade : whether it is the Council or the Commission .
Actually that sensitivity is not confined to this Parliament .
Many of my party members and constituents share that sensitivity and are alarmed at the Nice developments which seem to place far too much power in the hands of unelected Commission officials .
That is to say that I would not be content if the power was vested elsewhere in the EU , because the greatest sensitivity is that we as a country are having trade agreements affecting the UK negotiated and finalised by a third party , which may or may not be entirely in our national interests .
Further , as to conflict resolution procedures based as they are on a WTO model , we have already experienced the banana war where innocent British companies have been penalised for matters which have nothing to do with them and over which they have no control whatsoever .
Altogether we are happy that the EU and Mexico have reached an agreement but we do not believe that the UK should be bound by it .
We would much rather make our own agreements on our own terms .
Mr President , first of all I should like to express my satisfaction at the conclusion of the Association Agreement between Mexico and the European Union . Many of us present here have played an active part in preparing this agreement over the last few years .
With regard to the report we are dealing with , I should like to point out two aspects I consider important , the treatment of which is surprising .
First , this text mentions the Mexican constitution at least eight times , arguing that if Mexico signs the agreement with the European Union this will supposedly violate that country ' s supreme charter .
In this regard , I should just like to recall that on 20 May 2000 the Mexican Parliament approved this cooperation by 89 votes to 11 with two abstentions .
The same figures apply to the approval of the commercial decisions of the Joint Council for the Interim Agreement and also those of the Joint Council for the Global Agreement .
No parliamentary group appealed to the nation ' s Supreme Court of Justice , the body authorised to settle such matters , on grounds of unconstitutionality .
On another subject , with regard to human rights , it should be remembered that Mexico has signed more than 50 international treaties on human and workers ' rights , including many of those mentioned in the report on the table .
It also recognises the mandatory jurisdiction of the Interamerican Court of Human Rights in such matters .
It seems then , that the rule of law prevails in Mexico .
In addition , the current administration has signed an agreement with the United Nations and has set up a special embassy at that international organisation for human rights and democracy .
I must also mention that in 1999 the democracy clause was included in this agreement .
Lastly , I think the best guarantee of being able to exercise individual rights and freedoms is economic prosperity ; as everyone knows and as has been demonstrated on many occasions , free trade agreements provide in the medium term a solid basis on which to achieve it .
Mr President , it has already been said that our group will approve the Council proposal .
Mexico is an important country .
It is the largest Spanish-speaking country in the world .
Accordingly , this agreement is of great political importance .
But I would like to stress that it is also of great importance to us to approve this agreement , because it is evidence of the common foreign policy of the European Union . I address this remark in particular to the Commissioner responsible for foreign policy .
In this , I differ from my British colleagues for whom it would be preferable that the Member States concluded individual agreements with Mexico .
I regard the fact that the European Union is tackling this issue as a united front as a great step forward .
For us , the agreement with Mexico has a high priority .
What is more , it is the first in a series of agreements we are currently negotiating with Mercosur and Chile .
Implementing the Mexico agreement therefore serves a pilot function .
As far as our foreign trade policy is concerned , this will improve our trading situation in Mexico .
The share of Europe ' s trade with Mexico has fallen back to simply ridiculously low levels .
This situation must improve and I believe it is also in the interest of Mexico not to be solely dependent on trade with the USA but to have a well-balanced trade position , with Europe playing a role .
This , I believe , is a truism .
To this extent , the agreement is in our interest as much as it is in the interest of Mexico .
While approving the EU / Mexico agreement , we should nevertheless honour the fact that Mexico is changing .
The election of President Fox means that , for the first time since the Mexican revolution , there has been a changeover of power .
Mexico now ranks among the states in which democratic changeovers of power will become the norm .
There is also hope that the conflict in Chiapas , in the south of the country , will be settled peacefully .
Mexico has opened itself up to the USA , but it is also prepared to open itself up to Europe .
I would therefore very much welcome it if , for instance , the newly elected President of Mexico were to pay a visit to Europe in the not too distant future , and perhaps speak to us here in this Chamber , and if European heads of state were to visit Mexico .
A final word on the Lucas report : as is always the case , it is clear that we do not agree on the explanatory statement contained in the report .
Here , the rapporteur is free to express his or her opinion . But I would like to say in this connection that cooperation with Mexico , a country with which we entertain friendly relations , is critical .
What is more , this works in both directions .
We want to have the freedom to say what we do not like in other areas and we also ask our friends to tell us what they do not like .
That can best be exemplified by the situation with the USA : we have had some very serious clashes with the USA - and vice versa too , I might add - without that having changed our cooperation partnership and our mutual trust in any way .
Mr President , my group is very much aware of the importance of the EU-Mexico free trade partnership agreement to both partners and backs the rapporteur 's initiative on most points .
Mexico is the European Union 's most important trading partner in Latin America after Brazil , and I am particularly proud that Europe has reached a result that goes beyond NAFTA privileges in a number of areas which are good for Europe but also good for Mexico .
We consider this agreement a milestone in future relations with Latin American countries .
In the context of today 's debate , the European Liberals would like particularly to stress the importance of the standard human rights clause in this agreement , especially respect for democratic principles and fundamental human rights .
We would like to underline how vital it is to monitor the human rights situation in Mexico as I have seen with my own eyes .
In this context I find the rapporteur 's proposal to proceed to a reform of Articles 39 and 59 of the global agreement judicious .
A side agreement on cooperation on human rights is to be envisaged .
Our main hope is that the opening up of the Mexican economy will contribute towards economic and social development in Chiapas .
We declare our willingness to start this process and I hope that the march of Marcos on Mexico City will mean a breakthrough in peace .
It is now up to President Fox to make what he promised the European Parliament delegation during his campaign come true .
I will follow it closely .
Mr President , we gladly give the agreement between the European Union and Mexico the benefit of the doubt .
At the same time , we would request the Council and Commission to provide the European Parliament with continuous and comprehensive updates on the mutual effects this agreement has .
This explicit request is tied in closely with the promising initiatives which the new Mexican President , Vincente Fox , is currently developing .
These are efforts which are clearly aimed at supporting neglected population groups , in the first place the country ' s very extensive Indian community , by investments and considerable regional autonomy .
A courageous goal in the face of huge resistance , both politically and socially .
This holds a pleasant , joint development task in store for the European Union and the United States .
At the end of the day , we in Strasbourg and Brussels do not wish to have the reputation worldwide of being cool and collected customers .
In short , wider market access and an improvement of the Mexican position in the world economy requires an approach which is more humanitarian than one-dimensional liberalisation .
We can certainly identify with the social focus which the rapporteur , Mrs Lucas , has opted for amidst the needs of the Mexican population .
In her explanatory statement to the agreement , she mentions the adverse effects this agreement has on the Mexican constitution several times .
However , that is primarily a domestic matter , in our opinion .
But that does not affect our wish for the rapporteur ' s commitment to rub off on the Council and Commission in their dealings with the Mexican partners .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have an interesting case before us .
I think that a sharp mind must have worked on this report .
The rapporteur has managed , in an exemplary fashion , to tease weaknesses out of an agreement and , reading the explanatory statement contained in the report , Mrs Lucas , I get the impression that it may be paving the way for some form of Euro-imperialism .
I have two specific points to make .
Firstly , as regards the democratic weaknesses which have been pointed out time and again in the explanatory statement , we are setting standards for Mexico which only a strong country can allow itself to set for a weak country .
The need to adapt Mexico ' s constitution to bring it into line with this agreement in particular is questionable to say the least .
It reminds me of the deficits which the European Union has itself towards its own citizens due to a lack of democratic legitimisation .
The second point which , in my opinion , should not be forgotten is that Mexico is not only an important trading partner for the European Union but , in the mid 1990s , went through what the then President of the International Monetary Fund , Michel Camdessus , called the first financial crisis of the twenty-first century .
That is why , to my mind , it is especially laudable that special reference is made to problems which countries like Mexico and , especially now , Argentina have through being closely tied to the US dollar . It is very regrettable that the Commission does not follow mainstream opinion , which says that we must pay attention .
From my own perspective , I would even prefer to go in the direction of the Bretton Wood system .
The relevant precautions are lacking , as is positive assistance to Mexico .
Perhaps the only criticism I would have against the report is that we do not point out in the recommendations that , in the field of financial crises , we should be extending our help .
Mr President , the agreement with Mexico is in fact a milestone in our relations with the countries of Latin America .
It has a larger area of application than any previous agreement between the European Union and a third country .
I have always been very critical towards , but , at the same time , very solidly behind this agreement with Mexico . For us , it is not only a matter of keeping the interests of the European Union in mind - which is very much the case with many in this House - but also the interests of Mexico and its people , who mostly live in poverty .
The agreement will therefore only be a milestone if it improves the living conditions of the overwhelming majority of Mexicans .
Of crucial importance will also be how democracy and human rights are implemented .
The Fox administration will have to be measured in terms of that and not just in terms of its economic success .
Special heed should be paid to the services sector and direct investments , since Mexico must not be regarded as an extended workbench .
Rather , investments must contribute to enhancing regional development . They must be in line with clear social and ecological standards , which must not only be scrutinised but also adhered to .
It also behoves us here in the European Parliament and the Mexican government to ensure that the greatest possible benefits are reaped for the people of Mexico .
But how the Joint Council performs its tasks in connection with the further development of the agreement and how Mexico ' s Parliament and the European Union will be integrated are also important for us .
And as there is nothing that could not be improved , I hope Mexico and the European Union , as equal partners at the same eye level , will resolve the discrepancies and remove the errors which doubtless still exist in the contract .
I say this as Vice-President of the Delegation for Relations with Central America and Mexico .
I stand by this agreement and if these objectives , about which Mrs Lucas has said a great deal , are fulfilled , nothing should stand in the way of success . Then this agreement would really be a milestone in the history of the contracts concluded between the European Union and a Latin American country .
Mr President , Mr Seguro mentioned at the end of his contribution the terrible situation in El Salvador .
I would like to take this opportunity to inform Parliament that today I have decided to release another EUR 5 to 8 million to support people in El Salvador .
This is quite significant .
Turning to the matter under discussion , Mexico has gone through a radical modernisation process over the last decade .
The NAFTA agreement has played an important role in this .
It led to a major increase of trade and investment flows between the US and Mexico and also Canada .
Neither the EU nor Mexico wanted the NAFTA agreement to result in less intense relations between the EU and Mexico .
We both accepted the challenge and decided to adapt our relations .
This culminated with the entry into force last October of our economic partnership , political coordination and cooperation agreement , often called the global agreement .
This agreement , which consists of a free trade area , political dialogue and cooperation provisions reinforces Mexico 's existing relations with Europe .
Due to the very complex distribution of competence between the Community and its Member States , the free trade agreement is made up of two separate legal texts .
The first , Decision 2 / 2000 , covers the areas of Community competence and was adopted by the Joint Council in Lisbon on 23 March 2000 after Parliament gave its opinion on 16 March 2000 .
It entered into force on 1 July 2000 .
The second text covers the remaining areas - services , investment and intellectual property - and should be adopted by the Joint Council on 27 February 2001 .
The later text , which we are debating today , will liberalise services in two phases .
Firstly by including a stand-still clause which prevents both parties from introducing new discriminatory measures or reinforcing the existing ones .
This clause only applies to discriminatory measures and therefore does not exclude the possibility of adopting new , restrictive , non-discriminatory rules in order , for instance , to protect the environment further .
Secondly , this decision provides for the elimination of substantially all remaining discrimination between the parties over a maximum period of ten years .
The decision will comply with GATS rules - mainly the obligation not to exclude any sector from the liberalisation process .
Moreover the text includes measures concerning investments and related payments which complete the undertakings already made by both parties at the OECD and through bilateral agreements signed between Mexico and most of the Member States .
The European Parliament has been invited to give its opinion on this second decision .
Once this decision is adopted by the Joint Council on 27 February 2001 , the free trade agreement will be fully in place .
But this decision has also a bigger impact .
The global agreement will be fully implemented and thus the political dialogue and the cooperation pillars will enter effectively into force .
Mexico is traditionally one of the EU 's most important trading partners in Latin America with a significant growth potential , and the EU is Mexico 's second trading partner after the US .
The achievement of the free trade agreement will provide EC operators with access to the Mexican market similar to NAFTA .
Our trading relationship , which has declined over previous years , should improve markedly now that we are able to compete on a level playing field with the US and Canadian products and services .
We should be satisfied by what we have achieved in this area .
The EU-Mexico Free Trade Agreement is the first agreement of this type which the EU has signed with a Latin American country .
Apart from trade , we should make full use of this comprehensive agreement to further deepen our already excellent bilateral relations with Mexico .
The institutionalised high level political dialogue will provide a good tool to agree on common positions , on issues of mutual interest : for instance , UN reform , efforts to launch a new WTO round and the human rights situation of both parties .
The agreement will provide us with new possibilities for cooperation on the basis of the guidelines laid down for the period 2000-2006 , whether on strengthening the rule of law , judicial reform , tackling poverty or investing in human resources .
It is a new , very ambitious beginning .
I share the views expressed by most Members in this debate , and we will be very happy to see this flourish in the coming years .
Mr President , on a point of order , there was one specific piece of information that I asked for from the Commissioner .
It was about the agenda of the joint Council meeting on 27 February .
Could he tell us if and when we can get hold of that agenda , what will be on it and what kind of report we can expect from that meeting ?
The way the division of labour is organised will mean that we will , of course , inform Parliament about the results of that meeting .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Facilitation of unauthorised entry and residence
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in August 2000 , two initiatives were put forward by the then French Council Presidency to combat criminal networks trading in human beings and to take appropriate preventive measures .
But before that , a great many refugees had to die as victims of these criminal networks trading in human beings .
Unfortunately , they are still dying .
Every week , we read at least two reports about this sad state of affairs .
For this reason , the European Union must act without delay .
The Council Directive defining the facilitation of illegal immigration and unauthorised residence defines a statutory framework to prevent the facilitation of unauthorised entry and residence by criminal networks trading in human beings .
The second initiative is a Council Framework Decision on the strengthening of the penal framework to combat the facilitation of unauthorised entry and residence and hence to prevent the exploitation of refugees .
I must admit that both initiatives could actually be offered as a single initiative .
They could be combined into a single proposal on the same legal base , that of the first pillar .
Unfortunately , I was unable to convince the French Interior Minister .
I am pleased that my proposed amendments were backed by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
Now we no longer have two restrictive proposals but two proposals which can deal differently with the different target groups .
While the criminal networks trading in human beings must be combated , NGOs or churches and other similar organisations which offer humanitarian aid to persecuted human beings must not be treated as criminals .
We should not ignore the fact that , sadly , even today , tens of thousands of people have to flee from various forms of persecution and war .
I ask you , ladies and gentlemen , is it a criminal act to help a persecuted person in this situation ?
Quite frankly , I am glad that there are courageous people who help those who are being persecuted .
For this reason , it was very important to define facilitation and the honest facilitator precisely .
The text of the French initiative did not distinguish between individual and organised facilitation or between commercial and moral facilitation .
That is why a correction was crucial .
I would not like to overlook the fact that trading in human beings is a lucrative business for criminals .
But it would be a fatal mistake to believe that this problem can only be solved with restrictive measures .
Police and judicial measures must be accompanied by a common European asylum and immigration policy .
Only in this way can we succeed in preventing the sad events we all witnessed at Dover from being repeated in the future .
It would have been easy to reject the proposals of the French government , which I criticised , as there is no common asylum and immigration policy .
It really would have been the easiest thing for us to simply declare the matter settled in five minutes .
But , given the fate of the victims , that would have been irresponsible .
That is why I am glad that the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and I have managed , with my report , to develop the initiatives so that both humanitarian and penal demands can be met .
I very much regret that the PPE-DE is not prepared to back this report .
On the other hand , I am delighted to be able to thank the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party for their sensible , supplementary proposals .
I hope that , with my report , we will show the Group of the Party of European Socialists , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left that , in such a difficult situation , the European Parliament will put forward to the Council groundbreaking proposals for action which will represent the interests not only of the state but also of humanity .
Mr President , when I left the House of Commons in the United Kingdom in 1997 I thought I had got away from debates that took place after 10 p.m.
It is very comforting , however , to see that we are able to debate matters of great importance later in the evening .
I am also interested to note that in the United Kingdom debates now seem to have been truncated into times that are well before 10 p.m.
The balance of power , in that sense , has certainly shifted .
I was privileged to be an immigration minister in the last government .
It is important for me to emphasise straight away that the EPP is in agreement with the aim of the French initiative .
It is vitally important to curb illegal immigration and to deal with the criminals who are exploiting poor people to their own advantage , both financially and in other ways .
However , sadly , as shadow rapporteur I am unable to speak in support of many of Mr Ceyhun 's amendments , as I believe that these do not actually address the issue but could on the contrary have the effect of exacerbating it .
In particular , it seems to me difficult to try to decriminalise the facilitation of illegal immigration for some groups rather than others .
The notion that those acting with humanitarian intentions should be immune from prosecution is very problematic and certainly subjective .
I , as a lawyer , also have to question why the law should apply to some and not to others .
The humanitarian motives referred to in many of the amendments of Mr Ceyhun are , again , very difficult to define or to interpret in a fair and proper manner in a court of law .
This does not imply that humanitarian organisations should refrain from aiding such people after their proper entry into a Member State - I would very much support that continuing , and certainly being a feature in future - but rather that they have no more right to participate in any illegal act , in our view , than anyone else .
In this context it also has to be stressed that illegal immigrants whose entry is assisted by traffickers should surely be no more immune to prosecution than other illegal immigrants .
Of course there is a difficulty with the implementation of a common immigration and asylum policy .
I , as a British Conservative , have doubts about that .
But tonight I am perfectly happy that we should look at it in the context of how it will develop .
We are not yet ready .
We do not yet have that policy in place .
Given that such a policy may be implemented , this report appears at an inopportune moment .
It is imperative that the parameters of the common immigration and asylum policy should be established before any inner standards - such as those addressed in this report - are set .
Improving the legal status of refugees , as stated in Amendment No 2 , is not , to my knowledge , part of any common immigration and asylum policy .
As regards compensatory payments , the rapporteur does not detail how the money would be spent .
An increase in the EU budget surely requires more justification than is shown .
It is always important to distinguish between asylum and immigration : those are two separate issues , the latter of which is covered by the 1951 Geneva Convention .
Amendments underlining the importance of that convention are certainly welcomed by me and the EPP .
We support the French initiative .
We merely regret that this report has appeared before its time and is unacceptable .
Mr President , I am sorry , I was confused about the time .
I should first like to congratulate my colleague Mr Ceyhun for the work he has done and his efforts to cover all the sensitive issues surrounding these two initiatives .
Secondly , I must stress to this House something which is an absolute priority for the future of the European Union , our society and the political project we are constructing from here .
It is the need for a Community immigration and asylum policy , something we will not be able to achieve without commitment , effort and hard work from the European Union ' s political institutions .
I should like to reiterate a number of issues that this House and the Council must take clearly into account when making future decisions .
It is essential to distinguish between the disinterested humanitarian aiding of illegal immigration and the activities of criminal networks as laid down in Article 27 of the Schengen Convention .
It is also important to distinguish clearly between those who benefit directly and actively from illegal immigration , such as those who organise and take part in the transport of illegal immigrants , and on the other hand the passive and indirect beneficiaries , who are the ones who profit from the work of illegal immigrants .
It must also be stressed that the economic benefit itself may be direct or indirect , depending on the nature of the activity performed .
I realise , however , that carriers cannot be held liable for transporting persons who request political asylum immediately upon arrival within the territory of a Member State .
Carriers have neither the ability nor the authority to assess the admissibility of an application for asylum , and hence I understand that under no circumstances can they be directly or indirectly persuaded through these instruments to carry out an assessment of suitability .
Sanctions must be proportionate and balanced and the punishment must be made to fit the crime .
The means and ends must strictly respect the obligations accepted by the countries which are parties to the 1951 Geneva Convention as regards asylum-seekers entering an EU Member State .
The purpose of such measures must never be to dissuade asylum-seekers from exercising their legitimate right to seek the protection of a signatory state , since this would constitute an infringement of the Geneva Convention .
Lastly , I should like to point out that the Member States need to be aware that certain regions of the European Union are particularly affected by illegal immigration , and because of their geographical position they are having to shoulder much of the burden imposed by the immigration policies , so budget lines should be developed to allow compensatory payments , which will increase solidarity within the European Union in this area .
Mr President , we all remember with horror the container containing 58 dead Chinese people that was found at Dover last summer .
Recently , we saw drowned people washed up on the Spanish coast .
Such tragedies occur around Europe every day , if not always in such spectacular forms .
The gangs that earn money from exploiting people ' s desperation and smuggle them across borders under horrendous safety conditions must , of course , be punished .
This is an inhumane business .
Joint efforts are required here at EU level .
However , the initiative proposed by France only deals with a small part of these incredibly complex issues concerning migration and refugees .
Despite fine declarations of global responsibility , the EU Member States have not been able to agree on a common asylum and immigration policy .
It seems that the only thing that can be agreed upon is repressive measures .
The smugglers must of course be punished , and airlines that allow persons without valid documents to board must pay fines .
It is unreasonable to leave it to the cabin crew to assess people ' s need for protection .
One must also ask why people stake everything they own in order to be smuggled into an unknown country in unsafe conditions .
Is it really possible to get into the EU by lawful means when we require visas from 130 countries ?
I do not believe it is .
The EU is in the process of building a Fortress Europe .
The Liberal Group would have liked to have seen a more comprehensive programme on migration issues .
A common policy is required in this area .
The report written by the rapporteur is an important modification of the French proposal , because he attempts to see the nuances .
Certainly the gangs must be punished , but there are people who conceal refugees without any prospect of profit because they are convinced that the refugees are risking life and limb if they are sent back to their home country .
Relatives , friends or individual organisations must not be punished for this .
A distinction must be made .
It is also important to emphasise that the purpose of this proposal for a directive is not to make it more difficult for people to seek asylum or migrate to the European Union .
With the amendments tabled by the Liberal Group , we will support Mr Ceyhun ' s proposal in the hope that the Council will get its act together and agree on a common European asylum and migration strategy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today the issue of immigration crosses all areas in our European societies , from the situation of legal immigrants to that of illegal immigrants , from the right of asylum to the right of freedom of movement , from socio-economic and cultural rights to political rights .
In the majority of EU States , figures on the granting of refugee status and traditional immigration channels are falling systematically .
On the other hand , the figures for overall immigration have remained stable in recent years , proving that restrictive policies on immigration and visas have succeeded only in increasing the number of illegal immigrants .
On a daily basis , men , women and children die in the attempt to enter illegally into a Europe which has become a real Fortress .
For the most part they fall victim to smugglers and traffickers .
Unfortunately , their ordeal continues once they have entered European States as , without regular papers , they can be freely exploited and forced to suffer intolerable living conditions .
We should point out that some legal immigrants have been made illegal by restrictive legislation .
Some of these have been living in Europe for over twenty years .
They can no longer be expelled , nor can their situation be regularised .
What means is available to them to earn a living and support their families ?
The solutions laid down in the proposed initiatives replicate these repressive measures and grounds for exclusion .
They give rise to tragedies such as those in Dover , Gibraltar or the situation of those immigrants without regular papers in Spain , Belgium and France who are on hunger strike in order to obtain recognition .
Who is really responsible ?
Not only do these proposals not meet these requirements , but they even go so far as to challenge the right of asylum or the right of family reunion .
While it is clear that we must staunchly fight the organised networks trafficking in human beings , it is unjust to condemn natural or legal persons who , in good faith , assist asylum seekers fleeing conflict , famine and the horrors caused by economic and democratic deficits .
These initiatives , therefore , lump all categories together in an inadmissible and dangerous fashion .
While the proposed amendments limit some of the damage , we reject the initiatives and would vehemently urge the authors to go back to the drawing board .
It is only possible to combat illegal immigration within the framework of an overall Community policy that is clear and that respects the dignity of human beings based on genuine respect for fundamental rights and based on a new North-South relationship .
Finally we would point out that the best weapon to combat discrimination and human exploitation is to acknowledge rights and thus to regularise their status .
Mr President , the policy pursued by many Member States and , to an ever greater degree , by the EU too in this area gives us all a direct share of responsibility for the corpses at Dover and for the bodies washed up on the Spanish coast .
What we are doing is treating the symptoms .
We are doing nothing about the real disease .
The disease is , of course , the fact that there are 20 million refugees in the world .
The present project will lead to there being fewer humanitarians and more mafiosi involved in the trafficking in human beings and in helping to transport refugees .
It is said that trafficking in human beings is a lucrative business , but I maintain that , with projects like this , it will become still more lucrative .
The price will rise , and the mafia will , of course , add the cost of their fines to it .
That means more money from desperate people in the pockets of the mafia .
There will be fewer suppliers and ever more demand .
That means higher prices .
We know this , of course , from the market economy in general .
It will mean more unscrupulous players and , therefore , more Dover-style accidents .
I have to say that the rapporteur has done his best to temper the proposal .
He has really made an effort , but it is nonetheless still a matter of treating the symptoms .
We are not treating the disease .
Our group will , of course , support the amendments tabled by the rapporteur and the Liberal Group .
Above all , we shall support the proposals completely to reject this move , and my group will vote very differently in the final vote on the report .
Mr President , the radical members of the Bonino List will vote against the proposal for a Council initiative and therefore , while voting in favour of some of amendments improving the rapporteur ' s proposals , we will also vote against the report as a whole .
The fundamental reason for this is one that affects these and all initiatives dealing with the framework of criminal legislation in the Union .
As a European federalist , and therefore not a Eurosceptic , I consider it monstrous that criminal legislation should be adopted and implemented without any approval by a democratically and legitimately elected Parliament with the legitimacy to grant it .
Here , as elsewhere , I find the road the European Union is taking monstrous .
Criminal law cannot be removed from parliamentary debate .
Because of the very delicacy of the matter , it cannot be abstracted from more general considerations relating to society , risks , weights and counterweights , fundamental causes , and economic and social causes .
The only line on which European integration policy is advancing rapidly is that of repression , because that is easy .
Decisions are prepared by groups of civil servants from the Ministries of Justice and Home Affairs , whose only concern is the efficiency of the repression mechanisms , without any consideration - it is not their fault , that is their craft , their professional approach - or concern for issues arising from society , the economy , work , international policy or development .
We are travelling very fast down the line of repression while , on the other lines , such as guaranteeing the right of asylum and the right to a defence , the European Parliament , the European Union , the European Commission and the Council are incapable of making progress .
So that is the main reason why we cannot accept the Council ' s proposals .
We cannot accept a report which does not reject them out of hand because , even on this matter , the European Parliament - as usual - is just being consulted and does not have any real powers .
As to the merit of the argument - as Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and Mrs Frahm have said - it is an illusion to imagine that strengthening the ban on immigration produces anything other than a strengthening of illegal immigration and the forces of illegality overwhelming us .
Our frontiers are being overwhelmed by the illegality produced by our prohibitionist laws . That is the reality .
We should not delude ourselves that we can solve the problem by tinkering with the penalties for carriers of illegal immigrants without democratic consultation .
It is possible - although I hope this does not happen - that we will only succeed in making things worse .
At the same time , the fundamental economic causes are not being addressed .
Commissioner Lamy put a brave proposal to the European Commission for unilateral liberalisation of imports from the poorest countries .
That is a means of attacking the fundamental causes , not just doling out charity , alms and assistance but opening our markets to their agricultural products and basic manufacturers .
' Everything but arms ' the proposal was called .
It was sunk by the lobbies in the European Union and , consequently , pressure from migrations is growing ever stronger .
So the Lamy proposal gets sunk and , at the same time , we delude ourselves that we can solve the problem by a few months ' increase in the penalties meted out to those who ply a trade we have presented them with as a gift , for profits we , with our laws , make possible .
We cannot delude ourselves - I say this to Mr Ceyhun and Members on the left - that partial improvement - we are in favour of certain amendments - of this repressive framework can change the situation .
Only as a lesser evil do we support the distinction between immigration for economic profit and immigration for humanitarian purposes , but we do not think it can solve the problem , as you on the left point out yourselves , when you assert that economic causes are ultimately responsible for immigration .
How can you sustain the argument that economic causes are the fundamental causes and , at the same time , take such a strong stand against the entrepreneurs and profiteers running illegal immigration ?
This prohibitionist attitude is not confined to immigration alone , but also to the labour market and the new forms of employment - part-time work , temporary work , short-term contracts , seasonal contracts - and it is an attitude that the left , and the unions too , are largely responsible for in Europe .
Let us not try to salve our consciences by attacking the entrepreneurs and those who exploit labour for , in the eyes of the exploited , the people condemned to die in their own country of hunger and a total lack of the means to survive , the European entrepreneur-exploiter may well be the only hope of advancement and salvation for them and their families .
So I conclude , Mr President , by confirming the vote of the Bonino List radical Members against the motion .
Mr President , I consider the two initiatives by the French Republic seeking to better define and strengthen penal sanctions against assisting the illegal entry of aliens into European territory to be particularly welcome .
Illegal immigration , which is growing rapidly , is indeed becoming a major problem for the countries of Europe .
A good indication of this is the increase in the number of asylum requests , which have virtually doubled in the last three years in the main European countries , even though approximately three quarters of these are rejected as unjustified , thereby greatly increasing the number of immigrants illegally resident on our territory .
Europol currently estimates that 500 000 illegal immigrants enter the European Union every year .
This influx of marginalised individuals provides a breeding ground for all sorts of crime and exploitation .
According to the United Nations Organisation , even within Europe some half a million people from this illegal staff pool are reduced to slavery , mostly women and children , who are victims of sexual or economic exploitation .
This situation is a source of shame for Europe and I must say that I am shocked when I read the Commission communication of 22 November 2000 on the Community immigration policy to find that it includes only one tiny paragraph , and a vague one at that , on illegal immigration .
I am shocked , too , to see that the Commission ' s first practical proposal in application of this policy was for a particularly lenient draft directive on family reunion .
Once again , one has the impression that the concerns of the Commission are out of step with the concerns of Member States , which raise genuine practical problems .
For , after the French Presidency , which made the fight against illegal immigration one of its priorities , we now have the British Prime Minister , Tony Blair , and his Italian counterpart , Giuliano Amato , sounding the alarm and demanding an action plan to combat such trafficking .
That is why I totally agree completely with Mr Kirkhope that the amendments by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs are quite misplaced , as they water down the French text .
I also agree that these texts have been brought out at just the right time .
Contrary to the claims made in some of the committee ' s amendments , there is no need to wait for a general policy on immigration before taking steps immediately in the specific field of illegal immigration .
There is a clear need for such action as a matter of urgency .
Indeed it is a requirement of the Treaty of Amsterdam , since Article 63 ( 3 ) stipulates that , for the five years following its entry into force , measures must be taken as a priority against , I quote , " illegal immigration and illegal residence , including repatriation of illegal residents . "
The French Republic ' s initiatives on illegal immigration must therefore be approved , followed up and reinforced .
We must , incidentally , note our approval of Article 67 ( 1 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam which , amid some more unfortunate provisions , had the wisdom to retain Member States ' right of initiative in parallel with the Commission ' s , even in those aspects of immigration policy which it sought to communitise .
This exceptional juxtaposition , which , in this instance , turns out to be very helpful , is unfortunately only a temporary situation since it is scheduled to last only for a transitional period of five years following the entry into force of the Treaty .
It is therefore going to expire on 30 April 2004 .
However , at that very time , at the beginning of 2004 we are due to have an intergovernmental conference that will specifically have to look into the distribution of competences between the European Union and the Member States .
I believe that it would be a good idea for its agenda to include a proposal for extending the duration and scope of States ' right of initiative .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our starting point is based on the need to combat illegal immigration and , in particular , the resulting forms of exploitation .
The situation has been exacerbated , not only because it has proved to be extremely lucrative and less risky than other forms of trafficking , such as drugs trafficking , for example , but also because this activity actually benefits from shortcomings in the legislation and action of Member States and from all the factors that allow illegal immigrants to enter and remain in these countries .
The proposal now before us , which is intended to strengthen the fight against illegal immigrants entering and staying , must pay particular attention to two factors : first of all , the issue of employers ' responsibility and the consequences that using an illegal workforce may entail . We must look at the situations in our own Member States with regard to the illegal employment market - and the issue of trafficking in human beings , which must be fought hard , paying particular attention to the trafficking of women and children for the purpose of sexual exploitation , which is one of the most odious aspects of this type of trafficking .
Tragic events such as the one that took place in Dover last June or those that have come to light following the successful ' Cathedral ' police operation are situations that no democratic society can tolerate .
What we must do is target those who assist illegal immigration .
It is crucial that each Member State adopts the necessary measures to ensure that the deliberate facilitation of the unauthorised entry , movement and residence of immigrants is considered to be an offence punishable by effective , proportionate , dissuasive criminal penalties .
The European Union is now facing new challenges caused by migratory flows in evidence throughout the world . We must address these challenges as one wide-ranging issue .
The Member States must have a common immigration and asylum policy that is appropriate to their demographic , economic and humanitarian needs .
Mr President , I want to congratulate my colleague Mr Ceyhun for approaching a very difficult and sensitive issue .
Referring to what Mr Kirkhope said , this is an issue of great importance and I could not agree with him more .
I am sure he would agree with me that it is very sad that on an issue like this , which covers the pages of many of our newspapers , there is - to the best of my knowledge - no press here to cover it .
We have also to recognise that this report is just one piece of a jigsaw .
It is a very difficult jigsaw that we are trying to put together .
We need a proper system of immigration and asylum that will cater for the needs of Europe in the modern world .
I say to Mrs Frahm and Mr Cappato that this is what we are aiming for , and I do not believe the rhetoric you used just now is helpful in such a very difficult situation .
On specific points , Mr Kirkhope referred to his anxieties about paragraphs 11 and 12 , and I know the points that he is making there .
But the reference is to legally recognised organisations , NGOs , with which all of us are familiar .
We have to ask ourselves is someone or an organisation that is helping people in desperate circumstances escape persecution a criminal ?
Are they the organisations that we ought to be legislating against ?
I would say not .
We know , and others have said , that people escaping from these situations are desperate people escaping conflict , war and circumstances like that .
That is why we need these measures .
We must do more .
We must do more to help those developing countries and help the countries that are war-torn and with regimes that we do not like .
But we cannot do that overnight .
I do not believe we are helping those people who are trying to get out by doing nothing and leaving the situation as it is , so they have to clamber into the back of lorries and suffocate and endure torture and misery .
We have to make certain that we have a proper asylum system that is not skewed by the overemphasis on illegal immigration .
Our job in the new few months , as a Parliament , will be to report on the Commission 's opinions in a way that reminds all Member States that their national interest must not override our global and humanitarian obligations .
. ( DE ) Mr President , today , in Germany , a man is appearing before the court who immigrated illegally from the former East Germany to West Germany .
He has quite rightly been brought before the court , not because he immigrated illegally but because he grassed on illegal immigrants from the former East Germany to the state security police .
In my opinion , it should still be possible for people who betray refugees or illegal immigrants to the police to be prosecuted .
Why ?
Both the Commission proposal and the report admit that illegal entry can lead to an application for asylum being approved .
Yet this is tantamount to admitting , albeit unintentionally , that , for most people , it is no longer possible to enter the EU legally . This confirms , also unintentionally , the criticism made by the UNHCR of the EU and its isolationist policy towards refugees .
That is why the promised immunity from prosecution does not help refugees who are accepted as asylum seekers , because they must then betray the people who were actually able to help them in their application for asylum .
The conclusion is that separating commercial from humanitarian facilitation serves no useful purpose because the policy of isolation is increasingly being promoted and aid for refugees is becoming more of a financial burden .
If a decision cannot be reached to dismantle the fortress that is the EU , then at least this report must be rejected and aid for refugees must be promoted both in terms of commercial and humanitarian facilitation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing here with a very narrow area ; we are discussing combating facilitation , i.e. aiding illegal border crossing .
It is a very positive desire to want to do something considering that , every year , half a million people enter the European Union illegally , half of whom have been facilitated in this way .
Organised crime does brisk and relatively risk-free business with these people , which is why the initiative is to be welcomed , though it has not been put in an overall context .
Looking at Mr Ceyhun ' s report , I have to say that the intentions , namely to help refugees , are good .
But what the report proposes in terms of measures is anything but conducive to combating facilitation .
Rather , in my and our estimation , what is being proposed here will lead to the expansion of facilitation . Furthermore , the business will continue to be risk-free for criminals .
According to these proposals , persons or groups will a priori be immune from prosecution if they take illegal immigrants across borders for humanitarian reasons and without payment .
But what will the consequence be ? How quickly do you think criminal organisations will make use of such a legal construct ?
The whole thing would then be not only useless but counterproductive .
What is more , your proposals are moving in a direction in which our understanding of the law and our legal system are being turned on their heads .
They will introduce subjectivity , since legal persons or groups rather than the courts will decide whether a criminal act , namely facilitation , is a criminal act or not .
That is a reversal of our legal system and will certainly not lead to the desired goal .
In conclusion , Mr Ceyhun , I am convinced that you doubtless acted in good faith but the instrument you are proposing is neither legally nor effectively conducive to achieving a positive outcome .
What we need is a comprehensive system and I believe we are working towards this together . I am also convinced that , during the course of this year , working jointly with the Commission , we will be successful .
Mr President , Commissioner , zero immigration policies may well have reduced legal immigration into Europe to zero , but at the same time they have caused the number of asylum seekers and illegal immigrants to rocket together , of course , with the fees charged by all types of carrier .
It is becoming increasingly clear that turning Europe into a fortress , by reinforcing its borders and intensifying repressive measures , will not reduce migratory pressures as long as the prosperity differential between the European Union and its neighbours persists or increases .
As far as traffickers are concerned , as I maintained in my report on Albania , concentrating mainly on traffickers , as if they were the root cause of immigration , does not help us to understand or manage this phenomenon .
The fact , as other members have said , that carriers often save human lives , by helping people to escape from persecution by totalitarian regimes , and provide services to refugees protected by the Geneva Convention and desperate people who have nowhere else to turn , is often passed over in silence .
We must , I think , distinguish between disinterested , humanitarian aiding of illegal immigrants and the aiding of illegal immigrants by members of criminal networks for the purpose of gain , as proposed by our rapporteur , Mr Ozan Ceyhun , whom I congratulate on the many improvements which he has made to the French initiative .
Finally , I should like to say that any initiatives along these lines must be incorporated as quickly as possible into an integrated European immigration policy , which will have legal channels and , more importantly , which will guarantee the legalisation and social integration of those already living in the European Union .
But , Commissioner , this sort of policy does not seem to be making any headway ; on the contrary , the Council appears to be desperate to take what are , for the most part , repressive and fragmentary measures , rather than to introduce an integrated immigration policy as called for by the European Parliament .
Mr President , one of the objectives highlighted by the recent Tampere , Feira and Nice Summits , by resolutions of this Parliament and by the Euro-Mediterranean Forum , which we held in Brussels only last week , is the combating of the organised networks that traffic in immigrants .
This is a despicable traffic , which causes so much harm and even tragedy amongst the immigrants themselves and great concern within the European Union , a concern sometimes greater than that seen in some of these immigrants ' countries of origin , although it is a hard thing to say .
We must therefore receive the two French initiatives with satisfaction .
But the report by Mr Ceyhun suffers from a lack of legal rigour , which if not corrected will make it impossible to vote in favour - and believe me I am sorry - particularly on the point I am about to mention .
I am personally acquainted with the magnificent work that some NGOs are doing in this field ; the humanitarian care many of them are giving surpasses their own means .
But from that to generalising that if an association performs the criminal action of providing organised aid for the entry , residence or movement of illegal immigrants it should be exempt from liability , is going too far . This is because profit or financial benefit , as for example happens in Spanish criminal law , is an aggravating circumstance but it is not the essential component in characterising the crime of trafficking in human beings .
This does not mean that there are not aspects of the report that can be accepted and which I applaud , such as the compensation for the regions that most suffer from migratory pressure or prosecution of employers who use and abuse these workers illegally .
Finally , in any case , I believe that in this battle against illegal immigration the cooperation of the countries of origin is absolutely necessary , since without it any attempt to combat these criminal networks is doomed to failure .
The European Union alone cannot control this migration phenomenon if it cannot count on the essential collaboration of the countries from which the migration originates .
Mr President , last week in Stockholm the Council asked for the Tampere agenda to be revitalised .
I really do not understand at all .
I do not understand why they have not been able to revitalise and fulfil it over all these months .
What I see is that with initiatives like this one they will not only revitalise it , they will bombard it .
At this time of night , and coming from a Spanish and Portuguese evening that Ms Cerdeira and I attended , I am tempted to surrender to Mr Cappato ' s rhetorical charms and agree with him completely , because in fact the only thing I can understand is that the ministers meet on one side and on the other there is some machinery which points towards other objectives .
I do not understand why the Council does not go after some coherent political proposals , which follow one behind the other in pursuit of the clear objectives of creating a common , coherent and global immigration policy and asylum policy in the European Union , instead of advancing piecemeal on absolutely specific and partial topics which throw this policy off balance and make it increasingly difficult to make progress on the Tampere agenda .
Seeing that in the Council the ministers have also decided - paradoxically in my view - to support this French proposal , and it should be either discussed immediately or moved on , my Group will in any case try to send them the clear message that we in the European Union must not confuse compassion , the work of some people in the front line helping immigrants , with the traffic in people .
We shall try to do so by supporting the amendments that Mr Ceyhun has drawn up so well and also the amendments that Ms Cerdeira has added to the report .
If we succeed , we shall vote in favour of this report and we shall try to send this message to the Council .
If not , we shall see tomorrow what we can do with it : we shall probably have some difficulties .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank Mr Ceyhun , the rapporteur , and remind you , as he did , that the trafficking of human beings , particularly the trafficking of women and children , is , in itself , an odious phenomenon which is a growing source of concern , because it is not just a question of immigration policy or of security policy .
This is basically an issue that concerns the violation of human rights and human dignity . Throughout the world , tens of thousands of human beings are trafficked for the purpose of exploitation every year .
The importance of this issue does not mean - and I think that this criticism is unfair - that we are addressing it because we are obsessed with building a Fortress Europe .
This issue , which is complex and requires us to be very precise in the terms we use to discuss it , is today at the very top of the international agenda and , I think , received a broad , worldwide consensus when the United Nations Organisation promoted the adoption of a Convention against Transnational Organised Crime last December .
This convention contains two additional protocols , one on the illegal transporting of immigrants into a country - smuggling , to use the English term - and another specifically covering the trafficking of people .
These two protocols were signed by 81 States at the High Level Conference in Palermo last December .
Amongst the signatories to the United Nations Convention are all the Member States of the European Union and the Commission .
I personally took the opportunity to call upon both the Member States of the Union and the candidate countries to proceed as quickly as possible with the ratification of this Convention , which will only enter into force when 40 countries have concluded their accession process .
The European Union is , therefore , able to demonstrate its contribution to a worldwide fight against the trafficking of human beings .
Various speakers reminded us just now that , following the Dover tragedy last June , the Feira European Council called for measures to be adopted to combat illegal immigration and the trafficking of human beings .
This initiative by the French Government therefore addresses this concern and the Commission has no difficulties in acknowledging that , in principle , it should be supported .
We must , however , clarify the terms of the debate properly .
Today , I have , or rather the Commission has , been accused of paying little attention to the issues of illegal immigration and , furthermore , of not paying sufficient attention to drafting a comprehensible immigration policy .
I hope you will not be offended if I do not go into great detail , at 11.15 at night , in order to refute all the accusations and if I simply tell you sincerely that I do not consider these criticisms to be at all justified where the Commission is concerned .
For example , our immigration policy does contain a security component .
This component cannot be the main one , or exclusive , but we cannot ignore the fact that the trafficking of human beings is a serious problem , that also requires security measures .
I am therefore surprised - I shall not say shocked , which is a very strong word - that Mr Berthu has only found one paragraph on illegal immigration in a Commission communication which seeks to address the issue of legal immigration and that he has not , for example , discovered that the Commission has presented two proposals for framework decisions .
One of these proposals is intended to eliminate the trafficking of human beings for the purpose of exploitation , specifically to ban child pornography on the Internet . I am also surprised that Mr Berthu has not noticed that the Commission has presented a proposal for a framework decision to eliminate the trafficking of human beings for the purpose of economic exploitation , in other words , for the purpose of promoting illegal work .
Similarly , just as we agreed to discuss the French initiative , in which security features very prominently , the Commission has already initiated a discussion in the Council on a proposal for a communication on a European asylum system and a communication on legal immigration , in other words , on the rights and duties of third-country nationals who are allowed to enter the Union legally .
We have tried to define a balanced policy but the contradictory criticisms that have been made in this House show that we may well not have achieved this yet . These criticisms have not convinced me , however , that the Commission is not on the right track .
We have two fundamental concerns about the French proposal , which make it difficult for us to accept the proposed text .
Our first concern is about the legal basis , which is not a minor issue .
We feel that the French initiative must be completely underpinned , notwithstanding its reference to aggravating circumstances , by a legal basis under the first pillar , such as the Treaty establishing the European Community , Article 63 ( 3 ) ( b ) .
It can clearly be inferred from this article of the Treaty that competence for illegal immigration has been given to the Community .
It is also clear that the Community per se does not have Community competence in criminal issues .
Nevertheless , I wish to remind Parliament that there is case-law from the Court of Justice of the European Communities which indicates that , in cases in which the Community , within a clearly defined jurisdiction , has power conferred upon it by the Treaties to regulate activity in order to achieve a Community objective , it also has the power to decide whether the fact that this activity does not comply should be punished at national level by criminal sanctions .
This , as I see it , is especially true in this case .
Our second concern involves the scope of Article 1 ( a ) of the draft directive .
In its current wording and as matters stand today , this measure in the French proposal contains no reference to the objective of financial gain .
The Commission is willing to study this approach , in other words , not to lay down the requirement of financial gain , but this would have to be balanced by a carefully worded exemption clause for cases where illegal entry , movement and residence are subject to assistance for humanitarian reasons .
This is the only way it will be possible to distinguish clearly between humanitarian assistance under international commitments , specifically respect for the Geneva Convention , and the trafficking of human beings which is punishable by law .
I wish to conclude , Mr President , by saying that the Commission feels that other elements must be included in the French proposal , such as , for example , establishing an obligation for administrative coordination and cooperation between the competent national departments , creating a system for the exchange of information between Member States and imposing the obligation on Member States to adopt the appropriate measures to provide humanitarian assistance to illegal immigrants .
I wish to make one final comment , which is that , in line with the Tampere conclusions and the Commission ' scoreboard ' , we have presented a proposal for a framework decision on combating the trafficking of human beings . We would therefore like the joint work of the Council , Parliament and the Commission to show clearly that there is no overlap between the French initiative and the two framework decisions presented by the Commission , but rather complementarity .
These framework decisions are part of the broader issue of the fight against illegal immigration , which involves a proactive policy of legal immigration under the terms proposed by the Commission in its communication issued last November . Of course , this also involves other complementary policies that the Commission intends to propose to the Council in May , specifically on the issue of a policy of return and of the conditions for sending citizens from third countries back to their country of origin .
I hope that the conclusions of the informal Stockholm Council meeting last week will enable us , at the Laeken European Council , to take stock of this debate on a common immigration policy and on a European asylum system which respect our international obligations and which guarantee the stability and security of the Union ' s Member States .
Research guidelines 2002 - 2006
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0052 / 2001 ) by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : Making a reality of the ' European Research Area ' : Guidelines for European Union research activities ( 2002-2006 ) [ COM ( 2000 ) 612 - C5-0738 / 2000 - 2000 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , never before have I spoken for so long in Parliament .
You may go for a nap in between because eight minutes really is rather long .
Commissioner , it is now almost a year since it was agreed during the European Council in Lisbon that the European Union wants to become the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world and this Parliament rallied around that goal with a large majority .
If the European Union wants to achieve this goal , then more investment in research , technological development , innovation and education is essential , both in the Member States as well as at European level .
The creation of a European Research Area is vital to this .
European research has proved a success : and the innovative efforts of Europe 's businesses are also impressive , accounting in the first half of the 1990s for 33 % of turnover .
The European Framework Programmes of research and technological development have definitely contributed to this as well .
The success of the Framework Programmes must therefore be retained in the future and that will also have to be demonstrated when the proposals for the sixth Framework Programme are discussed .
But at the moment , ladies and gentlemen , there is absolutely no question of having one European research policy .
The proposals made by Commissioner Busquin in order to actually bring such a policy about were well received by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , but on a number of points we still have a few gaps to fill and some concerns to raise .
One way of creating an effective research area would be to ensure more cooperation on the basis of more Community objectives and flexible use of resources .
Let us do away with techno-nationalism .
The research policies of the Member States and that of the Union are currently pursued alongside each other without forming a coherent whole .
In addition , we invest significantly less in research than the United States and Japan .
These two factors mean that the ground lost to the United States has simply increased in the last few years .
In my first report on the European Research Area , I also went on about techno-nationalism , which has to vanish .
Greater cooperation is needed between the Member States , researchers and research groups , but also between companies , universities and public research institutes .
More coordination at a programme level is also necessary .
There is a need for new forms of European cooperation , namely intermediary cooperation , or in other words between national research institutes as well as between the establishments which subsidise research in the Member States .
But , ladies and gentlemen , cooperation in Europe will stand or fall with a state-of-the-art infrastructure .
It is vital to extend a high-speed trans-European research network with a capacity of ten gigabits to a hundred gigabits in the future , in order to achieve a European Research Area and enable it to perform optimally .
Only then will we also achieve cooperation such as that between centres of excellence .
This goal will never be reached with the SEAN project , which is based on an increase of two gigabits per second per year .
I therefore call upon Commissioners Liikanen and Busquin to show much more ambition in this matter .
As well as the creation of a European Research Area , we also have need of a European Educational Area , since a dynamic knowledge-based economy , which was talked about so much in Lisbon , requires not only high quality education at the same level in all Member States , but also mobility amongst researchers and students .
Greater harmony between higher education and researcher training is necessary as well .
I would like to hear the Commissioner 's point of view on this matter .
The agreements reached in Nice concerning flexibility , variable geometry , or cooperation between a limited number of Member States in the field of research , create an obstacle for the Industry Committee .
This forms a central part of Commissioner Busquin 's plans .
The Industry Committee expresses the strongest possible reservations concerning this cooperation between Member States , particularly if it involves spending European research funds .
As it so happens , the Research Committee , this Parliament in other words , has the power of codecision where research at European level is concerned .
If this brings about cooperation between the Member States , whereby the Member States finance this themselves , then there is no problem at all .
But as soon as European funding is put into research from which only a couple of Member States profit as a result , then the codecision procedure will indeed have to be retained .
That is laid down in the Treaty .
That is why I would like to see the details of these plans take on a clearer shape , although we are definitely not opposed to more cooperation - because for all that , I have also said : let us do away with techno-nationalism - but as soon as European funding is in the picture , Parliament 's power of codecision remains .
Another point is the role of small and medium-sized enterprises in the field of research .
In the fifth Framework Programme we argued in favour of spending at least 10 % on small and medium-sized enterprises within the thematic programmes .
That was successful too .
It appears that even more funding is going to small and medium-sized enterprises from the Fifth Framework Programme .
In my report for the Industry Committee , we established once again that at least 10 % must be spent on SMEs .
Nevertheless I believe that having regard to current spending we can well afford to be a bit more ambitious , so I put it to you that in the coming Framework Programme the amount should be increased to 15 % and , of course , I welcome your views on this as well .
One last point , Mr President , relates to an issue about which there is considerable doubt in Parliament and that is nuclear fusion research .
Essentially , Parliament has very little to report on this , except that we do have to make the budget available .
We were surprised , therefore , that you went to the Council to ask for their opinion on what should happen now with fusion , even before you made a statement yourself which would normally go to the Council and Parliament at the same time .
I think that that is a slight reversal of the procedure .
We hope therefore that you will ask our opinion on this as well and indeed also give an opinion on the budget that you would like to have seen , but we shall have to approve that first .
So in fact we are asking to be fully involved in determining the policy regarding fusion research , as well as in determining the direction that it should take .
Mr President , as Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel has said , research has consistently been identified as the key to improving economic growth , creating new jobs , a cleaner environment and better health .
How utterly astonishing , then , that every country in the world and every Member State of the European Union wastes half of its most valuable resource , that is , the brain power of its citizens .
It wastes that brain power because it fails to engage women in the task of science adequately .
Women are not encouraged at school level , they face discrimination in their careers , and this is something which we have to tackle in the European Research Area .
I congratulate Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , the rapporteur , and Commissioner Busquin , both of whom have realised the importance of this gap .
I am particularly pleased that Commissioner Busquin has upgraded the work of his directorate-general in this matter to the status of a unit , that he is ensuring that statistics are being kept , and that networks which help and encourage women scientists are being supported by the European Union .
This must be a key part of the European Research Area .
We need , as the phrase goes , research by women , for women - so that the gender implications of the research we undertake are examined - and about women .
It is important that the socio-economic aspects of the research programme concentrate on gender matters .
Why is it that almost every country in the world wastes the brains of half its population by not encouraging them ?
I thank Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel for her support of the Committee on Women 's Rights ' opinion and look forward to the gender perspective being an important aspect of the European Research Area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am happy to be speaking after Mrs McNally , for I myself am a research scientist and I am carrying out research into women ( it is not just a question of research carried out by and for women , but also of research about them ) .
I am glad that the report takes these questions on board .
I am speaking today on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , which unanimously adopted a report , part of which has been incorporated into the report by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy ; I want to emphasise the word " part " .
First of all , I am very glad that the human and social sciences will henceforth be regarded not just as a means of research but also as an end .
The issue of women is part of the question , but , of course , today we are discussing something much wider .
The fact that human and social sciences are now becoming a field of research in their own right means that we have reached a turning point in research in Europe . I think that needs pointing out .
Perhaps it will help us think about how to achieve the political and cultural integration of Europe , given that research is an element of this integration .
I was also struck by the emphasis placed on the extent to which the new technologies , which are so important today - we discussed that yesterday , in relation to copyright - promote cultural diversity through the question of languages .
That is another point we in the Committee on Culture consider extremely important .
As for the Sixth Framework Programme , I am pleased to see that the research on cultural identity that we proposed has been incorporated into the report that the Committee on Industry adopted .
I hope the Commission will also take this into account .
I think it is important to have the possibility of carrying out research on cultural identity , as it is to renew some of the key actions of the Fifth Framework Programme , such as ' multimedia content and tools ' and ' city of tomorrow and cultural heritage ' .
I somewhat regret , however , that the Committee on Industry has not incorporated our opinion on Internet costs .
Research on Internet costs could have made it possible to reduce them and finally make the Internet more democratic .
As for networks of excellence , that is all very well , but we can also , within the European Research Area , create networks that are not just networks of excellence . That is something we also need for the sake of mobility but also for the sake of research itself .
Lastly , of course , there is the question of intellectual property .
It could be a great help to Europe in safeguarding its cultural identity and democracy if research were carried out on the technical aspects of intellectual property rights .
Mr President , I should first like to thank Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel for being so very open and receptive to contributions from my group .
I must reiterate what a pleasure it has been to work with her on these matters . Likewise , I should like to express our sincere appreciation to Commissioner Busquin for his constant readiness to take our contributions on board .
His door is always open , he is increasing his contacts with the groups and we are grateful to him for that . I do not believe it is an exaggeration to venture to say that as regards working with Parliament his conduct has been exemplary This bodes very well for the Sixth Framework Programme .
Mr President , the European Union is not the product of constructivist rationalism , of enlightened tyrannical elites who impose themselves on the people .
Rather , it arises from the very promising idea of working together . If there is one area where the European Union was in need of stimulus to integrate policies , broaden the area of cooperation , coordination and synergies , it is the area of research , development and technological innovation .
Consequently , the European Research Area is one of the key concerns of the present College of Commissioners . Commissioner Busquin is to be credited with launching and developing such an ambitious idea .
The European Research Area does in fact introduce new and potentially very beneficial instruments . Examples of these are cooperation and coordination regarding the research policies of Member States , concentrating on a small number of promising priorities , exploiting to the full the concept of added European value , the notion of large scale projects and of networks of excellence .
There is no doubt that if proper use were made of these instruments they would all play their part in improving the quality and competitiveness of our system of research , development and innovation .
Mr President , our amendments arose out of a number of concerns . To give you some examples : to facilitate the movement of researchers , which we consider essential , to ensure openness and cross-fertilisation amongst the research systems of the Member States , to improve basic research and to establish clearly the criteria which will allow us to set priorities .
The European Research Area creates new expectations and is a source of great hope for us all .
We wish you success , Commissioner , because your success in this field will be Parliament ' s success and the European Union ' s success too .
Rest assured : as you move forward along the route you have presented so enthusiastically , you will find us marching shoulder to shoulder with you .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when the European Commission presented its first communication on the European Research Area , through the intermediary of Commissioner Busquin , we wondered whether this was just another gadget , the kind of publicity stunt the Commission has sometimes favoured , or whether it really did represent a new direction , a turning point in the development of European research . In other words , we wondered whether the Commission was taking on board the fact that strictly Community related research makes up only a small percentage of global research activity in the European Union .
Today , after the first communication and , in particular , after this one , which defines the instruments more clearly , we know that we are definitely on the eve of a major change of course in research - although I would not go quite so far as to describe it as a Copernican revolution .
Until now , the purpose of research and of its main instrument , the Framework Programme , has been to keep European industry competitive .
Today , obviously without neglecting that fundamental objective , we feel that there is a higher ambition , a new dimension .
It is clear that if we want to achieve this European Research Area , which corresponds to a genuine Community policy , cooperation with the Member States is absolutely essential .
In that respect , I do not agree with Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , even though I find her report quite excellent .
I think we must not be overcautious .
The Heads of State knew what they were doing when they incorporated that form of cooperation into the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 .
We must make that cooperation strong and vigorous . I believe it is an essential element and one that must form the basis of the ideas and proposals in the Sixth Framework Programme .
So we must embark resolutely on this cooperation , but without forgetting that , in itself , that will not be enough to create a European Research Area .
We will have to invigorate the European Research Area by making new efforts to promote the mobility of the researchers , as Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca so rightly said .
We must also invigorate it through joint efforts in the field of major infrastructure .
We must also , of course , invigorate it by setting up networks of research centres , whether or not they are networks of excellence , but it is true that we have centres of excellence and they will have to get used to working together .
Here you face a formidable choice , Commissioner , in regard to charting these centres of excellence .
These days , one could no doubt call it a benchmarking exercise .
To call it so is one thing , to make it so is , of course , another , more difficult thing .
However , when all is said and done , we have confidence that you will succeed .
Let me conclude by saying that over and above the European Research Area , which I believe will be a structural component of the next Framework Programme , we will also have to create links between the research areas and the whole field of university education .
That is another dimension , but it is a crucial one .
Madam President , the establishment of a European Research Area is a truly innovative idea , which Commissioner Busquin proposes to make a reality over the next few years .
We are grateful to him for that and I want to congratulate him personally , just as I want to congratulate Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel on the excellent report she has drawn up on the subject .
Of course , we are in favour of this idea , and we would like to point out the aspects that the Group of the Verts / ALE considers most important .
First , we must move towards closer European integration in research .
We want national programmes to be more accessible at European level .
Point two , this European Research Area must focus on sound basic research carried out by public establishments and it must be accompanied by a European innovation area that is geared to enterprises , be they large , small or medium-sized .
At each step , we must try to create a real European added value .
Three , we must also consider introducing new tools .
It is clear that the Sixth Framework Programme we are beginning to work on is the most important one .
We must renew it and make it more accessible , more flexible and more legible .
We must look into the idea of integrated programmes , of networks of excellence , but , at the same time , we must not forget the smaller entities , which can act as sources of discovery and innovation .
Four , we are aware of the need to develop means of promoting exchanges , such as grants , to invest in young people and to create a balance , giving more time to research .
Five , we must continue to promote pure science .
We would like to see more attention paid to the subject of sciences and society and more support given to the human and social sciences .
Six , the European Research Area must place more emphasis on sustainable development , by drawing up very concrete research projects , such as projects relating to the environment or to renewable energies .
But we are not in favour of the inclusion of military research or research in the defence area .
Finally , my seventh point , we are paying close attention to the international aspect , which is not just a question of competition with the United States or Japan and which must take account of the candidate countries and the cooperation programmes with the developing countries and the Euro-Mediterranean countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , the EU is to have a single currency and will therefore have a common currency zone .
There is also a desire to make the EU a common scientific area , eventually to become a scientific superpower .
In many fields the EU is already a scientific superpower .
Not all the results and methods applied become common practice , however , as many large countries appear to have their eye purely on their own national , commercial and military interests .
They should be opening up their projects to others more .
If that does not happen , the EU will not be a genuine European Research Area , and EU money will be used to finance just the scraps and leftovers , for which there are insufficient national funds owing to the fact that the work is deemed to generally lack importance .
In Finland we use the expression ' meaningless research ' .
That means research that produces results that no one needs , uses , criticises or adds to .
The European Research Area must not become an area of meaningless research and EU money must not be spent on financing meaningless research .
We have to solve the problem that there is no qualitative monitoring of the use of EU funds in which radically scientific achievements might be appraised .
It is to be feared that the use of funds is inefficient in scientific terms .
It is possible that a common research centre will mean more bureaucracy than science .
For that reason , we must demand that any common research area must be developed according to scientific criteria .
I would like to thank Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel for her thorough work in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
The report ' s only flaw is its call for an alliance between science and the armaments industry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the coordination and pooling of European research efforts must not lead to the demise of competition between research establishments .
Coordination and cooperative arrangements are good , but there should be no anti-competitive assimilation .
Subsidiarity defines the limits of the Community ' s powers , and those limits must always be borne in mind .
Whether the Commission ' s ambitious projects are realised will depend on the breadth of vision demonstrated by national decision makers , who must rid themselves of the notion that the awarding of research contracts is a means of subsidising their own national economies .
The foremost priority must be to achieve each research aim as quickly as possible for the benefit of the entire European Economic Area .
We in the Union probably have the best training courses for scientists , but sadly they often emigrate to more attractive countries like the United States after obtaining their qualifications .
Every effort must be made to keep them in Europe , which is why it is up to us to create the best possible conditions for research activity and thus to make Europe a more appealing option for top researchers .
My heartiest congratulations to Commissioner Busquin on his excellent relationship with Parliament and on the effectiveness and intelligence with which he is preparing to establish the European Research Area and the Sixth Framework Programme .
He is working resolutely towards high quality research , towards greater recognition of the value of the research profession and towards freedom of research .
The creation of networks of excellence , increasing the mobility of researchers and setting priorities in the neuroscience sector - witness the tragic situation of BSE and Alzheimer 's Disease and gene therapy to control as yet incurable diseases - are key parts of the project .
I hope that the rapporteur - who has done an excellent job , although the time frames and the deadline for tabling amendments were a question of " blink and you 've missed it " - will , together with Commissioner Busquin , accept one of my requests , which is aimed specifically at avoiding the brain drain from Europe to the United States of America and other competitive countries .
I am convinced that it is only by means of economic and social incentives , making the research profession more competitive with that of the United States and combining it , as is the case in Italy , with senior management posts , as we do for judges , that we will , at last , be able to attract young people and to offer them a position with a future and profound respect for their dignity and the role of research scientists in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by saying that I very much endorse the Commission 's communication and Commissioner Busquin 's statements about the European Research Area .
Let me also say to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel that I congratulate her on her work , even though , as she knows , I regret the fact that , for reasons which I believe were often ideological , she rejected out of hand all the amendments I had tabled with the aim of improving the report .
I want to tell her that I personally will be more generous than she was when we collectively draft the Sixth Framework Research Programme .
With this document , the European Commission is , in effect , proposing guidelines for future measures to support research prior to the discussion on the Framework Programme for 2002 ­ 2006 .
Among these very interesting ideas , I want to take up one , which is and will be one of the leitmotifs of our debates .
It is about the need to concentrate European research activity more closely on a limited series of priorities .
The key concept here is that of European added value .
I know it will not be easy to define these priorities , but I think European research will have everything to gain if we do so .
In the same context , the innovations that will mark the Sixth Framework Research Programme are the networks of excellence and the integrated projects , concepts that are also bound to give rise to wide debate .
The Commission document also addresses the question of the mobility of students , researchers and scientists .
That will be one of the central themes of the Sixth Framework Programme and I know that the Belgian Presidency intends to organise a conference on the subject .
I welcome that .
I am glad that the role of the SMEs has been acknowledged .
I approve the call for the inclusion of the human and social sciences under the Sixth Framework Research Programme .
It is vital to hold a debate on science and society now that we are at the beginning of the third millennium .
All in all , ladies and gentlemen , the communication from the Commission and Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel 's report establish sound foundations for the major task on which we will be embarking together , on the basis of transparency , which also covers the field of controlled thermonuclear fusion .
As rapporteur , I am now available to any colleagues who wish to join me as from this moment on in working on the Sixth Framework Research Programme .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , despite the contradictions and repetitions contained in the final version of the report produced by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , it is still possible to discern the guideline which it wishes to lay down for research for the benefit of the monopolies .
The clear references to strengthening competitiveness , the proposal to compile a list of priorities , the recommendation on reducing the number of priorities in order to focus efforts on smaller research projects , the suffocating controls on every research activity will , if adopted by the Council and the Commission , result in a nightmarish structure which will smother research and researchers , wipe out any freedom in the search for new knowledge and radically change the nature of research as a process of producing new knowledge and as a productive force , especially in countries such as Greece , where nearly all research activity revolves around European funding .

Furthermore , linking the European Research Area with security and defence policy , paragraph 28 , will encourage the militarisation of research , a highly dangerous move .
In addition , the reference to new Member States , paragraph 35 , is clearly disparaging , given that most of them have a long history of research .
I want to believe that Commissioner Busquin will have the sense to ignore most of the European Parliament 's recommendation .
Otherwise , as I said earlier , we shall have a nightmarish structure in the research area rather than a European Research Area .
Needless to say , the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against the report .
( Applause from the gallery )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank Commissioner Busquin for presenting this opinion .
I believe that Commissioner Busquin bears a heavier burden of responsibility than anyone else in Europe at the present time .
The main objective in the context of the BSE crisis is to restore consumer confidence , which we can only achieve by means of objective research , by means of evidence from scientists that the foodstuffs we consume are absolutely safe .
For that reason , I believe that the whole question of BSE , which covers biotechnological and genetic research , is an important and central issue . As a member of the Committee on Budgets , I am even in favour of our making a special allocation without delay for BSE-related research , because I believe that research is the only truly important contribution that we can make to the clarification and solution of this problem .
Secondly , small and medium-sized businesses are one of my main areas of concern , and I can only endorse the rapporteur ' s view that we should move from 10 % to 15 % and that funds should be earmarked for companies with fewer than 250 employees . I would also add , however , that provision should perhaps be made for a second threshold for cooperation between large and small companies , research establishments and university institutes .
We should insist that the knowledge of large companies and the research findings of scientific foundations and institutions be passed on to the universities and recycled from there into the business world through incubators in order to create new jobs and new businesses .
We know that the market is particularly keen on small and medium-sized businesses that are innovative and produce highly marketable products .
We should , however , work hard to shift responsibility for the achievement of the aforementioned aims to the national level , because another aspect of the research guidelines is , of course , the idea of dividing up large projects and making them accessible to small businesses too .
Mr President , I believe the report is a sound one , and I congratulate the rapporteur .
I also find the term ' research area ' very effective .
I believe this is a good initiative from the Commission .

I should like to say a word or two on Mr Alyssandrakis ' remarks , which invite the comment that , if Greece spent more money on research , it would be less dependent on Brussels .
That is the problem for many countries in the European Union .
They have cut back on their research funding for both large and small projects .
European research cannot fill this gap .
If we want to have a European Research Area , the EU and the Member States must both play their part , otherwise we shall be faced with an imbalance that we cannot redress .
I also see the administration of these research projects as a major challenge , especially when we enlarge the European Union .
Brussels will not be able to go on administering them in the long run .
That is why we should try , perhaps with the budgetary control apparatus , with the Court of Auditors , to develop procedures that will lighten the administrative burden in this domain .
Besides , the research effort cannot be governed by the principles of prudent accounting .
Research means taking risks , and some of these risks will inevitably be financial .
The crux of all research activity is the final outcome .
The bottom line is the result of the research and not necessarily the financial balance .
I should far rather have a successful project on which some losses might have been sustained than a project with a perfect balance sheet but no useful findings .
( Applause )
Mr President , when the House discusses research issues , almost everything that previous speakers have said can be unanimously endorsed .
The unanimity of our general aims , however , does not make them any easier to achieve in practice .
The foundations of future research policy are , in our view , concentration of effort , in other words prioritisation , as well as flexibility and coordination .
These must necessarily be accompanied by democratic decisions taken by a heterogeneous Parliament and an equally heterogeneous Council .
I must be honest with you , Commissioner : if this initiative succeeds , you will deserve our warmest congratulations .
We shall try to assist you in your efforts .
The European Research Area is certainly a first step in the right direction and will be a component of the Sixth Framework Programme .
However , as soon as it comes to putting the theory into practice , questions inevitably start to arise .
The devil is not only in the detail .
To put it another way , you want a concentrated effort , and indeed we all want to have priorities .
So what clearly defined criteria will you be using to set these priorities , Commissioner ?
All I can say is ' Have fun ! '
The criteria have never been defined in the proper degree of detail , and both of us , Mr Caudron , have been using the term ' European added value ' for the past ten years .
Is that not so ? Neither of us has ever defined what it means , nor have we ever been able to .
Enough has already been said about flexibility , but then comes the third point , namely coordination .
A European Research Area necessarily involves coordination between the Union level and national research , and here I see party-political differences rearing their heads .
How much do we want to coordinate centrally , how much do we want to plan and specify centrally , and how much should be done from below in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity ?
It will be an absorbing debate , and the political parties are already fuelling it , but we are ready and willing to engage in that debate .
Congratulations to the rapporteur - we shall continue our cooperation .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , for her excellent work .
Similarly I would like to thank the Commissioner for a very thorough presentation .
These days information is the most important factor in production and what we are calling for is an improvement to the content of processed information .
It is in this way different , therefore , from plain information .
Technical innovation and technical lead are slowly receding into the background as the importance of content and the content industry is being stressed more and more .
We are moving away from a sort of information society hopefully to one of education , culture and values , and these guidelines really do speak of a European Research Area .
That , in my opinion , is only right , and they say it will be a way of revising the basic social structures .
The situation being as it is , I will make two proposals .
As a result of the change already under way , we should create a cluster of projects within the framework of the European Research Area , which would help develop content and the production of content .
Europe would have much to do in such a project .
Another cluster would be one that revised basic social structures ; namely , the globalisation of commerce and communication .
This is a major factor in the changes taking place today and an enormous challenge in terms of research .
For that we would need a study undertaken , as it affects us all .
We need information because commerce and communication have taken the place of politics , measured globally .
For that reason , Commissioner , I would hope that the proportion of social research can be increased .
Finally , I would like to ask what you intend to do to allow research into globalisation to strengthen and grow and give us politicians more weapons to use in debating this issue .
Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report that provides a framework for the framework .
I would like to fill in an important piece of detail within the framework .
The oft-recited Lisbon Summit sets the overall objective of " making the European Union the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the world " .
The biotechnology industry can make a major contribution to achieving this ambition .
It is therefore vital that research in the life sciences is given the highest priority in the European Research Area .
At present there is much despondency , even despair in certain areas of research .
We are seeing moratoria on crop trials and new product approvals ; deliberate damage to trial crops ; delays in transposing essential legislation ; verbal and even physical attacks on healthcare researchers ; environmental scare-stories that are unfounded and unsubstantiated ; harassment of researchers - even threats to life by animal liberation extremists ; and the use of emotive and inaccurate terms such as " Frankenstein foods " by antagonistic spokesmen and in the media .
All these pressures , often exacerbated by weak responses by governments and public bodies , are threatening our ability in Europe to realise the great potential which biotechnology offers us .
Certainly , a reasonable level of regulation is necessary but this must be directed towards encouraging rather than discouraging advances .
Only within such a positive environment will it be possible to realise this potential and be competitive in the industries of the future , in the agriculture of the future , in the highest standards of healthcare , in our contribution to third world development and the elimination of starvation and disease .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I too want to join in the thanks to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel for her excellent report .
Let me also say how encouraging I find my relationship with all the Members who are deeply concerned with this issue . They have offered me their contributions , their experience and their advice on how to construct this European Research Area , which , I believe , is widely recognised as an essential political objective for Europe .
I would also like to thank Mrs Fraisse and Mrs McNally , representing the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities respectively , for their contributions .
Clearly , Parliament 's support for this European Research Area is essential if we are to make headway with this process .
The principle of establishing a European Research Area was accepted at the Lisbon Summit . It has become a political fact .
But it is true that much remains to be done to make it a reality , as you have made abundantly clear ; in that regard Parliament 's proposals are an essential component for creating a dynamic at European level .
Let me add that , at the forthcoming Stockholm Summit , we will have a progress report on this concept of a European Research Area .
The issue is also on the agenda of the Heads of State and Government who are meeting in Stockholm , where it is one of the aspects to be considered precisely in relation to the objective of creating a dynamic European economy .
I would like to make a few comments on the various points raised in Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel 's report and Members ' statements . Of course , I broadly agree with what was said , but perhaps I can be a little more specific on some aspects .
It is quite clear that the European Research Area will be created thanks , on the one hand , to the Framework Programme , which is designed to facilitate it , but thanks mainly to open coordination between the Member States and those involved in research .
So , if the Framework Programme is an instrument , it will have to be adjusted so that it can help structure the European Research Area .
That is what you will find in the new Framework Programme : elements contributing greatly to structuring a European Research Area .
Indeed , the five-year evaluation report highlighted the need for this measure and made it very clear that the Framework Programme needed to be modified .
On the question of open coordination , I agree that our role still needs to be defined and the criteria need to be more clearly adjusted . But our role is to facilitate and promote open coordination between the Member States .
We must consider how we propose to achieve this .
Clearly , therefore , this will be a long-term job , a job that will require partnership between the Commission and the Member States , with support from the European Parliament and support , Mr Alyssandrakis , from the entire scientific community .
It is indeed a project that concerns all European scientists . There is no distinction .
There are , of course , elements of subsidiarity ; there is research that is carried out in the Member States and there is added value research .
So we are still far away , light years away , in fact , from the kind of monopoly to which you referred and which is certainly not what any of the Members of this Parliament have in mind .
To that end , we will have to adapt new intervention formulae and , in this context , some speakers , including Mrs Fraisse and Mr Desama , referred to the question of the link with education .
This science-education link is very relevant and it will , in fact , be on the agenda of the meeting of Ministers for Education and Science in Upsala .
We will be holding a joint meeting between Ministers for Education and Science , an informal Council , in Sweden on 2 and 3 March , on the subject of science , society and education in the sciences ; we will also be holding an initial discussion between Ministers for Research on the future Framework Programme .
On the question of the new instruments I welcome your support , and Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca highlighted the importance of these new instruments very clearly .
It is in fact thanks to them that we will be able to act more effectively while also , as Mr Linkohr said , simplifying the management procedures , and therefore avoid duplication .
So that is the spirit in which the instruments proposed by the Commission were defined .
But I also understand your concern about the need to ensure that these instruments offer equal opportunities for all .
They must not look as though they were reserved for one category or another , for one group or another or tailored to any particular group or category . So it is in that spirit that we will need to define the new instruments more precisely .
On the networks of excellence , I think it is quite clear that this is a crucial point , but I am also aware that we have to agree on the definition of networks with a capacity for excellence .
In fact , we should use that term rather than referring to ' giant ' centres .
These are not ' giant ' centres of excellence .
They are networks with a capacity for excellence , depending on the subject and field of research .
So the objective is to establish virtual centres of excellence that incorporate the capacity for excellence in the priority areas .
It follows that this is certainly not intended to be a tool , amongst other things , for the small and medium-sized enterprises and the countries that are least developed in terms of research .
There are centres of excellence in all the European countries , based on the criteria , which we will be discussing , of the European added value of the programme .
That is obviously one of the questions on which the discussions will focus .
Let me say in passing that Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel was quite right in what she said about infrastructure .
As you know , we have already tried to establish an infrastructure with the GEANT programme and to reconcile the infrastructures of all the European countries , with the aim of attaining a capacity of 10 gigabits .
But , as she pointed out , we will have to achieve 100 gigabits , so the infrastructure programme will give priority to encouraging coordination between the Member States , since they have to make the effort on their own territory . We will be discussing that priority when we come to the new Framework Programme .
Variable geometry , or what has been called improved cooperation , is evidently one of the issues that raises questions , since Article 169 of the Treaty provides for it but it has never been implemented until now .
That is why a very major debate is being held on this issue , which concerns efficiency but is also an institutional matter .
We therefore believe that it is up to the Member States to take the initiative .
We can only make proposals on the participation of the Union if we have real participation by the Member States .
But I agree that we must ensure that this instrument does not discriminate against certain Member States and that Parliament is fully involved in the major decision making in this field .
We will have an opportunity to discuss this in greater detail when we come to consider the proposal for the Framework Programme .
It will be a major theme of that discussion .
Lastly , on priorities and criteria , I believe we have outlined the general criteria to illustrate the priorities set out on an indicative basis .
These criteria draw on the replies we received in a wide-ranging opinion poll of all those involved in research , which we ran on the Internet throughout the year 2000 .
We consulted a wide range of scientific and industrial groups on these questions via the Internet .
This showed that there are clearly three major subjects that are guaranteed to produce added value .
They are : everything concerned with post-genome research ; the information society , together with the cost of the Internet , which is an essential factor of democratisation ; and the question of the nano-technologies and advanced materials and processes .
These are three important subjects , without forgetting questions of food safety , which is , of course , very much on our minds in Europe today , the quality of life and sustainable development .
These will indeed be discussed in the communication the Commission intends to draft in preparation for the Gothenburg Summit .
It will discuss sustainable development as one of the key lines of research in the field of the environment , energy and transport .
On SMEs , Members are clearly right to emphasise their importance .
Initially , it was said that at least 10 % of the appropriations under the Fifth Framework Programme should be allocated to the SMEs .
It seems we are now moving towards a more ambitious target and we might be able to argue for 15 % in the next Framework Programme .
Let me now tell Mr Caudron that European added value is clearly the key component .
How should we define it ?
I think it should be defined according to the research projects in question .
The concept of European added value is not a global one .
It is defined according to the subject of the research , which must be carried out at least at European level if it is to match up to world competition .
On the subject of nuclear research , I have no objection , quite the contrary in fact , to Parliament being widely involved in the discussion .
You referred to the meeting on nuclear fusion .
Let me point out that it was in no way a formal meeting but simply a question and answer session on a document , which is , in fact , accessible and which sets out the four possible options in regard to fusion .
I think we cannot avoid a debate on this question .
Indeed , it has already been discussed in earlier debates on the previous Framework Programmes .
I , personally , am in favour of an open debate on this subject , because it is a fundamental social issue , an entirely legitimate question .
Women and society , young people and society : that is clearly the subject of the follow-up activities of the Helsinki Group we set up to look at the position of women in the sciences , both in the public and private sectors .
Clearly there is also the question of international cooperation . There is that international dimension : the role that Europe plays in the world in relation to research and to serious diseases such as AIDS , tuberculosis and so forth .
We have drafted a communication on development with my colleague Mr Nielson , which will be on the Commission 's agenda next week .
The international dimension must always form part of the debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , perhaps I have spoken at great length , but this was an opportunity for me to spark off some debate on the forthcoming Framework Programme , which will probably be adopted in the next few weeks , or even next week . That would allow me to come and present the broad outlines of the new Framework Programme in about a fortnight 's time , as a follow-up to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel 's report .
Let me close by once again thanking her and all the Members for their contributions .
Thank you very much for your address , Commissioner . We certainly did not find it too long .
It was very relevant and much appreciated .
Mr President , I had forgotten to thank all my colleagues for an enjoyable collaboration , but Commissioner Busquin has also forgotten something .
Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl asked very clearly what the criteria are for prioritisation .
This is not the first time we have asked this ; we put the same question at the two previous meetings of the Industry Committee .
We do not want to be told that they are general criteria .
We asked for a clear description of the criteria for research priorities .
We as a committee would very much like an answer .
Mr President , I think you are going to be gratified in the very near future with the advent of the Sixth Framework Programme of projects .
Then matters will be even more clearly defined .
We shall , of course , have scope to discuss this when we come to prepare the new programme .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Aid system for cotton
The next item is the debate on report ( A5-0022 / 2001 ) by Mr Korakas , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on
I. the proposal for a Council Regulation adjusting for the sixth time , the system of aid for cotton introduced by Protocol 4 annexed to the Act of Accession of Greece [ COM ( 1999 ) 492 - C5-0049 / 2000 - 1999 / 0202 ( CNS ) ] ;
II. the proposal for a Council Regulation on production aid for cotton [ COM ( 1999 ) 492 - C5-0049 / 2000 - 1999 / 0202 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , the cotton sector is of great social and economic importance , as you know , to Spain and , even more so , to Greece .
In Greece , cotton is becoming a national product , employing over 300 000 families and producing about 1 350 000 tonnes of cotton in Objective 1 areas , which have a far higher unemployment rate than the Community average and where the average size of holdings is much smaller than the Community average .
The Community needs 4.5 million tonnes of unginned cotton .
In other words , this product is in particularly short supply in the European Union , with Community production covering a mere 35 % of demand .
Guaranteed national quantities are always irritatingly lower than actual production , which has resulted in producers ' incomes being eroded by high coresponsibility levies while , paradoxically , the bigger the quota overshoot , the lower the cost to the Community budget .
This unacceptable situation has justifiably exasperated our producers , who are turning out in force , just as they did years ago and again yesterday throughout the countryside in Greece .
However , instead of strengthening the current regulation , as rightly demanded by our cotton growers , by bringing quotas into line with current production levels and adjusting at least some of the institutional prices , which have been frozen since 1992 , along comes the European Commission and not only does it propose to keep support at its current low levels , it increases the coresponsibility levy by 20 % .
The Commission 's objective of drastically reducing cotton production is unjustified because this is a product in which the European Union is only 30-35 % self-sufficient .
It is wrong because it penalises cotton producers for the fall in international cotton prices over the last three years - despite the fact that they are not to blame and the Commission did nothing to rectify the situation .
I should point out here that the European Commission tried to back up its unacceptable proposal by presenting it when international prices were at their lowest for a decade , in December 1999 .
Since then , international prices have doubled .
Similarly , the European Union is proposing to limit aid for cotton production when it is most needed , with the United States of America channelling more and more money to its cotton producers , enabling them to increase their output and depressing international prices .
The environmental alibi does not stand up because cotton production - and this has been scientifically proven - is much less harmful to the environment than similar types of subsidised production which producers abandoned in order to grow cotton .
The Commission has not taken any account whatsoever of Protocol 4 to the Act of Accession of Greece , which sets out the scheme for cotton with a view to aiding cotton production in the regions of the Community in which it is important to the agricultural economy .
Cotton producers are calling for the Community preference to be extended to cotton , especially given the shortfall in the Community in cotton .
Cotton is the chief plant-based textile fibre which is a natural and healthier product than the synthetic fibres with which it competes , it provides jobs for hundreds of thousands of farmers and it may even attract young farmers to remain in the countryside , which is being depopulated .
What do we propose ?
We propose to lift all restrictions on cotton growing , quotas , coresponsibility levies , environmental consequences , so that the minimum price is paid in full to producers .
Despite this , since for a variety of financial reasons some ceiling has to be set , this ceiling should cover present actual production by our cotton growers , the system of aid should be maintained , institutional prices of cotton should be adjusted in the light of official data concerning average Community inflation between 1995 and 2000 , aid should be paid directly to cotton producers through their cooperative associations , without the intervention of private ginning undertakings , after studying the most suitable procedure , and Annex B of the regulation , which determines increases and reductions in the minimum producer price on the basis of quality characteristics , should be included in the new regulation .
We therefore feel that it is essential for the European Parliament to support the producers ' call for aid .
It is in precisely this spirit that we proposed a quota of 1.5 million tonnes for Greece and 450 000 tonnes for Spain .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development decided on 1 200 000 for Greece and 350 000 for Spain .
We want to call on Parliament to stand by the side of farmers so that people stay in the countryside and so that , at the end of the day , our farmers can survive .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the first place , it should be made clear that we are dealing with a shortage product within the European Union . Indeed , only 42 % of demand was met between 1995 and 1999 .
Moreover it is also the case that , as Mr Korakas , whom I would like to congratulate on his report , has rightly stated , this is a crop grown in the most disadvantaged regions of Spain and Greece .
The production of cotton is very labour-intensive . This means that it is essential to maintain cotton production in order to preserve the social and economic fabric of these areas .
It is also the reason for the two most important requests made by Parliament : that the overshoot penalty percentage should not be increased from 50 % to 60 % , and that the maximum guaranteed quantities be brought into line with actual production levels . I am only advocating an approximation , not an equalisation .
When the Commission drew up its proposal , it was alarmed by unduly low world prices , which had reached a ten-year low .
As a result the cost of aid had risen , due to the system of aid for cotton .
Circumstances have now changed , Commissioner : prices have risen to almost record levels , the money allocated to paying farmers has been reduced and the proposal for a regulation can no longer be justified . However , the amendments adopted unanimously by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development certainly are justified .
An increase in penalties would put many of the smallest holdings out of business , with all the social problems that this would entail .
The current imbalance between actual production levels and the maximum guaranteed quantities is the reason for the huge penalties borne by farmers .
As Mr Korakas has rightly said , we could also invoke Protocol 4 of the Act of Accession of Greece , which calls for cotton production to be maintained in those areas where it is considered important to the agricultural economy .
It also states that farmers are entitled to a fair income . This would improve the agricultural infrastructure and so stabilise the market .
The Committee on Agriculture trusts that the amendments it has put forward will stimulate the implementation of collective environmental measures , through the sector ' s producers ' associations , which we aim to promote and support .
We hope that the Commission will take account of these arguments and amendments , and agree to amend the proposal .
Mr President , Mr Korakas , the rapporteur , has completed a very important piece of work over the last few months .
I would like to thank him very much for being open to dialogue and to all manner of proposals , right from the start . He has been very willing to listen .
Together with the work carried out by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development this has resulted in a splendid European Parliament report .
If the Commission adopts the amendments put forward in Mr Korakas ' report , the result will be a much improved cotton system .
The improvements will include adjustment of the guaranteed national quantities , the aid system , and the establishment of a new permanent framework recognising producers ' associations .
Moreover , the amendments tabled by Parliament encourage the implementation of more environmentally-friendly measures which will save water , reduce the use of pesticides , and provide for appropriate management of plastic waste materials .
However , in my opinion the Commission ' s proposal is too minimalist . It is concerned solely with saving money and is incompatible with what is supposed to be the European Union ' s top priority : protecting jobs .
This is because insufficient account is taken of job preservation or creation when choosing between the options available .
Ladies and gentlemen , I therefore urge you to vote for and support Amendment No 20 , tabled by Mr Garot and myself on behalf of the Socialist Group .
This amendment makes a significant proposal .
We ask Member States to take employment into account when adopting measures to change the criteria for land eligible for aid .
In making such decisions , account should be taken of the number of jobs dependent on these areas .
We also propose that alternative crops and the existence of other options be investigated .
In short , Mr President , this is all about social and economic sensitivity .
I trust that our amendment will be supported , and would like to congratulate the speaker once again on his magnificent report .
- Mr President , Commissioner , I would first like to congratulate the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the rapporteur on the report presented and the work undertaken . It reveals the anxiety affecting this important sector of European agriculture and , more particularly , significant areas of Greece and Andalusia , the main producer regions .
Cotton is a traditional crop which provides a livelihood for thousands of European families for whom there is hardly any alternative source of income .
There is a significant cotton shortfall in the European Union ; we can only meet 40 % of demand , and it remains the best natural fibre for fabric production , when compared to synthetic fibres .
Furthermore , cotton has replaced other intensive crops which generate more pollution and greater surpluses .
However , despite the improvements , it is true that there are still environmental problems we need to solve .
Commissioner , we support the Commission ' s proposal of maintaining the present system of production aid , based on the compensation payments system . However , we do not believe that imposing stiffer penalties is the right way to restrict expenditure on this sector .
It is simplistic to talk of containing spending and only to present budgetary considerations for reforming the aid system , when what is really happening is that farmers ' incomes are falling whilst we are witnessing an increase in imports from outside the European Union .
This constitutes a structural change , since expenditure has been determined principally by changes to international prices , not by an actual increase in the area of land under cultivation .
Stiffer penalties will doubtless lead to greater concentration of the sector . It will pass into the hands of a few individuals and the viability of family farms will be seriously threatened .
However , cotton growing will not cease , which is the intention .
We believe that the producers ' organisations are the best means of improving the effectiveness of the necessary self-regulation measures concerning production and environmental protection .
In conclusion I should like to stress that the Commission must gradually recognise the actual production in these areas . It should adjust guaranteed national quantities , bringing them into line with actual production of cotton , a product we do not produce enough of in the Union .
) Mr President , our starting point is a Commission proposal that took advantage of a temporary situation , an all-time low , to justify an untenable restrictive proposal .
One year on , world market prices have risen by 90 % . The risk of excessive costs no longer exists .
In fact , costs are now minimal . We therefore have to ask ourselves why the Commission has not withdrawn this proposal which no longer has a raison d ' être .
It is two years since China decided to export its stockpiled cotton causing a record drop in world prices .
I hope that the Commission does not attempt to maintain a proposal on the cotton system exploiting a decision by the Chinese Government , a decision which had no lasting effects .
If the Commission simply wishes to cut production aid crucial for the most disadvantaged regions of the European Union , it would be better if it said so clearly .
As part of an increasingly unbalanced common agricultural policy , the effects of these proposals , including the social effects , are wholly negative as earlier speakers explained .
In my opinion , the merit of Mr Korakas ' report is that it corrects the Commission ' s proposal .
It also makes other very useful suggestions on effecting adjustment whilst taking account of some of the peculiarities of cotton .
Firstly , it proposes adjusting the national guaranteed quantities in line with actual production .
This will put and end to the anomalies of the aid system , in which costs increase as production decreases .
Secondly - I must not be side-tracked by other matters - Mr Korakas ' report outlines a scheme for supporting producers ' organisations , and most importantly , a system to implement measures reducing the impact of cotton cultivation on the environment .
The Commission dwells on the possible environmental problems of growing cotton , but fails to suggest solutions .
I hope , Commissioner , that when finalising the legislative procedure , the Commission and the Council will include the amendments unanimously approved by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as previous speakers have requested .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , cotton , which is the subject of today 's debate , is basically grown in two Member States of the European Union , Greece and Spain , but it concerns the whole Union because there may be cotton processing and cotton fibre and textile producing factories in any Member State of the Union .
So when we examine cotton growing , we must bear these two factors in mind .
Another point worth noting in the case of the subject at issue is the fact that Community cotton production falls far below its actual requirements , barely covering around 35 % of demand .
Plus , European cotton growers are small and medium-sized farmers with an average of 4.2 hectares each , at least they are in Greece .
Production , therefore , is determined by the small size of the holdings and the soil conditions which meet the specifications for this crop .
These objective conditions have brought about a situation over the years which , at production level , is as follows : average annual volume of cotton produced : 1 200 000 tonnes in Greece and 350 000 tonnes in Spain .
The report finds a way round this in a compromise proposal - a judicious , moderate , perfectly realistic proposal - calling on the Commission to recognise this state of affairs by introducing national guaranteed quantities of unginned cotton of 1 200 000 tonnes for Greece , 350 000 tonnes for Spain and 1 500 tonnes for each of the other Member States .
I think that this responsible and realistic approach in the report should be accepted by the Commission as it stands and strengthened in the forthcoming negotiations in the World Trade Organisation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by expressing my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Korakas , and to the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for the report and for their thorough examination of the Commission ' s proposal .
Aid per hectare for cotton is three to four times higher than for other crops ; that certainly has to be considered whenever this whole issue is discussed .
In the view of the Commission , this special effort by the Community , in particular the extra financial input , is only warranted by the economic and , more importantly , the social significance attached to cotton in some regions of the Community .
In the last few years , however , the area of land that is planted with cotton has increased considerably , and yields per hectare have also risen sharply .
This poses new risks , both to the budget and to the environment , for we must not forget that cotton planting is a very intensive form of crop farming and involves the highly concentrated use of fertilisers and pesticides .
The main aim of the Commission ' s proposal , therefore , is to ensure that an excessive increase in production levels is accompanied by an accelerated reduction of the minimum price levels we set .
Adoption of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , however , would lead to a substantial increase in the size of the budget for cotton production .
This , in turn , would mean an increase rather than a decrease in production incentives , which would also tend to undermine the environmental safeguards .
To make it clear what is at stake here , let me tell you that , even if we assume stable yields and an average market price , the additional cost of the committee ' s amendments would be in the order of EUR 650 million a year .
This corresponds to an 85 % increase in the budget .
In view of the current budgetary situation , I certainly could not comply with such a request .
As for the individual amendments , Nos 1 , 3 , 4 and 9 to 13 seek to increase prices by 10 % and the national guaranteed quantities by 50 % .
Apart from sending costs soaring , these measures could lead to a 60 % increase in production , amounting to an additional output of 900 000 tonnes , with the consequences I have just described .
Amendments Nos 5 and 14 propose that the minimum price be indexed on the basis of the quality of unginned cotton ; the price scale would be adopted by the Member States if the relevant professional organisations could not reach agreement on a price scale .
We have had some apposite experience of such ideas in the past .
It emerged very clearly that it is simply impossible to establish and administer such a system centrally , because there are quite simply far too many factors that influence the quality of raw cotton .
For that reason , we must stand by our view that this question should continue to be decided by the interested parties , in other words , between the purchasers and suppliers of raw cotton .
We do , however , propose the introduction of a criterion , namely conformity with the weighted average of world market prices for cotton fibres .
This will give us a framework that will make it easier to negotiate future agreements .
Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 16 to 19 relate to rules governing the formulation of official statutes by cotton producers ' organisations and specifying the activities of such organisations for which Community aid is payable .
This is intended to apply to environmental measures in particular .
I must draw your attention to the fact that such a regime already exists and is set forth in Regulation ( EEC ) No 389 / 1982 .
Moreover , the creation of producers ' organisations has been financed by the Community for the past ten years .
As is customary in other sectors , these bodies are expected to meet their running costs from the funds allocated to the common organisation of the market and from environmental aid .
We cannot accept these amendments , because they would mean the existence of two different sets of rules for producers ' organisations as well as two different funding systems .
If we also take account of the increased production that would result from the requested rise in the national guaranteed quantities , this alone could entail annual costs in the region of EUR 80 million .
As far as the environment is concerned , Amendments Nos 6 , 15 and 20 seek wide scope for the Member States to amend the common organisation of the market , not only on the basis of environmental considerations but also , and above all , for economic and social reasons .
This is really unacceptable because it puts the very existence of the environmental safeguards in jeopardy .
So there remains Amendment No 2 , which is essentially intended to correct a mistake in the Spanish text .
But , in point of fact , neither a translation problem nor an error has occurred here , because the expression precio de objetivo is meant to refer to the target price , not to the actual market price .
I very much regret that , on this occasion , the Commission cannot accept the committee ' s amendments , but I trust I have fully explained the reasons for this .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
I cannot escape the conclusion that we have not yet succeeded in solving all the problems in the cotton sector .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Financing of quality and marketing improvement plans
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0035 / 2001 ) by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation extending for a period of up to one year the financing of certain quality and marketing improvement plans approved under Title IIa of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1035 / 72 .
Mr President , this proposal concerns fruits in shells or pods : that is , nuts and locust beans .
We are therefore dealing with walnuts , hazelnuts , almonds , pistachios and chestnuts .
These products are generally found alongside other fruits on the table and in supermarkets . However , when it comes to decision making , they are not treated fairly and reasonably in relation to other fruits and vegetables .
Through this proposal , the European Parliament is being consistent with itself . On two previous occasions , 16 June 2000 and 26 October 2000 , Parliament already came out in favour of maintaining support and proposing an extension until the introduction of a new aid system .
On both these occasions the vote was carried by unanimity . Furthermore , in my view , Mr President , this aid is justified because it benefits the agricultural workers who need it as it helps to compensate for a reduction in their income .
I do believe that granting over-generous aid in favourable market situations should be avoided . Cereals are a case in point .
Both the Commission and the Court of Auditors have stressed that undue compensation was awarded . In fact , in the period between 1993 and 1997 , the Commission estimates that excess compensation worth EUR 8 500 million was granted to the cereal sector .
The Court of Auditors puts the figure for excess compensation awarded at EUR 13 100 million . I am not in favour of granting aid as if it were a lottery .
The aid we are proposing now really is necessary .
In addition , this proposal is in line with the provisions in Agenda 2000 . When the latter was adopted Commissioner Fischler himself stated repeatedly that the intention was to maintain all aid .
The Council agreed with the European Parliament ' s position . Hence , on 17 July 2000 , it invited the Commission to extend the aid .
The Commission ' s proposal is on the right lines , because it redresses the earlier error of attempting to cut off aid .
It is right to do so . However , that alone is not enough to ensure a future for the sector .
It does not even cover the cost of projects under way this year . The budget has to be ready in June , and programmes relating to plantations in the first part of this year would not be included .
There is an obvious shortage of these products within the European Union . Walnuts are imported from the United States .
I have to tell you , Commissioner , that last Christmas , El Corte Inglés , a major department store in my country , strongly promoted Californian walnuts , but walnuts from Extremadura and other European walnuts were sidelined .
We import products of this nature to the detriment of the agricultural workers I am speaking for .
Commissioner , you ought to be taking note of what I am saying because this constitutes a precedent .
We are in favour of opening up markets and coming to multilateral agreements and to bilateral agreements , with Turkey for instance .
We are happy to show solidarity .
Nevertheless , the Commission cannot condone European agriculture abandoning these crops as a result of commercial agreements which have caused the collapse of such an important sector .
Will the Commission allow European aid to the agricultural sector to be cut off ?
And does this mean that European agriculture will no longer receive preferential treatment ?
Mr President , I speak for a sector which diversifies agriculture and which truly has great potential for economic development . Mr Fischler is not well acquainted with the Mediterranean area .
He ought however to make it his business to become acquainted with the benefits of this sector . It is important for the processing industry , has a most favourable impact on the environment and arrests desertification .
Commissioner , I call on you to amend your position and come into line with the spirit of the Council ' s agreement .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , you too have gone one minute over your time .
We do have a little time to spare , which is why I am not being quite so strict as I might be .
Nevertheless , we ought to keep to our speaking times .
Once civil servants reach the rank of Commissioner , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , they acquire the ability to do two things at once !
Mr President , Commissioner , I shall try to compensate for the fact that the previous speaker overran her time by not using all the time allocated to me .
Our group ' s position is that we support Mrs Izquierdo Rojo ' s report whilst also congratulating the Commission insofar as it is simplifying the procedure .
It is important to note that simplification . Simplification is often heralded but rarely achieved .
I think something will be achieved this time , because a need which has been mentioned in Parliament on numerous occasions , adopted almost unanimously and accepted by the Council has been recognised .
For example , the resolutions dated 16 June and 26 October are in that spirit .
We are now proposing that the improvement plans be extended .
We do not merely wish them to be extended for one year only .
Instead , we would like the amendments unanimously adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development requesting a two-year extension taken into account . We trust the Commission and the Commissioner will be sensitive to these proposals .
They are necessary and the Commissioner is perfectly well aware that a year is not long enough to assess the report on the future evolution of the COM in fruit he is due to submit . Nor is it long enough to find a permanent solution for the shell and pod fruit sector , which will have to become part of the fruit and vegetable sector under special conditions .
I am aware that all this will prove costly , and that current funding for this major problem is inadequate .
However , we cannot allow sectors which are so important to their regions to be written off as a result of agreements signed earlier . Community preference arrangements in those agreements made it hard for the sector to survive , not to mention a whole range of points already made concerning its environmental and social significance .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the unanimity evident at the vote and throughout the drafting of this report identifying the main concerns felt by the sector .
The European Parliament ' s resolution of 16 June contains an ongoing appeal for the search for a solution which will provide for direct support for farmers ' income to be awarded , enabling production to continue and preventing the depopulation of very underprivileged areas .
I should like to highlight how these crops contribute to environmental conservation in the most desertified areas of the Union . This is true of almonds and hazelnuts , for example .
As for chestnuts , they are produced in indigenous Community forests , which are preserved for that purpose .
The Commission is therefore called upon to put forward proposals offering clear support to the sector . A flat rate of aid per hectare to be administered by producers ' organisations should be introduced and the structural crisis in the sector should be addressed .
In conclusion , the present arrangements should be extended until the introduction of permanent support measures for these products . They are of regional importance , offer a high level of food safety , are a source of energy in the Mediterranean diet and make a valuable contribution to safeguarding the environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , nuts , to which we should also add the locust bean , are one of southern Europe ' s most common crops .
The only specific aid from which they have benefited in the past and from which they benefit today is limited to cofinancing under plans to improve quality and marketing which expired at the end of last year and which the Commission is now proposing to extend by another year .
This Commission proposal has come about as a result of the acknowledgement , as made by the Commission itself in the preamble to its proposal , that other measures , for which the sector is also eligible , have not been sufficient or directly applicable to nuts .
The Commission therefore promised to present new proposals in a report that it would publish by the end of 2000 , which it has still not done .
It makes no sense to extend the already scarce measures in place by another year and to say nothing else about the future of this sector , still less so in that the sector is undergoing a particular crisis due to the extremely strong competition from third countries .
What would make sense is for nuts to be treated as a separate sector within the Common Organisation of the Markets in fruits and vegetables .
This was why , as a matter of fact , at the time of the proposal on the new COM in fruits and vegetables , the European Parliament adopted an amendment requesting the Commission to present proposals that would provide the nut sector with permanent measures and aid of the kind that exist for other agricultural sectors .
This is what the rapporteur is proposing and this is what we hope the Commission will put right .
In the short term , until these future measures materialise , the most prudent course of action to adopt would be to extend existing aid not by one year but by two , as the European Parliament ' s Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has suggested .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank you , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , for your report and to express my thanks to everyone else for the time and effort they have put into the 22 amendments .
Before I deal with these , allow me to say a few brief words on the basic principles that underlie our proposal .
The present regime for nuts and locust beans has been in place for ten years , and the first quality-improvement plans expired in the year 2000 .
During this ten-year period , 92 producers ' organisations have been awarded a total of EUR 750 million in Community funding to improve the production and marketing of nuts and locust beans .
Successful restructuring has indeed been effected in some cases , and producers have become more competitive .
As a result , they are generally in a stronger position than they used to be when it comes to securing markets for their goods and competing successfully with suppliers from countries outside the EU .
An amount of EUR 250 million is earmarked once again for the agreements and measures that are still in force .
The Commission believes that the ten-year plan has , in principle , adequately achieved the goal that was set ten years ago , namely the creation of a stable basis for economically viable producer organisations .
The Council , however , asked the Commission to propose the continuation of the payments to nut and locust bean producers in the 2001 financial year .
This was the basis on which the Commission drew up its proposal .
Your amendments show that this proposal does not go far enough for your liking .
The amendments , some of which refer to resolutions adopted by the European Parliament in June and October of last year , chiefly relate to three areas .
One group of amendments , comprising Nos 14 , 15 , 17 and 20 , seeks to maintain the aid for quality and marketing-improvement plans beyond the year 2001 and to treat as eligible expenditure all money spent on work that is carried out by the end of 2002 .
Amendments Nos 10 and 11 refer to the modest level of funds required for this purpose .
The purpose of the second group of amendments , comprising Nos 8 and 18 , is to maintain the special aid for hazelnuts through to the end of 2002 .
Both groups of amendments are at least partly motivated by a perceived need to protect EU producers from imports .
As far as these amendments are concerned , let me make the following points : firstly , the framework of this proposal is confined to the funding of programmes under the budget for 2001 .
It was never meant to be extended to the 2002 financial year , because that would entail additional costs amounting to EUR 82 million .
Secondly , specific aid for hazelnuts is not covered by the proposal .
Its inclusion would generate a further EUR 110 million in additional budgetary expenditure over and above the cost of the present proposal , which is assessed at EUR 24 million .
Amendment No 16 , which deals with chestnuts , does not fall within the scope of the regime we are debating here .
The third group of amendments , comprising Nos 6 , 7 , 12 , 13 , 21 and 22 , are designed to secure the long-term future of nut and locust bean production by means of other support measures .
In addition , Amendments Nos 9 and 19 propose the continuation of support within the framework of the Common Organisation of the Market and of Regulation ( EC ) No 2200 / 96 .
With regard to this third group , allow me to tell you how the Commission sees the future of this area of economic activity and the support it should receive .
If we consider the present situation with regard to the production of nuts and locust beans , we see , on the one hand , economically viable and very definitely competitive producer organisations , which are , in a manner of speaking , the Union ' s flagship producers . It is they who grow new varieties and who use modern production and marketing methods .
These producers have made good use of the money we have provided over the past ten years and a number of them will surely also be able to benefit from the extension that is under discussion today .
On the other hand , unfortunately , there are also producers and producer organisations that have to operate in extremely difficult conditions - in disadvantaged areas , for instance , many of which are in remote mountainous regions - with no irrigation facilities .
In these areas there are literally thousands of families who remain partly or totally dependent on nut and / or locust bean production for their livelihood .
On account of the natural disadvantages that their geographical location imposes on all of these producers , they will always find it difficult to compete with importers from countries outside the EU .
For this reason , we believe it makes far more sense - and this , indeed , is one of the aims we set ourselves in 1999 - to support this latter group of producers , whose problems are primarily of a social nature , in the framework of rural development .
That is why we built this second pillar of the common agricultural policy , and so it is right to make use of it in this context .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , responsibility for rural development has also been shifted to the Member States , which must include measures of this type in their programmes and accord them due priority .
Having done so , the Member States are then free to decide on the precise nature of their rural development projects .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.47 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon . )

VOTE
. Mr President , we have a situation here where under Rule 67 and Rule 68 we can choose what to do now with this initiative .
Under Rule 68 , we would normally ask the Council to withdraw the proposal .
However , I have conferred with the rapporteur and others .
The committee does not particularly wish to see this proposal come back .
We would prefer to use the precedent which we established in the case of dual-use goods of a vote now to reject the Council 's proposal .
Members may be interested to know that in order to reject the proposal , we have to vote in favour of the draft legislative resolution .
This is because , having rejected the modified proposal , the services automatically now change the text so that the text reads " Council rejects " .
We are asking Parliament to now vote in favour of the legislative resolution which rejects the Council 's text .
I hope I have made myself clear !
Mr Watson , you put that very neatly .
We can do that and there is a precedent .
I can confirm that , as is being communicated to me on my headphones by the services .
We can do it in accordance with the procedure that you propose .
Mr Poettering has the floor .
Mr President , a moment ago you quite rightly asked where the Council was .
The Council ought to be delivering an opinion .
I find it unacceptable that the Council is not represented here , and we should voice our protest to the Council .
Mr Poettering , in my opinion you are completely correct .
I shall ensure that the President , Mrs Fontaine , communicates our displeasure to the Council .
I concur with the warm applause for Mr Poettering on that point .
We shall now proceed to vote on the legislative resolution amended in accordance with Mr Watson ' s communication in which Article 1 rejects the accordingly modified initiative of the French Republic .
Mr President , I should just like Parliament to be clear about what it is voting on here .
I am asking Parliament to do as we did before - to vote in favour of this in order to reject the Council 's proposal .
Mr Watson , you , and some others with you , were momentarily confused .
The vote is completely clear .
If you want it rejected you must vote in favour .
I give the floor to the rapporteur .
Mr President , I believe it is important that the rapporteur says a brief word on this .
I regret that we have not managed to exercise our parliamentary responsibility .
But Mr Watson is right , and we should support him .
I appeal for the support of every Member , otherwise we shall make our Parliament look ridiculous .
Mr President , I was the shadow rapporteur for my group , and there is no doubt that we engaged in very fruitful cooperation .
However , one of our key points in Article 4 has been rejected , and so I must recommend that my group vote against this report , contrary to our previous agreement .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I should like to lodge a complaint concerning the unacceptable behaviour of the Vice-President , Mr Friedrich .
He should be setting an example as regards compliance with the Rules of Procedure and he has done exactly the opposite in this case .
( Applause and protests )
Mr President , I do not wish to speak on the subject of the debate .
I merely wish to say that no Member of this House has the right to single out any fellow Member with that sort of remark .
Mr President , it is certainly true that the House agreed very amicably on a common starting point and a common line in the debate on the preparation for Stockholm .
The PPE-DE proposal that was rejected is a mere nuance .
By no stretch of the imagination is it one of the cornerstones of the resolution .
I am very disappointed that this House , which is unanimous in its desire to demand more rights for the European Parliament , has neither the competence nor the guts to make a joint contribution to the Stockholm Summit .
( Loud sustained applause )
Mr President , I have to say that I prepared some of my explanations of vote yesterday , which was Valentine 's Day , and so they may reflect some of the spirit of the day .
With regard to this document , drawn up by Mrs Peijs , which concerns a directive on the reorganisation and winding-up of insurance undertakings , I have to say that Mrs Peijs is certainly - as always - attentive to financial issues .
I hope that , whenever this issue - which I voted for - is debated in future , my request to help pensioners throughout Europe by prioritising the liquidation of pension policies in the winding up-of insurance companies which have gone bankrupt will be remembered .
Lambert Report ( A5-0026 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted against the Lambert report because the Council of the European Union does not actually intend to regulate the important matter of the movement of workers who need to make sure that they do not lose any of their pensions .
For example , Italy refuses to pay old-age and invalidity pensions to European Union citizens who move to other States of the Union .
However , it allows the citizens of non-Community countries who come to Italy to cash their pension contributions when they leave , after which they can come back and claim the same old-age and invalidity pensions and helplessness allowances which are denied to Italian citizens who move to other States of the European Union .
It is high time that the issue of European Union citizens ' pensions was dealt with properly .
The European institutions themselves are starting to be ashamed of the minimum standards enshrined in Community legislation on social matters , drawn up any old how , yet while taking good care not to touch employers ' prerogatives in any country whatsoever .
The very fact that , with every passing year , additional steps to harmonise the rights of employees moving within the European Union are not taken indicates that , thirty years after the initial directives , there is no more harmonisation than there are Community rights to bring employers to book .
Harmonising the situation of EU workers ought to mean that employers and Member States are obliged to bring wages throughout the European Union in line with those of countries where they are highest and to stipulate the same social rights for the whole of the Union in line with the social provision for illness , unemployment and retirement that is most advantageous to the workers .
The only form of harmonisation which the European Union is interested in , however , is harmonisation of the rules governing competition between industrial and financial groups .
The movement of workers is considered only insofar as it affects the movement of goods and of capital .
The reason that we did not vote against this report is only because we did not wish to stand in the way of a few scant benefits that specific categories of workers may gain from it .
Since , however , we are completely opposed to the motivation of this approach , we did not vote in favour of it either .
UK Conservatives are broadly happy with the original Lambert Report , which in its initial form usefully cleaned up some technical matters .
Specifically however , we have voted against Amendments Nos 8 onwards .
These amendments would significantly have extended the material scope of the Regulation : this should not be the role of miscellaneous amendments .
It should be specifically noted that supplementary pensions are NOT State-provided social security payments , and cannot therefore come within the scope of Regulation 1408 / 71 .
Similarly , one amendment attempts to extend the scope of the regulation to taxation : this is simply not acceptable .
UK Conservative MEPs will continue to resist any amendments to any report at any time which attempt to make similar encroachments into Member State competences .
Free movement of persons
We have voted in favour of the motion for resolution because we think that the Council needs to push ahead with the work on simplifying Regulation 1408 / 71 and extending it so that citizens of third countries who are engaged in active employment and have legal residence may also be covered .
We have voted against paragraph 1 of the motion for resolution which states that Article 42 of the Treaty of Amsterdam is to be the legal basis for securing social security rights for third-country citizens .
We do not agree with that .
The Council must find another legal basis , for example Article 63 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , so that the objective may be achieved .
We voted in favour of this resolution only because it proposes thoroughgoing reform of the Community regulations on the free movement of workers within the European Union and proposes that their rights be maintained from one country to the next .
The new regulations when they finally emerge must , however , be in line with the regulations in those countries where the terms are the most advantageous to the workers in all areas .
If this is not the case , we shall vote against .
I think that this discussion should never have taken place in the European Parliament .
So I voted against the whole resolution .
The Danish Social Democrats have today abstained from voting in the final vote on this motion for resolution , tabled against the background of an oral question concerning the free movement of persons in connection with Regulation 1408 .
We do not agree that Articles 42 and 308 constitute the legal basis for allowing third-country citizens to be covered under Regulation 1408 , but think that Article 63 , subsection 4 should do so .
We cannot support the attempt to bend the Treaty in this way when there is an adequate legal basis elsewhere in the Treaty , just because a few other procedural regulations concerning the involvement of the European Parliament are at issue .
If another legal basis is required , the Treaty must , in our view , be altered .
We should like to emphasise that we support a general reform of Regulation 1408 .
However , we believe that a reform of this kind would be made more difficult if its scope were to be extended to include more people .
We would also emphasise our concern that those from third countries who are seeking work and who are legally resident in the EU must have the opportunity to obtain employment in the EU .
The EPLP has voted for the motion for resolution on the free movement of persons , but with an important reservation .
The EPLP supports the Tampere conclusions that the EU must ensure fair treatment of third-country nationals who legally reside in its territory and recognise that there needs to be a resolution to the situation of Regulation 1408 / 71 / EEC not covering third-country nationals .
However , the EPLP does not support the view that the legal base should be Article 42 and 308 .
The EPLP supports the Council and a number of Member States who wish the legal base to remain Article 63 .
Lucas Report ( A5-0036 / 2001 )
Mr President , the Pensioners ' Party , which I am pleased to represent in this House , supports all documents , all initiatives and all actions by means of which the European Union acts to help states all over the world which need to increase cooperation with the States of the European Union .
In my opinion , Europe truly exists - has the right to exist - above all when it combines the strengths of its 15 component States in order to be stronger , more effective and , in this case , more generous in its cooperation with states who find themselves in a state of want .
And this is the spirit of the Lucas report , which provides for assistance , cooperation and an economic partnership with Mexico , a state with a great cultural tradition which has always taken care to maintain economic cooperation with the States of the European Union , cooperation which , I hope , will also serve to improve the social situation of the pensioners and elderly people of that country .
This report speaks of economic partnership , but it is nothing more than an attempt to promote the major European firms on the Mexican market against American competition .
Past experience shows that this type of partnership is very profitable to the industrial groups but does nothing more than drive the people of the country concerned into even greater poverty .
Over half of the 95 million inhabitants of Mexico already live in poverty , without counting those that are driven to emigrate precisely because of this type of partnership which is based on exploitation .
We therefore voted against this report .
Ceyhun Report ( A5-0315 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for the motion because I was against it , as did the majority of the other Members of the European Parliament .
" Wolf !
Wolf ! " cried a shepherd boy who wanted to play a trick on his friends .
In fact , his cry " Wolf ! Wolf ! " summoned all the villagers , who asked , " Where is the wolf ? "
To which the shepherd boy replied " Ha ha !
It 's a joke .
There isn 't a wolf ! "
Three days later , he shouted again : " Wolf !
Wolf ! "
All the villagers arrived asking : " Where is the wolf ? "
" Ha ha ha !
It 's a joke .
There isn 't a wolf ! "
A week later , a wolf really came and started to tear the sheep to pieces .
" Wolf !
Wolf ! " , cried the shepherd boy , but nobody came from the village to help . And the wolf ate all the sheep .
I have told you this story because we have to realise that we must do something practical in our immigration policy , not just talk and cry " Wolf ! " .

Mr President , following that completely incomprehensible diatribe from our colleague over there , I want to make a serious contribution , although the situation with the recommendation being rejected is somewhat different .
Along with my British Labour colleagues of the PSE , I voted in favour of the underlying principles and sentiments of the Ceyhun report .
In doing so , we recognised that the proposals were far from perfect but they did at least attempt to address the present situation .
The European Union and individual countries must do more to address the problems and circumstances in the countries of origin that cause people to seek refuge in the European Union .
Progress in this area cannot be made overnight and , in the meantime , the interests of desperate people , understandably fleeing from conflict , persecution or other hardship , are not well served by pushing them into the hands of the unscrupulous and those seeking to make money out of trafficking people .
The situation of organisations who assist asylum-seekers and refugees has been raised as a contentious issue , but the report recognises that these are legally recognised organisations , responsible and established NGOs , many of whom have a strong and proud record of supporting the very people that this report seeks to assist .
In voting for the Ceyhun report we recognise the complexities of this issue and will continue to work for a full and common asylum system for the European Union that has humanity and the interests of the most vulnerable at its core .
The two French initiatives intended to better combat illegal immigration have , in the first instance , been changed beyond all recognition by the European Parliament amendments designed to limit their scope .
Furthermore , in the second instance , they have been rejected by Parliament , thanks , in part , to my vote , and that of the MPF Members , against .
Our vote against should be taken to mean , of course , that we reject the amendments , but we do actually endorse the original French initiative and would like to see it acted upon .
The vote of the European Parliament on this matter was , in fact , merely consultative , pursuant to Article 67 ( 2 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
I find the amendments initially adopted by the European Parliament particularly regrettable .
A good number of them , as I explained in the course of last night ' s debate , would have the effect of putting the definition of measures against illegal immigration off until the Greek Calends on the grounds that a whole host of other policies in all sorts of areas would have to be implemented first .
This was a completely erroneous position , but I shall not harp on the subject .
There was a second category of amendments which tried to reduce the force of the text by exempting various categories of offender from punishment , for example , the illegal immigrants themselves or the persons assisting them on putatively humanitarian grounds .
Such exceptions were completely inappropriate .
In particular , these " humanitarian " smugglers must not be exempted from prosecution .
Firstly , because all the mafia groups smuggling people into countries illegally in return for payment would then claim humanitarian reasons .
Secondly , because even the illegal immigrants that have been assisted by charitably minded people almost inevitably wind up in exploitative situations , as often as not , purely by dint of their illegal status .
And finally because the possibly genuinely disinterested persons who assist illegal immigrants are probably doing the immigrants themselves no good but are certainly doing their fellow citizens no good by presenting them with a problem which will be practically impossible to resolve for generations to come .
We wish to denounce the French Presidency initiative which is focussed in its entirety on the criminalisation of what it terms ' illegal immigration ' .
For the perpetrators of this infamy , it is not just a matter of terminology , as the police force of the Socialist Prime Minister , Mr Jospin , has just forcibly expelled illegal immigrants that had take refuge in the Parisian church of Saint Bernard in precisely the same way that his right-wing predecessor , Juppé , had people deported from the same place four years previously .
Regarding the causes driving hundreds of thousands of poor people out of their country of origin in order to attempt to survive elsewhere , the European Union has nothing but fine words .
In order to put an end to poverty in these countries , the European institutions would have to take on the plunderers and exploiters of these countries .
Since they are unable to cure the illness , they opt to penalise the victims .
While the French Presidency announces a Europe-wide witch-hunt against these " victims of oppression " , it points the finger at the squalid modern day slave traders , but only does so in order to cast a veil over the parties for whom the smugglers are recruiting , i.e. big business , construction giants and any number of smaller scale employers who thereby benefit from an immigrant workforce provided , at the discretion of employers and the police , by laws which do not grant them even minimal protection .
This report confines itself to smoothing out some of what it considers to be the more repulsive aspects of the French initiatives .
We have voted against the report as a whole , while voting in favour of the amendments which might temper or eliminate the despicably repressive nature of the French proposals .
. ( NL ) I should like to take this opportunity to explain in more detail , also on behalf of my colleagues , Mr Belder and Mr van Dam , my voting behaviour in respect of the Ceyhun report .
I have voted against the report and against many of the amendments submitted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms , Justice and Home Affairs .
In view of the sensitivity of the subject , assistance with illegal immigration , a subject that always triggers intense emotions , I wish to explain my motives .
Let me say at the outset that I fully support the reception of recognised refugees as defined in the meeting in Geneva .
The latter should be received in all Member States and granted asylum .
Unfortunately , the general use of the word refugee for all those who seek sanctuary in the Union creates confusion in this report .
What is an illegal refugee ?
If that person applies for asylum on entry he is not illegal .
The terms foreigners , refugees , illegal immigrants , asylum seekers and suchlike are used in an inconsistent way .
Such a careless use of terms does not belong in a legal text , in which , moreover , definitions have to be laid down and the framework of criminal law agreed .
I recognise that deported asylum seekers often find themselves in a distressing position .
Humanitarian aid from churches and organisations jumps into the breach created by the inability of Member States and the international community to find a satisfactory solution .
For this reason I have some sympathy for the appeal not to punish these organisations for giving assistance to illegal immigrants .
But a more nuanced definition is required .
A problem arises where the judgment of the independent judiciary based on legislation is constantly undermined by the subjective judgment of aid providers .
Apart from that , how do you define ' humanitarian aid ' ?
Does it also apply to a charity that , for example , has the aim of helping as many poor Russians as possible to enter a Member State illegally ?
The dramatic circumstances of illegal immigration are a humanitarian disgrace .
Stringent , harmonised criminal legislation on traffickers in human beings is necessary .
To complement this a strict but fair asylum policy is needed , which must send a clear signal of discouragement to illegal immigrants .
Accordingly , I support the proposals of the French Government .
The French initiative , through the proposed directive and the proposed framework decision , offers only the solution of criminalisation to the problem of illegal immigration .
Proposing to step up the penal framework for prosecution for assisting the illegal entry and residence of immigrants is tantamount to making solidarity a crime .
The proposed amendments are right to distinguish the assistance provided in return for payment from the assistance provided out of solidarity , on humanitarian grounds .
Criminalising the people and organisations fighting against Fortress Europe is not , however , an effective tactic against the underground networks and smugglers .
What should be combated , rather , is this ever more restrictive visa and asylum policy which forces people to enter European Union territory illegally .
What should be combated are the structural adjustment policies and policies imposing the Community acquis which exacerbate unemployment in candidate countries , and the logic of development aid packages for countries in the South which are completely inadequate and unfairly distributed .
A policy of cancelling debt and of ensuring equitable development aid would be a first essential step towards a different kind of European policy on immigration .
We are resolutely opposed to the logic behind criminalising immigration and that is why i voted against the draft French initiative , even in its amended form .
We might have thought that at long last we had a text which would lay down some outline for the fight against illegal immigration in Europe , even if it was only a sketchy draft , but that was not to be !
This report , on the contrary , in response to an initiative from the French Republic which was , I must stress , relatively acceptable , is nothing but a trap and , worse than that , an incitement to crime , illegal immigration , lawlessness and violence .
The rapporteur seeks to punish only the smugglers and organisation involved in illegal immigration networks .
Are the foreigners that have entered a Member State ' s territory illegally not to be seen as having committed any offence ( Article 2 , Amendment No 9 ) ?
How can we fail to be outraged at this ?
Are we to think that illegal immigrants should be seen as the victims of a system in which they are actually the players ?
If criminalisation must seek primarily to penalise the organisers of illegal immigration , it must also firmly penalise the immigrants themselves , specifically by deporting them back to their country of origin in order to make them accept their responsibilities and deter them from offending again .
Similarly , the report aims to exempt the humanitarian organisations assisting illegal immigrants from any form of penalty ( Article 4 , Amendment No 11 ) .
Illegal immigration should not be encouraged in any way whatsoever .
Our leaders must adopt a hard line in combating illegal because in so doing they are also combating security problems , organised crime ( drugs trafficking , money laundering , etc . ) , and even the forced prostitution of young women from Eastern Europe or Latin America , most of whom have illegally entered one of the countries of the European Union , which is unfortunately only a mythical El Dorado .
Our national governments must beware , for there is no room for lenience and fine feelings here : they can only lead to a lax and irresponsible attitude .
By leading policies with an inordinate emphasis on human rights , by practising a policy of systematically regularising the status of illegal immigrants and immigrants in irregular situation and by foisting the integration and assimilation of these people from outside Europe on our societies , we are endangering the whole social and demographic balance and the very identity of the European nations affected .
The Council ' s proposal for a directive concerning unauthorised entry , movement and residence is another in a series of proposals for repressive measures , tabled in the legal sphere .
In spite of the fact that the Member States have agreed to establish a common immigration and asylum policy , all energy is being focused upon producing proposals aimed only at making it more difficult for people to enter the EU , whether they be refugees or people looking for work .
A large number of Europeans choose to hide often unknown people who have been smuggled in or have managed by their own efforts to get themselves over the border and into the EU countries .
Those people who , with no thought at all of profit , make an effort on behalf of people in fear of their lives , must not be punished .
This type of humanitarian aid is now entirely lawful in , for example , Sweden and ought not to be criminalised .
Europe needs a common immigration and asylum policy characterised by humanitarianism .
We have an obligation to help people who find their way here in order to obtain sanctuary , irrespective of whether they are refugees from war-torn areas or asylum seekers fleeing political oppression .
Europe must also change its attitude to legal immigration and open its borders to citizens of third countries who wish to look for work in the European Union .
The basis must be that people should be allowed to travel freely into the European Union and not be prevented from doing so by a restrictive policy on visas and work permits .
By means of a policy which affirms both asylum seekers and immigrants , we can get on top of organised crime and the human tragedies for which traffickers in human beings are responsible .
.
( NL ) For as long as there have been huge differences in income in the world , people have migrated from poor to rich countries .
In the past that migration was actually encouraged by governments , since businesses suffered from a shortage of labour , and it looks as if this is about to be repeated .
The fundamental problem , the unequal distribution of wealth among humankind , is not solved in this way .
There are also people who are not asked to come , but who are forced to leave their country of origin .
Once they have left they can no longer return in safety , since the prevailing regime threatens them with imprisonment or even the death penalty .
Unfortunately it is still common for such people to be turned away or sent back at the border .
The tough outer borders of ' Fortress Europe ' are driving more and more people into the hands of unscrupulous human smugglers , who are greedy for fat profits and abandon people to their lot before the port or border river is reached .
It is right that this mafia should be tackled .
On the other hand it is madness to start punishing the solidarity of pressure groups and churches with political refugees and workers employed for a long period of time in a Member State of the EU without the correct papers .
The Ceyhun report moves in the right direction , but is still inadequate .
There are various causes of illegal immigration , but I believe that the main causes are , on the one hand , the desire to escape from the difficult situations many countries are now experiencing and to find a better standard of living , and , on the other , the construction of a Fortress Europe , which is making access to Member States ' territory increasingly difficult for citizens of third countries .
At the same time , like the rapporteur , I believe that the greatest offenders in illegal immigration are those who make financial profit from this process . As this is the case , we can only endorse the establishment of a punitive framework that will act as a sufficient deterrent , penalising not only the smugglers and traffickers of human beings , but also the employers who take advantage of this situation .
Nevertheless , in addition to adopting these measures , we will have to carry out an effective assessment of the situation and implement measures designed to ensure the effective integration of these workers , guaranteeing them rights and social status rather than , as has increasingly been the case , the sudden expulsion of citizens who are discovered to be in an illegal situation .
Since we are in favour of a common asylum policy at EU level , we support the idea of introducing common regulations to combat trafficking in human beings , provided that this does not in any way punish humanitarian initiatives .
We nonetheless believe that the framework decision in favour of common penalties needs to be improved .
Korakas Report ( A5-0022 / 2001 )
Mr President , last night I had a dream , probably induced by the fact that it was Valentine 's Day yesterday .
I dreamed that I was in Greece , in Crete , in the town of Agios Nikolaos , where it is said that Venus rose out of the lake .
I dreamed of Venus herself rising out of the beautiful water of Crete . Turning towards me , she said , " Mr Fatuzzo , Mr Fatuzzo ! "
" What 's the matter ? " I replied .
She said to me : " I know that tomorrow , at the European Parliament , you are going to vote on a document on cotton grown in Greece .
I am tired of rising from the lake naked .
I am cold , absolutely freezing .
I would like a cotton dress and so , tomorrow , please would you vote for the Korakas report so that there will be more cotton in Greece ! "
The dream vanished , but I did what I had been told to by the apparition and voted for the Korakas report .
The Commission 's proposals for cotton are unacceptable because :
the European Union produces too little cotton
the principle of Community preference is being blatantly violated
hundreds of thousands of family holdings depend on cotton production
despite the problems , cotton growing may cause less pollution than other industrial crops
the minimum guaranteed quantities do not match actual production .
We therefore need to :
increase the guaranteed quantity , so that it matches actual production .
The proposals by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Parliament are a step - albeit hesitant - in the right direction
cost inflation over recent years into the price of cotton
exempt small growers from coresponsibility levies
give professional organisations a proper say in the qualitative assessment of the product
take special steps to support small growers .
We Swedish Social Democrats believe that the EU ' s agricultural aid ought to be considerably reduced and are therefore opposed to certain of the demands presented in Mr Korakas ' s report .
We welcome the Commission ' s proposal to increase fines in the case of over-production , but do not back the demands by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to maintain the percentage of damages as it stands ( Amendment No 12 ) .
We also oppose the demand to establish new Community financial aid to producers ' organisations , as tabled in Amendments 18 and 19 .
We have voted against the Korakas report , on aid for cotton production .
The report calls for an increase in quotas and fixed prices on cotton and also seeks to regulate the role of cotton producers ' associations .
We have also rejected the Izquierdo Rojo report , calling for increased aid for the production of nuts and locust beans .
Both reports call for the protectionist measures , such as preservation of the system for community preference .
It is not reasonable that half of the Union 's budget is devoted to subsidising production and exports of agricultural products .
We believe that EU funds should instead be spent on purposes where cross-border cooperation is needed .
Environmental protection , aid for reconstruction and development assistance are fields where increased funding is essential , not least in light of the upcoming enlargement of the Union .
The common agricultural policy is not only very costly for the European citizens , but also contributes to higher consumer prices and lower quality .
Consumers express concern about European food production and have rightly begun to question the present the agricultural policies .
Export subsidies , leading to the dumping of EU food surpluses on the world market , is the reason behind the serious difficulties for food production in many developing countries .
The CAP was established in order to secure the provision of food after the second world war , not to subsidise unprofitable cultivation of crops used for textile production .
The common agricultural policy of today has lost its political legitimacy and must be completely reformed .
All aid to exports and production should be abolished .
Agriculture needs to adapt to market rules in order to be exposed to competition .
This will increase efficiency and quality , to the benefit of both production and consumers .
The European Union cotton consumption stands at more than 4 million tonnes while its production capacity is only approximately 1.5 million tonnes .
We therefore have to import the balance .
Apparently there is nothing too shocking about this , given that , after all , we already import cars , fruit , vegetables , etc . , and so why not cotton too ?
It would be unbelievable if , given the shortfall in cotton production , the European Commission actually banned further cotton production , but that is in fact the case !
There are quotas and penalties in place to limit European cotton production to approximately 1 million tonnes , instead of the 1.5 million tonnes that we are capable of producing .
There is a ban on cotton production in Spain and Greece , with hundreds of small farms in Andalusia , Thrace and Valencia .
To make matters worse , there are plans to increase the so-called " coresponsibility " levy to more than the current penalty of 50 % of the overshoot of the quota .
And all this benefits the United States and Australia .
In this instance , unlike the case for sugar and rice , it is no longer a matter of sacrificing our own farmers in order to assist the poor in - for instance -the Sudan , a country responsible for exterminating the Christian population of the south .
Oh no , there is no such excuse in the case of cotton .
It is not like the milk sector , where quotas can be justified due to overproduction .
Our sacrifices are not justified in terms of assisting the 48 least developed countries .
Europe is blocking production and the only beneficiaries are the United States and Australia .
We saw this in the case of oil- and protein-rich crops which we nonetheless need as substitutes for meat meal .
We saw this in the case of Californian almonds , and in the case of bananas .
Now we have cotton too .
What good , then , are the European defence system , the euro , the European Constitution and all the other folderols about the Europe we must have , if Europe is the specific entity which is stopping us producing , however modestly , the cotton we need , so as not to ruffle the feathers of the United States , a country we are also freely allowing to spy on us day and night through the Echelon system .
The Greek economy is more dependent than that of the other Member States on small businesses in the agricultural sector .
That applies particularly to crops that can only be grown on the southern edge of Europe , such as cotton and tobacco .
Both crops have their disadvantages .
Tobacco is bad for public health .
Cotton is a useful product , but its cultivation involves the use of large amounts of toxins .
Those toxins find their way into the scarce water sources or pollutes arid land .
In Egypt and Uzbekistan , countries that are far more dependent than Greece on cotton production , this has caused major environmental problems .
That consideration might be a reason for me not to agree with the report of my fellow group Member , Mr Korakas .
From a Greek perspective and particularly from that of the small farmers in that country , the report is of course quite justified .
Its starting premise is the protection and expansion of production and the creation of the financial preconditions for that .
In the longer term , however , those considerations of incomes policy must be weighed against environmental interests , the conditions under which imported cotton is produced and the burden of the common agricultural policy on the financial resources of the EU .
Until those matters are tackled in a fundamental way I am able to support the Korakas proposals .
British Conservative Members of the PPE-DE Group voted against this report because we feel that it moves too far away from the Commission 's original intention of tightening up budgetary control mechanisms .
Further , while being sensitive to the socio-economic function of cotton-growing in certain regions , we strongly dispute the rapporteur 's assessment that cotton is less environmentally hazardous than other crops .
It is well known that a vast array of chemicals are used in cotton-production and we therefore support the Commission 's aim for Member States to determine and adopt the appropriate environmental measures to regulate the use of agricultural land used to produce cotton .
The insistence that Member States remind producers of the need to comply with environmental legislation is particularly welcomed by British Conservatives .
Izquierdo Rojo Report ( A5-0035 / 2001 )
Mr President , I did not dream about the Izquierdo Rojo document , which provides for aid to the producers of certain agricultural products , including hazelnuts .
I have to tell you , Mr President , that my daughter Elisabetta has a tiny pet , a guinea pig , therefore a rodent , called Schumi .
Being a rodent , it eats hazelnuts , and so I decided to ask it , as an expert , what it thought of the report .
" In Europe , not enough hazelnuts are grown . We must increase hazelnut production , " it said .
I feel that advice from such an interested user , a connoisseur consumer of these nuts , cannot be ignored , and so I voted for the development of hazelnut production in Europe .
The production of nuts - hazelnuts , walnuts , peanuts and almonds - and locust beans may provide jobs for thousands of producers and help to stop many areas from being depopulated , especially in the Mediterranean .
The Commission has a serious responsibility here , because the 1989 restrictive support measures started in essence in 1996 , with certain exceptions for programmes which had already begun .
The Commission 's new proposal extends the programmes which were maintained for a further year .
I agree with the rapporteur that these programmes should be maintained for at least two years and , more importantly , that the Commission should present an overall proposal for liberalising and broadening the support mechanisms for the production of nuts and locust beans .
Otherwise , the whole sector will be brought to its knees by imports from the USA and Asia .
We Swedish Social Democrats believe that the EU ' s agricultural aid ought to be substantially reduced and are therefore opposed to certain of the demands presented in Mrs Izquierdo Rojo ' s report .
We do not back the demands by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for continued financing of quality and marketing improvement plans for a further period of two years ( Amendments 14 , 15 and 17 ) .
We also oppose the demand , made in Amendment 22 , to secure permanent support for the nut sector by means of new flat-rate aid per hectare aimed at preserving existing income levels for producers .
I voted for this report because the rapporteur advocates extending aid for an important sector that is currently in crisis . As a matter of fact , I voted the same way previously , by approving a proposal included in the Jové report on the COM in fruits and vegetables .
I also agree with the rapporteur ' s stance , advocating increasing the extension to two years , in order to give the Commission time to prepare a new system of aid for nuts , including locust beans , and the introduction of aid for hazelnuts .
In any event , this extension must be maintained until the new system comes into force , and this should be included in the COM in fruits and vegetables .
It is crucial that in this new system the Commission takes account of the enormous socio-economic importance of these nuts for the countries of southern Europe as well as their environmental role in combating desertification .
Unless aid is increased , the sector will be in serious danger , given the competition it faces , which is largely due to the increase in cheap imports from third countries .
Restructuring operations and mergers in industry
This resolution takes it for granted not only that industrial restructuring is necessary but that such restructuring necessarily entails layoffs , and that we must mitigate the effects of these .
Since we are not in favour of the market economy , competition and competitiveness , we shall not enter into a discussion of whether competitiveness does or does not necessitate restructuring .
The question we ask is why should it be the workers that have to pay the price of competitiveness ?
Instead of cutting costs by reducing the wage bill , why not deduct a similar amount from the revenue due to company owners and shareholders ?
The resolution takes it for granted that shareholder revenue should be protected rather than safeguarding workers ' wages .
Therefore , despite a few token expressions intended to convince us of the author ' s good intentions on social matters , we voted against the resolution .
( PPE-DE ) , in writing . The level of ongoing unemployment in continental Europe is far too high .
It is a direct reflection of entrenched labour market rigidities plus the administrative burdens on business of high costs and excessive regulation .
Continual industrial restructuring is vital for a healthy economy , for the replacement of yesterday 's unwanted jobs with the fresh jobs needed for the future .
More regulation is the problem , not the solution .
Because of our desire to see more jobs not less , UK Conservatives have voted against this resolution .
In Portugal , as in a number of countries in the European Union , industrial restructuring has often brought large-scale redundancies , greater job instability and huge economic and social costs , particularly for the countries and regions that are directly involved , thereby endangering their economic and social cohesion .
In Portugal , just in the last few months , thousands of workers in various companies in the metallurgy , shipbuilding , electronics , footwear , textile and clothing industries have been threatened with redundancy and early retirement , or have been pressured into accepting voluntary redundancy . The specific companies involved are the Siderurgia Nacional group , the ABB group , Renault , Setenave and Lisnave , Indelma / Siemens , J.C.Clark and Vesticom .
This extremely serious situation requires particular attention both on the part of Member State governments and of Community bodies , in order to amend their policies so that they give priority to , in particular , respect for workers ' rights , to high-quality employment and to the economic and social cohesion of the areas in which the companies wishing to close and / or relocate their production plants are based .
Urgent progress also needs to be made in amending the existing directives in this field to make the position of workers ' representatives mandatory and binding with regard to collective redundancies in order to protect workers ' rights . This applies particularly to all processes of restructuring , mergers and relocations by companies and to the need to make Community and national aid dependent on long term commitments for employment and local and national development .
Like Danone , major European companies are currently making colossal profits .
In their competition with major firms in America or Japan , they seek to achieve profitability equivalent to that of the stock exchange .
The sectors making a mere seven to eight per cent profits per annum are implacably restructured by means of reducing wages and , more especially , massive layoffs .
There is no justification for still making employees work 35 , 40 , 45 hours a week at oppressive rates while their fellow workers are shown the door even though profit margins are increasing .
These tens of thousands of redundancies for the benefit of a few dozen shareholders should be prohibited .
Democracy dictates that the lives of millions of people should not be subjected to the dictates of a handful of industrial magnates .
These layoffs must therefore be banned .
When as much , and even more , can be produced while reducing the required work and time input necessary , there is no reason for the gains of such modernisation to be appropriated by employers and for millions of people to lose their jobs .
We should look at the system the other way round , the millions of hours which have been gained should be redistributed , by cutting working hours drastically , to 32 hours in the first instance , without a concomitant drop in wages and without introducing flexibility , and by recruiting personnel as appropriate , financed through the profits made .
The EPLP has voted for the motion for resolution on the social consequences of restructuring because we believe in partnership in the workplace .
However , we have reservations on the resolution itself .
The EPLP recognises that attention needs to be given to the social consequences of restructuring and has voted for this resolution as it is non-legislative .
However there are aspects which are not supported .
Paragraph 6 is not supported by the EPLP .
The EPLP continues to have strong reservations as was expressed at first reading of the framework directive on informing and consulting employees .
In January , Stephen Byers , UK Minister for Trade and Industry announced that business and Unions would be brought together in the UK to examine and review current UK legislation for consultation .
However , the Minister stated that the UK Government continues to oppose the European legislation on information and consultation .
Mr Byers stated that for the UK , " our whole system of corporate structures is quite different from that on the continent . However , in many respects , the directive reflects the continental system of corporate governance , not that in the United Kingdom .
The directive is not appropriate for several reasons , but the issue is important and we should deal with it in our domestic setting . " ( Commons Hansard Debates 18th January 2001 )
The EPLP supports the view of the Minister that it is inappropriate to have European wide legislation in the area of information and consultation .
Lipietz Report ( A5-0023 / 2001 )
Mr President , the Pensioners ' Party , which I represent , and the pensioners of Europe expect a great deal of the European Investment Bank .
In my opinion , the EIB should not stop at its already excellent work of lending money to the industries who need it , but it should make greater endeavours to bring about the creation of a European pension fund to pay pensions in Europe .
I feel that we will genuinely succeed in improving the lot of the elderly of all the 15 Member States when we have a single European pension fund which , as such , will be stronger and better able to resist the fluctuations of the market , thus resulting in larger pensions and more comfortable lives for the elderly .
The EIB lags far behind better-known institutions such as the World Bank in terms of transparency , accountability and the ways it addresses environmental and social issues in its work .
Founded in 1958 under the Treaty of Rome , the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) is the official financing institution of the European Union .
However , there seems to be little public knowledge of the Bank 's existence and operations , although it is a public institution that lends more money every year than , for example , the better-known World Bank .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , sustainable development has become a central objective of EU cooperation .
According to the new Article 6 in the EC Treaty , environmental protection requirements must be integrated into other EU policies .
Bullmann Report ( A5-0034 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted against the Bullmann report because I do not feel that the initiatives laid down therein will succeed in performing that function that we of the Pensioners ' Party and I , in particular , would like Europe to perform .
The Europe of the European citizens , all of them without exception but , in particular , the pensioners who imagine it to be so , should be a Europe which brings ready money into all our pockets , which improves our financial situation considerably , but really considerably , so that the euro is something that the citizens see as progress .
But for this to happen we need less words and more action .
Mr President , on behalf of the ELDR Group , I wish to give an explanation of vote in view of the fact that , in the final vote , we voted against the Bullmann report .
I should like to say that Mr Bullmann and I cooperated well in the course of the work done on the report .
There were nonetheless a number of wordings which were of central importance to ourselves in the ELDR Group and which made it all the clearer that the Stockholm Summit will also have to debate important reforms in favour of a competitive Europe .
It is a question of further liberalisation , a more favourable business climate and better education and further education .
The aspect of the report relating to these issues fell through and was voted down , and so the whole of recital E also came to nothing .
The ELDR Group therefore chose to vote against the proposal as a whole .
I would add that , as a new Member , I have possibly not become familiar with all the parliamentary conventions in the course of a year and a half .
Perhaps I made a mistake in not fully informing the PSE Group about what , in the very end , we were to do .
I apologise , and I shall convey my apology directly to Mr Bullmann .
The Bullmann report on preparations for the forthcoming European Council meeting in Stockholm has just been rejected in Parliament , and quite rightly too , for I feel the European Commission ' s proposals , and the preparatory work within the parliamentary Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , are characterised by a authoritarian and plan-based mentality that runs counter to the spirit of Lisbon .
Immediately following the Lisbon Council , in March 2000 , I endorsed the new working method , the new " open " method of coordination suggested by the Council , thinking that it might help to reduce the number of European regulations , which are , by definition , centralised and authoritarian , and to favour arrangements " between equals " that were less restrictive and more likely to adapt flexibly to suit the needs of each party while respecting their freedom to make their own decisions .
Yet the Commission is now proposing to introduce an arsenal of 28 structural indicators , plus seven general economic indicators , to measure the relative economic performance of the Member States .
The Bullmann report lost no time before hurling itself into the breach and proposing to add a whole host of indicators in the fields of allocating public expenditure , the nature of this expenditure , the environment , productivity , employment , youth unemployment , social exclusion , poverty including a breakdown by age and sex , and Lord knows what else .
This might possibly be a valid approach if the aim was to collect data on our various situations .
According to the Bullmann report , however , these indicators were clearly intended to provide the basis for new European regulations which would have fleshed out " the Union ' s social legislative framework " .
The report goes on to specify that this regulatory strategy was to be crowned by an " interinstitutional agreement " enabling the European Parliament to be fully involved .
Even at the time of the Lisbon Council , I was already voicing my opposition to the authoritarian tone of some of the conclusions , such as those , for example , which took on society ' s role in deciding that it was necessary to increase the rate of participation of women in the labour market .
Yet the proposals of the Bullmann report could well have vastly accentuated this sideways shift .
After rejecting this report , we now hope that the Stockholm Council , in March , will bring the Commission back into line .
We must not slide down the slippery slope from open coordination to closed planning .

I voted against Mr Bullmann ' s report , mainly because clarity is required if Parliament ' s views are to be accorded any value .
It is not acceptable to be in favour of a whole lot of new indicators and further statistics and , at the same time , warn that statistics do not solve problems but , rather , create new ones .
The parallels with a planned economy become all too clear when it is believed that the Commission must control economic development with the help of a whole lot of economic and social indicators .
Instead , I want the Stockholm Summit to focus upon liberalisation and dynamic deregulation .
It is important to emphasise that politicians do not create jobs .
Politicians can , at best , help create a more favourable business climate .
With the " Lisbon Process " , the EU has decided once and for all to engage upon the road to all-out liberalism .
In imitation of the Davos Forum , bringing together the elite of the ruling classes , at the Lisbon Summit the EU set itself the goal of becoming " the most competitive and dynamic ... economy in the world " .
After the launch of the single market in 1985 , and of the euro in 1997 , this is just one more step in building a Europe which responds only to the interests of capital .
The smokescreen of rhetoric on " full employment " , vocational training or promoting the spread of new technologies is not enough to conceal the actual attacks on the world of work set forth in the resolution .
The widespread privatisation and liberalisation of further public services , the commercialisation of information technology in the educational system and in administration , the opening up of pension funds , the dismantling of the current pension system , flexibility in employment - all these are measures that speak volumes as to the antisocial nature of the Lisbon policy .
This is heightened by the recent Treaty of Nice and will be exacerbated by closer cooperation between governments centred on the new convergence criteria .
In opposition to the " Lisbon Process " we would advocate Europe-wide harmonisation of social rights , pensions , public services , wages and employment in line with the most favourable conditions .
Gasòliba i Böhm Report ( A5-0020 / 2001 )
Mr President , Page 6 , point 6 of this report on the impact of liberalisation and the economic reform process on the economic growth of the European Union reads : " ( The rapporteur ) considers that the ageing of the population will necessitate new ways of increasing participation in the labour market , especially among women and older workers " .
I do not agree , Mr President - and nor does the Pensioners ' Party - that we can resolve the problem of elderly people and pensions by making the elderly work longer .
I feel that the problem of pensions and elderly people must be resolved by better , more prudent management of the pension funds of our States than I regret to say has been the case thus far .
With shocking cynicism , the rapporteur proposes full liberalisation of the market and deregulation .
He also proposes speeding up privatisation , reducing public expenditure , increasing labour market flexibility , liberalising the financial markets and lifting the regulatory and administrative framework , allegedly in order to improve the competitiveness of the European economy .
The ÅU continues to exert pressure on Member States to sell off the family silver by handing all transport , postal and telecommunications services over to the private sector .
Labour relations are being dismantled , the social security system is under threat and the working classes are being condemned yet again to poverty and social exclusion , allegedly in order to increase employment .
Even the rapporteur admits that the current adverse situation and the high rate of unemployment have been brought about by intensifying and strengthening neo-liberal , monetarist policies .
These economic reforms will result in a guaranteed level of poverty , not a minimum level of prosperity for workers , while the view is being promoted that a modern social state need only provide certain minimum services to its people , in the form of charity .
Prosperity is , of course , being promoted for big business , which is becoming more and more unaccountable .
It is contradictory , ironic , hypocritical and provocative to workers to propose that the way to combat unemployment is to strengthen the competitiveness of companies through reduced labour costs , full liberalisation and flexibility of the labour market and atypical forms of work .
Support for the public sector , stable , permanent and full employment and a better and protected social security system and social protection system in general should form the backbone of economic policy .
We want to achieve stable economic development based on healthy internal demand by improving the workers ' purchasing power , concentrating on crucial sectors such as creating and maintaining infrastructures , education , health , research and applying economic development policies which help to increase employment by creating permanent jobs .
This is the way to achieve the objectives of full and stable employment , stronger workers ' rights , high-quality employment , training and job skills and shorter working times without any cut in wages .
It is for these reasons that the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
The Gasóliba i Böhm report on the impact of liberalisation and the economic reform process on economic growth could , at first sight , merit my support : greater liberalisation , upon the condition that public services remain operational , must indeed encourage more efficient production processes , better resource allocation and hence more active growth .
Yet , when reading the explanatory statement , we find some perfectly inadmissible statements such as this , " the economic situation no longer allows the same level of social protection for European workers : there is unfortunately a direct link between social protection and what separates us from full employment . "
Is this a stylistic infelicity or a Freudian slip betraying an inner conviction ?
At any event , we see this as an opportunity to restate our view that liberalisation must be carried out while maintaining the level of social protection .
The critical issue is to frame new procedures that are based on both private management and public-minded regulations , which will make it possible to offer the same services at a reduced cost , and even better service , for users are more likely to be satisfied if the service on offer is more adaptable .
These are the principles which must , in France , underlie the reform of the social welfare system and the educational system .
In both instances , the public and the private sector must be allowed to compete fairly , within the terms of public-minded regulations and a minimum service provision defined by law .
In this way , competition will have the effect of driving administration costs down and pushing the quality of the service up .
And the countries of Europe will be able to define a form of liberalisation which is compatible with their own cultural models and desire for social solidarity .
This report restates the credo of the advocates of a Europe of capitalists and bankers according to which it would be sufficient to make life easier for employers by making it less costly to launch businesses , expedite the privatisation of public services and step up the flexibility of the labour market in order to see economic growth take off , thereby putting an end to unemployment .
The fact that the privatisation of the post office or the railways in those countries of Europe where this has already taken place has demonstrated that the first to suffer from this are the public sector workers and service users , since private operators are ready to sacrifice absolutely everything except their profits , does not prevent the rapporteur ' s making so bold as to guarantee that " current safety levels " for rail will be maintained , despite the evidence to the contrary .
The rapporteur passes over the fact that most of the jobs generated are insecure and underpaid and announces that " the ageing of the population will necessitate ... increasing participation in labour market , especially among ... older workers " .
Where is the much-promised social progress in all that ?
The massive increase in productivity would make it perfectly possible to guarantee a better standard of living for all the working and the retired population if a small minority of property owners were not determined to seize all profits for themselves .
Consequently , the stated objective of making " the European economy the most competitive and dynamic ... in the world " cannot be achieved except on the backs of the workers , who would bear the entire burden of boosting the profits of the major capitalist groups in the form of deterioration in their working and living conditions .
We voted against this report .
This resolution is a sort of liberal social charter maintaining a basic illusion as to the extent to which liberalisation and regulation can be combined .
In actual fact , the hardline neoliberal programme is being affirmed once again in two major areas .
The first area of focus is the continued privatisation , deemed to be " essential " starting with postal services , savings banks and financial services in general , as well as the railways .
The second is the continued reform of the labour market , and there are even plans to extend this further .
Such guidelines represent a step backwards for civilisation , seeking nothing more and nothing less than to convert the provision of all social needs into saleable commodities , subject to the rationale of profitability .
This is , apparently , a " careful liberalisation process " . That is something that the victims of the Paddington rail disaster will appreciate .
Reform of the labour market tends to always go the same way , elevating flexibility and social insecurity to consider them the economic ideal .
This report , in thrall to liberal orthodoxy , illustrates the cynicism of property owners and the miserable submission of reform policies to their lead .
I had no hesitation in voting against this resolution .
Soares Report ( A5-0017 / 2001 )
Mr President , page 7 , point 17 of Mr Soares ' report on the state of relations between the EU and Macau reads " Calls on the European companies which are developing operations in Macau , and via Macau in China , to observe the basic ILO labour standards in their operations " .
This is a good thing and it is part of the reason why I voted for the report , but I would greatly appreciate it if , in future , respect for the pension rights of workers were to be promoted as well , for the elderly workers in Macau need protection too .
I support the proposals and initiatives intended to improve friendly relations between the European Union and Macau following that territory ' s integration into the People ' s Republic of China , of which it has become a Special Administrative Region following a handover that I consider to be successful .
All the conditions are now in place for closer economic and cultural relations , on the basis of cooperation and mutual benefit between the People ' s Republic of China , specifically through the Special Administrative Region of Macao and the European Union and its Member States .
Nevertheless , with regard to the report , for which I voted , I still take a critical view of certain aspects that appear to reveal a degree of suspicion , specifically concerning compliance with agreements , since I consider that the reality of the situation shows that there is no reason for such suspicion .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Soares on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament ' The European Union and Macau after 2000 ' because it fully addresses the issue of what the European Union ' s concerns and initiatives for Macau should be .
The concerns arise basically from the need to preserve the freedoms and rights that already existed in this Special Administrative Region before the transfer of sovereignty , including religious freedom , which stem from the principle , so arduously negotiated by the Portuguese and Chinese authorities , of ' one country , two systems ' .
The initiatives are the specific actions that the European Union can stimulate and promote for Macau with the aim of ensuring that the region maintains a democratic collective life , in which the human rights and individual freedoms of the Macanese are respected and in which prosperity and peace are valued .
I wish to highlight three of these initiatives that are intended to preserve the autonomy and specific nature of Macau in relation to China .
The first is the permanent monitoring of the implementation of the ' one country , two systems ' principle . The second is the boosting of European investment in the SAR , as a corollary of active cooperation at all levels , and the third initiative concerns the call for the urgent appointment of a European Union representative in Macau , in order to stimulate relations between the two regions .
Portugal governed Macau for four hundred years .
We are not ashamed of our past in that region , in fact , quite the opposite .
On the one hand , our presence fostered peaceful coexistence between the European and Chinese civilisations and , on the other , we left the Macanese a region with outstanding prospects for growth , with legislative , customs and judicial autonomy and where the rights and freedoms of every citizen are part of a legacy of civilisation that we have the duty to preserve .
Plooij-van Gorsel Report ( A5-0052 / 2001 )
Mr President , yesterday evening - the evening of Valentine 's Day - some friends and I were looking for a restaurant , but we could not find a free table anywhere . Doubtless , they were all occupied by lovers celebrating Valentine 's Day .
I still had to prepare my explanation of vote on the Plooij-van Gorsel report .
I closed my eyes for a second and saw a vision : I saw the Commissioner for Research , Mr Busquin , and the rapporteur , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , having dinner together and talking animatedly about research in Europe .
It being Valentine 's Day , I said to myself : " I wonder whether European research will even make it possible to find one 's soul mate , which is what is generally hoped for on Saint Valentine 's Day " .
Therefore , with this in mind , I voted for the report .
Once again we have been served a balanced menu which is nothing of the sort .
A pinch of good intentions regarding the position of women in research , a nod of acknowledgement towards the social sciences , a handful of allusions to the role of cooperation in scientific matters between the Member States , or the role of research in the development of culture and even of employment for all , before coming to the main course , the only real meat of the matter : a substantial package of subsidies for businesses .
For that is the main if not the only motivation of the European Commission , the Council and the author of this report .
What we are being asked to support is a move to strengthen the private sector ' s grip on public sector research , facilitating the exploitation of the results of public sector research by private capital , and the " dramatic reduction " , written in black and white , " in the red tape that obstructs " it .
The rapporteur claims that , " It would be an advantage for companies to have better access to research results . " An advantage only for the business owners and shareholders who have been promised further subsidies disguised as aid to research .
No one is fooled by the fact that the report only makes reference to SMEs .
All major corporations have small and medium-sized enterprises as subsidiaries , particularly in the field of research .
Public monies should remain in the public sector and should be used for research that is of benefit to the population .
We voted against this report .
Even though the draft resolution adopts a number of interesting positions , particularly regarding equal access to research for women , I must reject the guidelines for framework projects favouring finished research , characterised by big industry alongside small and medium-sized businesses in the high tech sector .
I cannot accept a situation whereby research is used as a tool in the " economic warfare " conducted by firms for the control of pharmaceutical or agro-industrial markets , or must take account of developments in security and defence policy .
Priorities cannot be limited to biotechnology , genome research , new information and communication technology and nuclear technology , and Parliament instead should take action to ensure that knowledge is part of our shared heritage , quite apart from any criterion of profitability .
I am therefore opposed to patenting the living organism . Developing medicinal products that are useful to the health of society must be an imperative .
In this age of GMOs and mad cow disease , we can but deplore the failure to mention the subject of democratic scrutiny regarding the goals of research .
I also reject a situation whereby establishing a " European Research Area " implies jeopardising the position of state research bodies , as evidenced by the fall in public resources set aside for long-term research or , in France , the " innovation " law which legalises the use of public resources to private ends .
For all the above reasons , I voted against .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.41p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Situation in Kosovo
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0102 / 01 by Mr Dupuis , Mr Pannella , Mrs Bonino , Mr Turco , Mr Dell 'Alba , Mr Della Vedova and Mr Cappato , on behalf of the TDI Group , on Kosovo ;
B5-0104 / 01 by Mr Sakellariou , Mr Souladakis , Mr Swoboda and Mr Martínez Martínez , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Kosovo ;
B5-0114 / 01 by Mr Lagendijk and Mr Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Kosovo and southern Serbia ;
B5-0122 / 01 by Mrs Pack , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the situation in Kosovo and southern Serbia ;
B5-0134 / 01 by Mr Brie , Mr Alavanos and Mr Manisco , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Kosovo ;
B5-0143 / 01 by Mr Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Kosovo .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us note the absence of the Commission and of the Council .
I regret to have to say that this motion for a resolution on Kosovo is quite unbelievable .
Once again we are suffering from total amnesia .
We are acting as if everything that has taken place in Yugoslavia over the last ten to twelve years did not take place .
We are allowing Mr Kostuníca to let the Serbian people remain in ignorance of everything that Milosevic kept from them for the previous ten years , namely the events in Vukovar , in Sarajevo , in Kosovo , even quite recently , just eighteen months ago .
I find this perfectly unacceptable .
All eyes are on Belgrade .
I understand , Mr President , Mrs Pack , the need to assist the new Serbian authorities in tackling the problems which exist , but this cannot be done at the expense of justice - or a modicum of justice - i.e. by failing to challenge and condemn the actions of Mr Milosevic and the main Serbian leaders .
Nor can this be achieved while closing our eyes to a situation which is perfectly intolerable in terms of international law .
The 700 Kosovars still detained in Serbia were sentenced in absolute contravention of the laws of the international community .
Only UNMIK and the international tribunal in The Hague would be authorised to sentence these people .
An amnesty would therefore not be valid , and I would urge the responsible parties within the Commission to refer the matter , with all due discipline , to the competent Commissioners .
There is no need to pressure Mr Kostuníca to grant an amnesty , all he has to do is to hand over the parties concerned to the head of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo , Mr Hækkerup .
Mr President , I should just like to ask who is down to represent the Commission this afternoon and when he is expected to arrive in the Chamber .
As soon as he gets here , I will be able to tell you , Mr Posselt .
Mr President , last week we saw television pictures of the presence of the European Parliament , the Commission , Mr Solana and Mr Patten in Belgrade .
We hope that these pictures represent the beginning of the end of the Balkan tragedy .
I appreciate the fact that , for the first time , Mr Solana appeared not as the evil oracle from Euripides ' ancient Greek tragedy Iphigenia , but as the good oracle .
A starting point for a policy in the area to dull the feelings of those responsible in connection with any man-made disasters in the area should , I think , be decisively supported by the European Parliament .
This House needs to send a message of support for stability , peace and the development of cooperation in the area .
The people in the area must understand that there is no question of their becoming big or small , because poverty never makes people big and as long as clashes continue , the only outcome will be poverty and unhappiness and that is all they will share .
In this sense , because stability , development and cooperation must be our prime considerations , this is the basic thrust of this motion .
The people in the area must understand , as must we , that occupied protectorates in any shape or form never allow economic development , they never allow peace and they never allow countries or people in the area to be strengthened .
Thus , the interplay of circumstances surrounding the visit , the interplay of circumstances surrounding the exchanges in Belgrade and the interplay of circumstances for us is an exceptional , useful and crucial interplay and we must help it .
We need to understand that , if democracy , peace and cooperation are to succeed , we have to surpass ourselves .
This motion , which defines a wide framework which can be used as a political framework for the next round of developments in the area , gives us the prospect of doing so and we should all support it .
Mr President , the international community , and certainly the European Union , is involved in a complicated balancing act .
On one side are the Kosovars , waiting impatiently for a decision on the final status of their country , also waiting impatiently for elections and still - and let us be clear , understandably - full of hatred for the Serbs .
In that climate the extremists have a free hand , for example in the Presevo area , where they are actually attacking KFOR troops , a situation that , in my eyes , and also for Mr Dupuis , is totally unacceptable .
On the other side there is the Serbian Government which , with new faces in charge and fine plans , can be sure of a great deal of sympathy from the international community .
It has , for example , come up with proposals for the same area , around Presevo , which I definitely think offer a good basis for negotiations and which I also think the Albanians should respond to .
What one can now see happening is a shift in international sympathy from the awkward Kosovars to the cooperative Serbs .
That is the moment - and the moment is now - that the balancing act is most difficult .
What is the task of the EU ?
We must hold the Serbs to their promises which , however splendid they may be , as yet exist only on paper .
We must isolate the extremist Kosovars and impress upon the moderate Kosovars , using force or persuasion as necessary , that they must cooperate with the Serbs , and that they cannot go on fighting them and pressing their demands .
Once again , President , I can imagine easier tasks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my good friend Olivier Dupuis spoke on quite the wrong subject .
We are speaking today about southern Serbia and Kosovo .
We are not discussing Serbia and current policy in Serbia proper .
I agree with much of what you said , Olivier .
Believe me , those Members who were in Belgrade have taken a clear line on the conditions .
For us , there can be no money unless the conditions are fulfilled .
No one has ever disputed that , apart from Commission President Prodi , whom I hereby urge to desist from such comments .
But let me come back to today ' s debate .
It is a matter of how things stand now in Kosovo .
I agree with Mr Lagendijk on this point .
Unless we know quite soon what is to happen next in Kosovo , the difficulties will simply accumulate down there .
The problem is that KFOR troops have become the targets of Serbian and Albanian attacks , although KFOR is actually there to protect both of these ethnic groups .
The problem , in a nutshell , is that Mr Hækkerup will have to call elections very soon .
To do that , he must know what powers the elected bodies will have .
But we need these bodies so that the Serbian side has Kosovar negotiating partners .
Now we have the subject of southern Serbia .
I believe that KFOR , like other bodies , has not done all it should have done there .
Where have the weapons come from for these new extremists ?
They have , of course , been transferred from the old KLA to the new KLA .
In my view , KFOR , with its 50 000-strong force in Kosovo , ought to be able to establish order in the Presevo Valley .
I appeal to KFOR to do so , lest we lose our credibility in that corner of the Balkans .
I also believe , of course , in the truth of what the Mayor of Presevo said in Belgrade , namely that the population of Kosovo would like to remain in Serbia if only the Albanians in the region could be treated at long last on a par with the Serbs .
They want to be part of everything that Yugoslav citizenship implies .
I believe the government ' s new plan is good .
It is pursuing the right path , and we should support it .
To tell the truth , I am a little saddened that Mr Kostuníca has said it will all happen without supervision by the EU .
Why should we not play a part ?
We are good mediators .
We can help the Serbs and Albanians to live together in peace , and I hope we shall be allowed to help them .
Mr President , we intervened in Kosovo in order to protect the Albanians , who were a minority in Serbia .
We must now protect the Serbs , who are minority in Kosovo .
Moreover , we must say to the extremist Albanian insurgents that we are not , therefore , there to support the ideas of Albanian extremism .
We are there to support peace and human rights , and we shall do what we can to prevent Albanian extremists from creating unrest in the new democratic Serbia .
I should like to assure Mr Dupuis that there were six of us from Parliament who spent the weekend visiting the new leaders in Belgrade .
We received assurances that that they would cooperate with the War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague , set up a truth commission and grant amnesty to conscientious objectors etc .
What we can do here in Parliament is to hold the new leaders to these promises and , if they do not live up to them , then there are things we can do , for we are , of course , the great aid provider , granting large amounts of money , now and in the years to come , to the new Serbia .
I want , finally , to say something which is almost a remark on the rules of procedure .
The purpose of these urgent topics we are now debating is , of course , to draw the public ' s attention to serious problems in world politics and to serious violations of human rights and democracy .
It is therefore a paradox that we are holding the debate at a time when there are fewest people here .
There is no-one from the press .
It is , in fact , almost like performing a striptease in the dark , if you will pardon the expression .
I also think it is a paradox that we are insisting on the Commission ' s being present - and the Council too ought , of course , to be here - but we have written our motions for resolution before we have heard what they have to say .
It is both paradoxical and frivolous .
I would therefore conclude my speech with the request that urgent topics of this kind be put on the agenda on Wednesdays when the Council and the Commission are here and that we only vote on the motions for resolution once we have heard the remarks on our proposals .
As you are aware , Mr Haarder , it is not the Bureau but the Conference of Presidents which sets our agenda .
If you would like to make this proposal to the President of your group so that he can bring it to the attention of the other Members , then we may be able to do something .
Mr President , may I begin by replying to Mr Haarder that the absence of our fellow Members of Parliament is an utter disgrace , to put it bluntly .
We cannot compress five days ' work into a Wednesday just because some people want to work for one day and have six days off every week .
Perhaps there are employees in other walks of life who would welcome a similar arrangement .
In my opinion , what goes on here brings shame on this Parliament , and I find it scandalous , Mr Haarder , that you should encourage this by trying to eliminate Thursday sittings too , now that the Friday sittings have gone .
But now to the topic itself .
I wish to say very clearly that we , as Europeans , bear a great responsibility for Kosovo - and this topical and urgent debate , incidentally , was originally devoted to Kosovo , not southern Serbia ; it is listed in the agenda as the ' situation in Kosovo ' .
In this respect I am not entirely happy with the resolution , and I should also like to point out that my name appears erroneously on the resolution , which I did not sign .
May I ask that this be corrected , because I believe - as the last few speeches , and particularly Mrs Pack ' s eloquent intervention , have graphically illustrated - that it is a matter of stabilising the situation in Kosovo , for as long as the situation in Kosovo is unstable , there can be no stability in the neighbouring regions either , including southern Serbia and , indeed , the whole of Serbia .
This is why it is absolutely imperative , as Mr Lagendijk quite rightly said , to take the decisive step by arranging for elections to be held in Kosovo .
Until we have democratically legitimised authorities for Kosovo to act as negotiating partners of the democratically legitimised Serbs , there will be no peace settlement in the region , and we shall incur a heavy burden of guilt if we keep postponing these elections for every conceivable reason , because by so doing we undermine Mr Rugova ' s position , and extremist forces - whose background , by the way , is obscure , to say the least - are able to exploit the situation and make internal political capital out of the Albanians ' frustration .
As I have said , our inactivity weakens the position of Mr Rugova , who embodies people ' s hopes for a peaceful solution .
Instead of just pointing the finger at others and saying that this one or that one is undemocratic , we should recognise the fact that we ourselves are neglecting our primary responsibility .
Let me close with a remark aimed at the Serbian President : if he does not accept EU mediation to resolve this thorny issue , I wonder why he accepts money from the European Union .
Mr President , Europe ' s coherence and credibility are at stake in Kosovo . So too is the confidence of our own citizens and the people of the Balkans in the European institutions as well as the stability of the region itself .
Our action in Kosovo a couple of years ago was not exactly a paragon of speed or unity . For too many months it was not a paragon of efficiency either .
Our people reacted with disgust to Milosevic ' s odious policy which resulted in oppression and terror for the Albanian Kosovars and in their mass exodus .
Public opinion in our own countries demanded determined action such as was eventually taken .
Military intervention of that nature was likely to generate misgivings and even rejection amongst some sectors of our society and even more so in Yugoslavia itself .
It is only fair to reiterate that we gave political consent to that action and that it did serve to curtail Milosevic ' s excesses and the sufferings of the people of Kosovo .
It also contributed to Milosevic being discredited and defeated a few months later .
However , our consistency is now being put to the test . We can no longer conceal our embarrassment as we witness how some of the former victims in Kosovo are turning into tormentors .
They are persecuting their fellow citizens of Serb origin and driving them out of their territory in as hateful a process of ethnic cleansing as the previous one . Those same elements are involved in armed aggression on other Serb territory with an Albanian population .
At the same time , Albanian Kosovar mafias are operating as part of organised crime networks in several of our countries . It appears that they are doing so to raise funds with which to finance their guerrilla activities .
All of this is incompatible with the objectives pursued by the European Union and we must not tolerate it .
The European Union is contributing very substantial sums to the rebuilding of Kosovo . Nevertheless , that contribution must be strictly conditional on respect for human rights , recognition of existing borders adopted by the international community and the cessation of all military and terrorist operations by Albanian Kosovars within their territory or beyond it .
The stability of Yugoslavia , Albania , Macedonia and the rest of the region may depend on our consistency and firmness . It could hinge on our stifling the extremist and expansionist action of certain elements of the Albanian Kosovar population .
President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me first say plainly and simply : I am opposed to any kind of force in political conflict .
I believe we must see that as an absolutely fundamental principle .
But the situation is , of course , rather more complicated in Kosovo and in the Presevo valley than simply dealing with a few extremist Albanians and heaping abuse on them today .
Of course I shall support the resolution , but really I should have preferred it if we had tackled in one go today not only the situation in the Presevo valley , but also what is still happening daily in Mitrovica .
Because there - and we must not forget that - it is not only policemen , not only KFOR troops , but also citizens who are attacked daily , and it is no fun living there .
Very many colleagues have been there and know what the situation is like .
I am amazed at the warmth with which the international community is treating President Kostuníca at this moment .
We are making a fuss of him , and supporting him , and when he came to power we quite rightly told him that there must be immediate emergency aid .
Of course I was in favour of that , but we are now at a turning point .
We are at a moment when we are moving from emergency aid to structural help .
I believe that this is a turning point that we must take advantage of .
We must use it to make clear once and for all to Mr Kostuníca and his regime that he will have to take fundamental steps to solve the problems in Kosovo .
That means , in the first instance , the release of prisoners .
We have still made no progress at all with this .
This is a real scandal .
If one comes into contact with Albanian Kosovars , that is the first thing they ask about .
Secondly , I believe that we must use the turning point finally to force Mr Kostuníca to consider a truly fundamental political solution for the Kosovo region , and in my view that means autonomy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the parliamentary delegation that was in Yugoslavia a few days ago saw a Yugoslavia , a Serbia , in transition .
The future shape of the country is the subject of intensive discussion , and there is much talk of decentralisation , even in Serbia itself , and of a new relationship with the ethnic minorities .
Another subject that is frequently discussed is the need to strengthen local government and , particularly in southern Serbia , the need to give the Albanian minority fair representation in the local authorities , where the rules have hitherto been stacked against them .
Every act of violence , whether in southern Serbia or in Mitrovica , disrupts the painstaking peace process that is currently taking place in the Balkans .
The Yugoslav and Serb authorities must naturally take a firm line in their dealings with the minorities .
That is what we in Parliament have always advocated and will continue to advocate , and there is no room for compromise there .
It is important , however , that the measures taken should be realistic .
Elections in Kosovo are certainly one such measure , but they must be preceded by a precise definition of the powers and authority that the elected representatives will have .
The present problems cannot be solved overnight .
They can only be solved by a consensus of all interested parties , states and ethnic groups .
That is a complex process , and I entirely agree with Mrs Pack , perhaps not in detail but certainly in principle , that Europe must take the initiative here , because none of the parties in the Balkans enjoys the level of trust that would enable it to launch a successful peace initiative at this stage .
Only the European Union enjoys that level of trust .
Neither the United States of America nor Russia nor any of the Balkan States and societies have the requisite degree of authority .
And if Europe were caught napping now , that would pose serious problems .
I can only agree with another of the previous speakers , Mr Posselt , on the money issue .
We already pay out enough in the world and in particular regions without having a stabilising influence .
It must be different in the Balkans .
We are willing to pay , but we also want to have a say , so that stability and peace can be established in the region .
Mr President , the Commission shares most of the concerns referred to in the resolutions .
As regards Kosovo , we were already aware of many of the issues raised .
We strongly condemn violence in all its forms and wish to combat organised crime . At the same time we fully support the United Nations ' mission and both the incoming and outgoing Special Representatives .
The European Union and UNMIK pillar responsible for economic development promotes the involvement and training of local communities , as you yourselves have outlined . This is perceived as a key issue underpinning our cooperation .
A number of speakers have raised a crucial issue , namely basic respect for democratic principles and the rights of minorities .
We certainly share this concern . In particular , we are pursuing our efforts on behalf of Albanian Kosovar detainees in Serb prisons .
The European Union has raised this matter on numerous occasions , most recently during the troika 's visit to Belgrade last week .
We are aware that the authorities are working on an amnesty law for the thousands of political prisoners imprisoned under the Milosevic regime .
We know that in principle this law should have a very wide scope . Only a few hundred prisoners sentenced for acts of terrorism would be excluded , mostly Albanian Kosovars .
The authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and in Serbia are dealing with each individual case under urgent procedure . It is , however , true that they have no intention of granting a general pardon .
They have made it clear that they will not free a single prisoner , Serb or Albanian , who has been fairly sentenced for that type of offence .
As far as the European Union is concerned , we shall continue to raise the issue and press for an early solution .
We shall have this and other matters very much in mind in the coming months as we negotiate this year ' s programme of aid to Serbia with both the Serb and the Yugoslav authorities .
It is very important for all concerned that the new democratic authorities maintain their commitment to continue with the reforms outlined .
You raised another matter in the resolution , namely the problem of the tension in the Presevo valley in southern Serbia . The resolutions adopted are also in line with the political positions adopted by the Union , which unreservedly condemns violence and terrorism .
On behalf of the European Union we have highlighted the moderation displayed by the new leaders of the Yugoslav Republic and Serbia and we urge them to continue in this vein . We all have to be very clear on one point .
Some of you have already referred to it and we agree entirely with you . A new era is dawning in the Balkans and it must not be marred by violence from any source whatsoever .
The European Union must therefore rejoice at the plan put forward by the authorities to solve the current crisis . This programme includes proposals for dealing with the grievances felt by the people of that poor and underdeveloped region , with all the attendant problems .
For our part , the European Union has just received the plan and is studying it . It is worth pointing out that this is Belgrade ' s first attempt to reach a negotiated settlement through dialogue amongst the various ethnic groups in the territory of the former Yugoslavia .
This is indeed important . Milosevic never attempted to do so .
The principle of negotiation and dialogue warrants our support and will receive it .
The European Union is increasing the number of monitoring missions in the Presevo valley and the Commission is considering ways of increasing the already substantial aid devoted to the area .
This currently amounts to approximately EUR 1 million for fuel and for educational and humanitarian programmes .
The Deputy Prime Minister , Mr Covic , is due in Brussels today and will discuss the plan with the Commission too .
For their part , the Member States are considering how they could contribute .
KFOR is playing an important role in Kosovo in an effort to restrict the activities of the extremists . Furthermore , both UNMIK and the European Union are putting pressure on Albanian Kosovar politicians to distance themselves from the extremists in Presevo .
Mr President , given that the Commissioner was not present when I spoke , might I point out that this is not a law on amnesty .
Security Council resolution 1244 is quite specific on the point that only the authorities of the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo ( UNMIK ) are competent to rule on the situation of the Kosovars , where necessary .
There is no amnesty law being applied , it is a simple matter of transferring these 700 people from Belgrade to Pristina in Kosovo .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0105 / 01 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco , Mr Van den Berg and Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ;
B5-0115 / 01 by Mrs Isler Béguin , Mrs Lucas and Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ;
B5-0123 / 01 by Mr Van Hecke and Mr Fernández Martín , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) ;
B5-0133 / 01 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the situation in the Congo ;
B5-0135 / 01 by Mr Vinci , Mr Sylla and Mr Alavanos , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ;
B5-0144 / 01 by Mr Van den Bos and Mrs Dybkjær , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the Congo .
Mr President , democracy alone will deliver states from barbarism , ethnic warfare and despotic and military governments .
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is no exception to this rule .
Despite the 1999 Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement , which provided for a UN-supervised ceasefire , the disarmament of all the armed factions , the withdrawal of all foreign troops and the establishment of internal dialogue between the government and the opposition , both armed and civilian , the state of war has nonetheless continued and is paralysing both the economic and political situation throughout the whole region .
The European Parliament must condemn in the strongest terms all these acts of violence perpetrated against the civilian population and must also condemn the military intervention by neighbouring countries and demand the withdrawal of all foreign troops .
Following the assassination of President Laurent Kabila , the international community and the European Parliament must intervene in this political transition .
We must ask the new Head of State to lift the ban affecting political parties .
Mr Joseph Kabila must demand and must clearly announce a timetable for the opening of internal Congolese dialogue and the organisation of free elections .
The civilian population , whose economy and welfare has already been hit hard - particularly in the suburbs of Kinshasa , must not once again fall victim to the lack of political interest on the part of our continent , nor of the perfectly casual attitude of investors and firms operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , more especially in terms of human rights , the environment and the rule of law .
We have political responsibility in Africa and we must take action to safeguard the dignity of the peoples of Africa .
Mr President , the death of Laurent-Désiré Kabila has opened new perspectives for peace .
The fact is that the former president had become an obstacle to the implementation of the Lusaka peace agreement .
He was eliminated by the very people who helped bring him to power .
His successor and son , Joseph Kabila , can count for the time being on a great deal of credit from the international community .
All the same , he is the main character in a script written and directed by others , by Angola and Zimbabwe , but also by the hardliners from his father ' s government .
It looks very much as if there has been a change of driver , but that the bus remains the same .
The young Kabila has awakened high expectations .
The time has now come for him to act .
As of now the Lusaka agreement is the only framework for a permanent solution .
Specifically , withdrawal of all foreign troops from Congolese territory and the simultaneous initiation of inter-Congolese dialogue .
The international community must quickly decide on its attitude and particularly push for the deployment of MONUC of the UN peacekeeping forces .
There is also an urgent need for more coherent action , both between Europe and America and between the various Member States .
Certain Member States continue to approach the conflict in the Great Lakes region on the basis of an imagined , artificial conflict between English-speakers and French-speakers .
Others mainly try to secure their own economic interests .
There are limits to cynicism .
If the window of opportunity is not quickly used to force a real breakthrough in the peace process , violence will soon flare up again and the first African world war will further escalate .
I urge the Council and also the Commission to take a more assertive stance , because only if Europe speaks with one voice can it make a meaningful contribution to ending a war which has already cost too many lives .
Mr President , obviously the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are those who suffer most in the conflicts between armed gangs which are tearing the country apart , but it is both pathetic and misleading to present these conflicts as if the only people to bear any responsibility were the opposing Congolese factions and their protectors in neighbouring African states and as if Europe ' s calling for national reconciliation and democratisation could resolve the situation .
Among those sitting here aspiring to give the Congo lessons on democracy or human rights are representatives of the former colonial power which for decades has kept this country under the yoke of brutal oppression .
There are also those who took up the baton of French imperialism and demonstrated the true worth of their speeches on democracy by supporting Mobutu , not to mention their accomplices of other nationalities , all tempted by the mineral wealth of the Congo .
They are criminals who are preaching to the victims of their own criminal action .
While expressing our solidarity with the people of the Congo , we refuse to be associated in any way whatsoever with the representatives of the political powers which bear some of the responsibility for the past and present oppression of this country , some of whom still belong to political or business networks whose goal is to make profits on the back of Africa .
Mr President , under Kabila Sr. , the peace process had ground to a halt .
There is new hope in the air now that his son has become president .
Peace is only possible if all foreign troops are withdrawn .
That is why Europe and America particularly must exert joint pressure on Rwanda and Burundi to end their adventure .
The dividing up of the country is not an acceptable option .
Even the so-called rebels will have to recognise territorial integrity .
But they will only do so if Kabila and his friends are prepared to share power in the country .
Without the democratisation of political life no lasting stability is possible in Congo .
The poor population has to make do with emergency humanitarian aid .
As soon as peace makes it possible , the European Union should resume structural aid and this must particularly enable the government to function properly .
The poor Congo could be rich .
It has large mineral resources and the population is predominantly very young and very dynamic .
They deserve the efforts of all involved to breathe new life into the hope for peace .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in discussing this resolution we should be aware that Congo is larger than Europe .
A country containing some 300 tribes , some of which live in total isolation , as the communications network is virtually non-existent .
A country where both production and supply are achievable only with great difficulty .
A country that is , moreover , wedged between Rwanda and Uganda .
Rwanda , which meanwhile for its own security has moved its borders up to between 200 and 300 km into the Congolese interior .
Uganda , which under the guise of combating rebel movements extended its influence to significant parts of Congo , up to and including Kisangani .
The neutral position , which puts the Lusaka agreements first , involving the withdrawal of foreign troops and the establishment of partition areas both on the borders with Rwanda and Uganda and between the migrants themselves , is a passive first step that may lead to the stabilisation of the front and the belated return of the many refugees .
Perhaps it will be useful if Europe , in contrast to the hesitant attitude of American policy towards Kabila , plays a key role .
After all , Europe has an unbelievable potential impact because of its knowledge of the thinking behind events in Congo and can once more play a role to the benefit of the population , helping it do battle with desperate poverty , squalid health condition , starvation and epidemic disease .
For example , without taking sides , Europe could support Belgian efforts to bring some stability to a population of over 55 million men and women in a land area larger than that of the enlarged Europe .
In this way Europe would prove that it wants to respond to the priorities that the new President set out in his inaugural address .
Europe must not remain passive in the face of developments in Central Africa .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the tragedy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot , I regret , be separated from the tragedy of the entire region .
The purpose of my speech is , in particular , to draw attention to the particular responsibilities of Angola , a country governed by a totally corrupt military power that has taken advantage of the weaknesses of western capitalism to oppress its people and to threaten the peace , stability and security of the entire region .
This is of particular concern to us , all the more so because , in Cabinda , there are Portuguese citizens who have been held for over nine months , in a tragedy as long-standing as that of the western tourists who were kidnapped in the Philippines approximately a year ago .
These people are being held captive by guerrilla forces fighting for the independence of Cabinda .
The truth of the situation is that Angola ' s Government is not able to solve these problems and is spreading its instability and greed into neighbouring territories .
I urge the Commission to be particularly firm in its assessment of the situation in that part of the world , and I also call upon the Commission and the Swedish Presidency to help us to obtain the release of the Portuguese citizens who have been held hostage as quickly as possible .
Mr President , the European Union obviously condemns political violence in all its forms .
The Congo is an area of concern to us and Joseph Kabila ' s rise to power may indeed provide a fresh opportunity to reopen the Lusaka negotiations along the moderate line he has taken to date , particularly during his visits to France , Belgium and the United States .
True , so far all we have to go on are words , which must be translated into deeds .
We shall certainly be monitoring developments closely .
In any event , we feel that this is an opportunity we should not hesitate to grasp in an effort to reach a negotiated solution to the conflict , particularly now that it seems a significant cease-fire is being observed .
At the time , the European Union actively supported the Lusaka negotiations with a significant allocation of regional funds . The mechanisms set up under the agreement were allocated a fund for the joint military commission .
These were relatively large funds , amounting to several million euro . They were essential in achieving the three fundamental objectives : negotiation , the military commission and facilitating political dialogue .
However , we are endeavouring to do even more in terms of financial assistance and humanitarian aid .
ECHO allocated EUR 20 million last year and an allocation of EUR 35 million is planned for this year .
Yet we are not only offering economic support to assure food supply and health services , but also attempting to promote the negotiated solution we all hope for based on the Lusaka agreements .
In addition , the Commission is studying the possibility of supporting the revival of the peace and reconciliation process through programmes for the rehabilitation , demobilisation and reintegration of displaced people . Given the present situation it is too early , however , to define possible future action .
Neither the technical nor the political conditions exist to allow us to detail the action we might take .
Finally , I should like to say that I have taken note of the request made by Mr Ribeiro e Castro to consider the extent to which we might be able to take the lead on this matter .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions on human rights :
Religious freedoms in the People 's Republic of China - B5-0100 / 01 by Mr Dupuis , Mrs Bonino , Mr Pannella , Mr Turco , Mr Dell 'Alba , Mr Cappato and Mr Della Vedova , on behalf of the TDI Group , on freedom of religion in the People 's Republic of China and in the occupied territories ;
B5-0106 / 01 by Mrs Gebhardt , on behalf of the PSE Group , on human rights and freedom of religion in China ;
B5-0116 / 01 by Mr Wuori , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on freedom of thought in the People 's Republic of China ;
B5-0124 / 01 by Mr Thomas Mann , Mrs Banotti and Mr Jarzembowski , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on freedom of religion in the People 's Republic of China ;
B5-0142 / 01 by Mr Sjöstedt , Mrs Frahm , Mr Brie and Mr Papayannakis , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on religious freedom in the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) ;
B5 ­ 0142 / 01 by Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on freedom of religion in the People 's Republic of China ;
Laos- B5 ­ 0101 / 01 by Mr Dupuis , Mr Pannella , Mrs Bonino , Mr Dell 'Alba , Mr Turco , Mr Della Vedova and Mr Cappato , on behalf of the TDI Group , on the situation in the Lao People 's Democratic Republic ;
B5 ­ 0107 / 01 by Mrs Berès , Mr Naïr and Mrs Iivari , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the human rights situation in the Lao People 's Democratic Republic ;
B5 ­ 0117 / 01 by Mrs Frassoni and Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the human rights situation in the Lao People 's Democratic Republic ( Laos ) ;
B5 ­ 0125 / 01 by Mr Hugues Martin and Mrs Sudre , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the human rights situation in the Lao People 's Democratic Republic ( Laos ) ;
B5 ­ 0136 / 01 by Mrs Morgantini and Mr Alavanos , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the human rights situation in the Lao People 's Democratic Republic ( Laos ) ;
B5 ­ 0146 / 01 by Mr Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Laos ;
Guinea- B5 ­ 0098 / 01 by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the situation in Guinea-Conakry ;
B5 ­ 0108 / 01 by Mrs Carlotti , Mrs Kinnock and Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on armed attacks along the southern borders of Guinea ( Conakry ) ;
B5 ­ 0118 / 01 by Mr MacCormick , Mrs Schörling , Mrs Lucas and Mrs Isler-Béguin , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Guinea-Conakry ;
B5 ­ 0126 / 01 by Mr Van Hecke and Mrs Banotti , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the situation in Guinea-Conakry ;
B5 ­ 0137 / 01 by Mrs Boudjenah and Mr Miranda , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Guinea-Conakry ;
B5 ­ 0147 / 01 by Mr Van den Bos and Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Guinea-Conakry ;
Nigeria- B5-0109 / 01 by Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the application of sharia law in certain Nigerian regions ;
B5-0119 / 01 by Mrs Sörensen , Mrs Lucas , Mrs Hautala and Mrs Evans , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Nigeria ;
B5-0127 / 01 by Mr McCartin and Mrs Banotti , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on human rights in Nigeria ;
B5-0138 / 01 by Mrs González Álvarez , Mrs Fraisse , Mrs Morgantini , Mrs Frahm , Mrs Eriksson , Mr Alyssandrakis and Mr Cossutta , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights in Nigeria ;
B5-0148 / 01 by Mrs Dybkjær , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Nigeria ;
Freedom of expression in Pakistan
B5-0110 / 01 by Mr Fruteau , on behalf of the PSE Group , on human rights in Pakistan ;
B5-0120 / 01 by Mrs Jillian Evans , Mrs Frassoni and Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on freedom of expression in Pakistan ;
B5-0129 / 01 by Mr Thomas Mann and Mrs Martens , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the arrest in Pakistan of several journalists ;
B5-0139 / 01 by Mrs Fraisse , Mr Marset Campos , Mr Manisco , Mr Seppänen , Mr Schmid , Mr Korakas and Mr Alavanos , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on freedom of expression in Pakistan ;
B5-0149 / 01 by Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the freedom of expression in Pakistan .
Religious freedoms in the People 's Republic of China
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , China is on the agenda once again .
Yet , I doubt that this introduction will be enough to make Parliament realise that there is a crisis in China , that this typical Communist regime is , most tragically , turning into a National Communist regime and that this presents a risk now , and in the future , to security in Asia and the rest of the world .
Today , the people of China , Tibet , Mongolia and Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region of China have no freedom of religion or conscience .
In particular , the Falun Gong movement and other groups have been subjected to repression on a par with that seen during the Cultural Revolution .
Already 500 000 people have been arrested , more than 150 people have died in prison , usually after having been torture .
What I am describing here is the situation now , not the situation during the Cultural Revolution .
Parliament has a duty to take an extremely firm stance .
The resolution is a good text .
I would particularly like to thank Mrs Malmström , who played an instrumental role in this task .
The members of the Group of the Party of European Socialists are certainly not aware of an incident which in another , less tragic , context might be considered amusing . At the meeting to discuss the compromise , one of the members of the Group of the Party of European Socialists recommended that Falun Gong be excluded from this resolution , asserting that it was something other than a religion .
Freedom of religion and freedom of conscience are part of the same concept and each of us must define it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , freedom of faith , conscience and religious creed and freedom of expression and association are the most elementary fundamental rights that can , and must , be granted to every individual in this world of ours .
They are part and parcel of our democracies , and we expect them to be applied everywhere as basic principles so that the dignity of human life is truly respected throughout the world .
For a while it looked as if the situation were taking a turn for the better in the People ' s Republic of China too .
Sadly , in more recent times this appears to have changed , and progress seems to have not only been halted but even reversed .
For example , I greatly regret that , while the People ' s Republic of China has signed important documents such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , the process of ratifying and implementing the two covenants has yet to be completed .
That is a great pity .
This process needs to be reactivated .
I therefore appeal on behalf of my Group to the People ' s Republic of China to respect people ' s civil liberties just as we endeavour to do in our democracies .
May I add a postscript to the honourable Member Mr Dupuis , just to mention to him that the Falun Gong say that they are not a religious institution .
We should also respect the way in which institutions define themselves .
Mr President , first of all the title of the resolution should be " Freedom of Expression " rather than " Freedom of Religion " because , as was mentioned earlier , Falun Gong is not a religion but rather a practice comparable to yoga in the West .
Secondly , the repression against Falun Gong is totally absurd .
Can you imagine repression against all the people who ever follow yoga classes in Europe ?
The Chinese Government goes so far as to imprison cyber-dissidents meaning people who create or manage websites whose content does not please the government like Mr Huan Qi who is being tried now .
Finally , you should stop supporting the EU / China human rights dialogue as long as it does not yield any result .
Its only concrete outcome so far has been to prevent a resolution condemning China in Geneva .
Mr President , what was it that Karl Marx said ? " Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature , the heart of a heartless world and the soul of soulless conditions .
It is the opium of the people . "
Marxism-Leninism is in terminal decline , but other ideologies have survived .
China is far from permitting freedom of expression , let alone freedom of religious observance , for Tibetans , Mongolians and members of Christian churches or Muslim communities .
The Tibetans are persecuted .
It is an offence to display pictures of the Dalai Lama .
Those who stand up for their beliefs face the threat of lengthy prison sentences .
I recall the initiative of the Tibet intergroup of the European Parliament to propose the nun Ngawang Sangdrol , who has spent the last nine years in prison , for this year ' s Sakharov Prize .
The eleven-year-old Panchen Lama , the second-highest authority in Tibetan Buddhism , has been abducted and has since been cut off from the outside world .
He was not even allowed to meet with Mary Robinson , the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights .
The PPE-DE Group expects China , as a future WTO member and a global player , to assume its responsibility at long last and to ratify and implement the international agreements on civil and political rights as well as those on economic , social and cultural rights .
We call on the EU Member States to take the opportunity presented by the meeting of the Human Rights Commission in Geneva .
Put the obstruction of freedom of religion and the gross violations of human rights in China at the top of the agenda .
And let us remember that , in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , one of the few successes of the Nice Summit , the Member States enshrined freedom of religion , conscience , expression and information in the second chapter .
I hope that our European Commission will show the same powers of initiative .
Tashi delek !
Mr President , there was a time when the People ' s Republic of China was systematically excluded from international negotiations and world trade by Europe and America .
The fact that a divided and backward country made a new start and started rebuilding its economy , in a way that was enthusiastically received by masses of workers and peasants , was felt as a threat by the outside world .
Over half a century later the heirs to that revolution are still in power .
Their ideology and the enthusiasm of the population have gone , but unfortunately they have retained their dictatorial traits with a vengeance .
For this regime , economic growth and political calm are of supreme importance and as a result anything that runs counter to them is attacked fanatically .
That bodes ill for ethnic and religious minorities and those with political criticisms .
Organisations are banned , people are locked up and death sentences are liberally used .
Small , powerless countries that breach human rights at home , rightly attract foreign criticism .
In the case of China , the most populous country on earth , things are usually different .
People with widely differing political views say that it is a large and important country that may become a major trading partner and that we must therefore stay on good terms with it .
My group believes that an end should be put to this special treatment .
Human rights , including freedom of religion , cannot simply stop at the Chinese border .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would echo Mr Dupuis in saying that I do not know how many times we have stood here and discussed human rights violations in China .
Unfortunately , the situation appears to be getting worse and worse .
Torture is on the increase .
There is frequent use of the death penalty .
Freedom of expression is limited .
The ELDR Group is very worried about this and appeals to the Commission and the Council to put increased pressure on China regarding human rights issues .
The world cannot look silently on as the world ' s most populous country systematically engages in violations against its citizens on a daily basis .
We have high hopes that the Swedish Presidency will succeed in bringing about a united approach prior to the Geneva meeting in a month ' s time and then , in the course of the meeting , will get a resolution passed concerning China .
The Chinese have extremely limited opportunities to practise their religion .
Catholics report systematic persecution .
Mosques are burned down .
In Tibet , the oppression of the Tibetan people , especially of Buddhist monks , continues .
Torture , re-education camps and imprisonment under unacceptable conditions are the rule rather than the exception .
We know that there are now at least 600 political prisoners in Tibet , most of whom are monks and nuns .
Over the last year , we have been able to see , on TV screens throughout the world , the harsh offensive launched by the Chinese régime against the meditation movement Falun Gong since the latter was banned in July 1999 .
Ever since the ban , tens of thousands of Falun Gong practitioners have been arrested .
At least 137 people have died in prison .
Thousands of cases of torture , atrocities and ill-treatment are also being reported , as is the fact that thousands of people are in work camps and countless individuals have been punished with imprisonment following summary trials .
That is completely unacceptable .
Falun Gong has been branded an evil sect , but one might well wonder if the reason for the hatred felt towards this peaceful movement does not lie , rather , in the threat it constitutes to the Communist system , because it unites so many people .
However , Falun Gong practitioners are entirely peaceful and have no political ambitions other than to be allowed to exercise their basic rights - rights which are laid down in the Chinese constitution and in international agreements signed by China .
Laos
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to welcome a delegation from the Laotian opposition and exiles from Laos , led by representatives of the Laotian royal family , who are seated in the public gallery .
We have not discussed the situation in Laos in great depth ; however , Laos is a country still governed by a dictatorship , has a one-party system and is one of the poorest countries in the world .
I believe that this resolution is important because , for the first time , it requires Parliament to state that a process of national reconciliation is needed in Laos , that we need all political forces , both internal , which even today are suppressed , and external , to be able to work towards bringing about change in this splendid country .
I would like to thank all the Members who contributed to this work .
I believe that it is an important text and I hope that the Commission will present it firmly to the Laotian Government so that we see a change and a relaxation over the next few weeks in Laos and I would welcome Commissioner Solbes Mira ' s comments on this matter .
Mr President , the European Parliament took a positive view at the start of the week of extending the agreement between the EU and ASEAN to include Laos .
Parliament ' s report states that the protocol can be seen as part of a broader process in which the Union aims to encourage political , economic and social growth as well as stability in the country .
There is much room for improvement when it comes to the situation regarding human rights in Laos .
It is appropriate that human rights there should be discussed at the same time as increased cooperation .
We have given a lot of attention in Parliament to the question of Burma .
But things are hardly any better in neighbouring countries .
Laos is one of the world ' s poorest countries .
All the negative features of a one-party system are manifest there .
There are barely any signs of greater freedom of speech or the liberalisation of political life there .
In October 1999 , a demonstration was organised in front of the presidential palace against the ruling powers .
Those who took part in it have not been seen since .
Amnesty says that they were arrested and have been languishing in prison camps without trial .
Meanwhile , Mr Thongsouk Saysangkhi , who died in prison in 1998 , belonged to a group of three ministers and a high official who had been attempting to change the administrative machine from within . They were convicted of treason .
The international community has tried to aid the development of Laos , despite the human rights problems .
The EU has given EUR 120 million in aid to the country ; the United States has given 23 million , and Japan 132 million dollars .
The Laotian people , who live in dire poverty , need help , but the country ' s internal situation gives cause for asking just who is really benefiting from the aid being given .
There are regrettable examples of projects where the army and the government have reaped the benefit instead of the local inhabitants .
Laos is rich in natural resources and , were there democracy there , would have real potential for development .
In a parliamentary statement Laos is being urged to sign , ratify and enforce the UN ' s conventions on human rights , to free prisoners of conscience , and to guarantee freedom of the press .
The importance of these objectives should really be clearly emphasised .
Mr President , I would like to join Mr Dupuis and Mrs Iivari in expressing our sense of deep solidarity with Lao exiles who are here today , and even more with dissidents who are detained in prison without trial and in intolerable circumstances in Laos itself .
On behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance who are in Parliament - and , I am sure , in a spirit in which the whole Parliament joins - we very much wish to express our support for the liberation of Laos .
We cannot but remember here how much the West - the United States perhaps more than Europe - has done , in times past , to destabilise and damage life there .
We now wish to see an improvement .
We know that Laos has signed the UN Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic and Social Rights .
It still must ratify them , and the government there must live up to what it has undertaken to honour .
We call for this to be done in the name of human liberty and solidarity .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has already , on several previous occasions , adopted positions on the human rights situation in the Lao People ' s Democratic Republic , in 1991 and 1997 in particular .
At that time , Parliament requested the unconditional release of prisoners of conscience but this request was ignored and since then at least one of them , Mr Tchongsouk Saysangkhi , has died in prison .

After 25 years of Communist rule , the people of Laos are today hoping that their country will follow the path of transition to democracy and are calling for free elections .
The Laotian Government , however , continues to stamp out any peaceful demonstrations , such as the one held on 26 October 1999 and , more recently , on 17 November 2000 .
The organisers of the earlier demonstration were arrested and are still in prison .
The leader of the second demonstration , Mr Phommachaul Phannolath , was also arrested along with other demonstrators .
The resolution before the House denounces these human rights violations and reminds the Lao People ' s Democratic Republic that , as a partner of the European Union through a Cooperation Agreement signed in April 1997 , it undertook to promote and protect all human rights .
The Lao PDR also showed its commitment to this by signing two United Nations conventions on human rights in December 2000 .
This commitment must henceforth be backed up with real action .
Furthermore , the Lao PDR is taking on the role of coordinator of relations between the European Union and the Association of South East Asian Nations until 2002 .
This role gives it further responsibilities in promoting the concepts and values on which the partnership is based .
I hope that Parliament will give its support to the European Union ' s strategy on the region as well as to all the people of Laos who are working towards democracy and for national harmony within the country .
The compromise resolution is well-balanced , clear and specific .
On behalf of my group , I would urge you to support it so that the European Parliament can make its voice heard in this troubled area of the world .
Mr President , five people , namely Thongpaseuth Keuakoun , Kamphouvieng Sisaath , Seng-Aloun Phenphanh , Bouavanh Chanhmanivong and Keochay , disappeared on 26 October 1999 and were probably imprisoned for holding a peaceful protest in Vientiane and calling for political changes in their country .
They are all members of the Lao student movement for democracy .
Their safety is feared for because of the torture and poor treatment in the prisons .
The government of Laos should see the contribution of this kind of motivated person precisely as an impulse towards improvement .
They must be able to contribute freely .
Freedom of expression , the right of association and assembly are greatly restricted in Laos .
Inflation is currently running at over 30 % .
The mysterious bomb explosions are damaging the largest economic factor in the country , tourism .
If the government does not act soon to implement political and economic reforms then this country faces an unstable future .
Guinea-Conakry
Mr President , one of the greatest humanitarian dramas at present being played out on the world stage is the refugee problem in Guinea .
For more than five months hundreds of thousands of refugees from Liberia , Sierra Leone and Guinea have been hemmed in between the warring sides .
In the border area between these countries , called the ' Parrot ' s Beak ' , they are caught like rats in a trap in fighting between Guinean troops , shadowy rebel movements and the gang of murderers known as the United Revolutionary Front .
The personal commitment of the new UN High Commissioner for Refugees , Mr Lubbers , in this crisis area is very gratifying .
His proposal for the establishment of a safety corridor , which will enable refugees to return to their home countries quickly , deserves international support .
But , all this is not enough .
The causes of this humanitarian disaster must be tackled .
For example , it would be a good idea to institute an international boycott against the trade in ' blood diamonds ' , in which this border area is so rich .
It is also essential that the international community should present a united front against those principally responsible for the present degrading chaos in West Africa - a task in which the Security Council of the United Nations should take the lead .
For this reason we request that the Council and Commission should take action along these lines .
Mr President , Mr Belder has graphically accounted for the dreadful situation facing people on the borders of Guinea where warriors from neighbouring states , rebels against their own government , come and go across the border creating problems of refugees , problems of human suffering , death and destitution .
We must do all that we can to bring this to an end .
Our resolution says that we must urge all the countries in the region to refrain from activities directed against a neighbouring country , and so we must .
It says we must ask all the neighbouring countries to refrain from supporting groups that fight the Conkary regime or make incursions into Guinea 's territory , and so we must .
We want to see the speeding-up of the process that will lead to reintegration of displaced persons and the return of refugees to their country of origin .
West Africans themselves are doing great work in this direction .
We in the European Union must put our voice , and whatever weight we have , behind them to help them .
Mr President , all reports indicate that Liberia has underlying responsibility for the present conflict in Guinea .
Charles Taylor originally came to power through violence and terror , with the sole aim of obtaining control of the diamond trade .
He later exported violence to neighbouring Sierra Leone by arming and training the RUF , one of the most savage rebel movements on earth and now the Hitler of West Africa is exporting violence to another neighbour , Guinea .
Guinea is in a certain sense the victim of the fact that it admitted hundreds of thousands of refugees from Liberia into its territory , including members of the rebel group opposed to Charles Taylor .
The Conakry regime has sometimes reacted in a very unfortunate way , but let us not mistake our adversary .
Liberia is the destabilising factor in the region .
In any case , according to my information it is incorrect that Guinea is refusing to transfer refugees to areas further from the border .
The international organisation for migration has in fact already begun moving a first group of 35 000 refugees .
It is clear that a safe corridor must be created as soon as possible for the return of these people .
Europe could definitely give unconditional support to the ECOWAS plan for stationing observers in the border area .
If violence persists , the Union should also call within the UN for smart sanctions against the leaders of Liberia .
European Member States that flout the ban on the import of so-called blood diamonds , must be strongly condemned .
Apart from that , Mr President , I feel that the Council should also investigate reports of possible support from France for the regime in Liberia .
The situation is critical .
If a Sierra Leone scenario is repeated in Guinea there is a risk that in addition to Central and East Africa , West Africa too will be caught up in a spiral of violence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall speak in the same vein as my fellow Members and clarify that Guinea today is home to almost 500 000 refugees , who , for ten years , have been fleeing civil wars raging in Sierra Leone and Liberia .
In many cases , they refused to join the armed forces . I think anyone who has read Ahmadou Kourouma ' s book ' Allah Doesn ' t Have To ' will be familiar with the tragedy of the child soldiers forced to join possibly revolutionary but most certainly bloodthirsty armies such as the United Revolutionary Front .
I would also like to say , like Mr van Hecke , that a safety corridor to allow the mass evacuation of refugees must be established immediately , as it is , indeed , a matter of urgency .
The Guinean Government must allow the victims to settle in areas that are further from the fighting and the borders .
In my view , that is the least it could do .
Obviously , it is justifiable and understandable for Guinea to defend itself against any incursion .
I am even of the opinion that the territorial integrity of a state like Guinea must be protected .
However , the Guinean Government must also prevent paramilitaries acting in the place of legitimate armed forces and perpetrating acts of violence on refugees .
I share the view that Guinea is not solely responsible , but I feel that it should do this , at least .
That is why the decision of the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) to use troops from West Africa must be supported and must come into force as soon as possible , as it may provide good protection .
To sum up , the European Union should put intense pressure upon Liberia to end its support for forces such as the URF .
However , Guinea is also partly responsible for the current situation , and is , even so , a country that regularly violates human rights - no one in the House could forget the imprisonment of Alpha Condé .
I believe that it is important to reiterate that , in a country that has no respect for the most basic democratic principles and where the slightest opposition is quashed , it is not surprising , although it is extremely regrettable , that one of the regime ' s opposition parties has joined the rebellion and allied itself with the URF .
My last point is to say that Africa is in urgent need of democratic rule and genuine economic development , which will improve the fortunes of all people .
We can help to achieve this .
I have a question to put to the Council . When will our governments cancel the debt owed by third-world countries , knowing as they do that this is the cause of wars and poverty ?
Mr President , in Africa small elites often deem the struggle for power and wealth more important than the suffering of the population .
At first , that did not apply to Guinea .
Despite the poverty , it offered a safe refuge for refugees from Sierra Leone and Liberia .
Now Guinea , too , is caught up in a regional struggle for power .
There is nowhere else for the refugees to go .
Thousands are hiding in the jungle or are wandering fearfully in the heat without food , water or hope .
If a corridor is not quickly created , an unparalleled humanitarian disaster threatens .
There is a great deal at stake .
The whole region seems to be heading for chaos .
The purchase of weapons is more important than feeding people .
Above all , Charles Taylor must take Liberia in hand .
It is harrowing to see how indulgently Europe , too , is reacting to this catastrophe .
What is the European Union doing , I ask the Commissioner , and when will the petty tyrants in power finally concern themselves with the lot of their people ?
Mr President , any normal human being would be moved by the sight of refugees from Sierra Leone wandering the streets of Guinea , bullied , beaten and humiliated by soldiers in the Guinean Army or some armed gang or other .
We must express our outrage at the actions of the Guinean army and dissident armed gangs , from Sierra Leone or Guinea , who are trying to gain control of the south west of Guinea .
However , once again , outrage is not enough to conceal British imperialist involvement in the civil wars in Sierra Leone , France ' s involvement in Guinea ' s dictatorship or even the involvement of large diamond traders , led by de Beers , in funding , the armed gangs directly or indirectly .
Furthermore , when military intervention is needed to support dictatorships dedicated to the interests of major Western powers , particularly those in Europe , European powers find it possible to implement considerable resources .
In order to ensure provisions and medical supplies can reach the 500 000 refugees in the area , the leaders of the European institutions merely send moral pleas to the armed gangs , official and unofficial , who have no use for them .
It is precisely because of our solidarity with the refugees and the people of the region that we refuse to be associated with this farce , which does not aim to come to the aid of these people , but to absolve the major powers of their responsibility .
Nigeria
Mr President , since 1998 eight states in Nigeria have enforced a form of Islamic law which allows corporal punishment , despite the fact that it contravenes both the Nigerian Constitution and international covenants on human rights to which Nigeria has signed up .
The effect on human rights is graphically illustrated by the case of Bariya Ibrahim Magazu , a 17-year old mother of a young child .
Despite having lodged an appeal against her sentence of 100 lashes , the sentence was carried out in January without even her lawyers being informed .
They were still preparing the case for her appeal in court .
No attempt has been made to bring those who abused and exploited her to justice .
This case highlights the increasing anxiety about human rights abuses in Nigeria .
People of different religious beliefs have coexisted peacefully in Nigeria in the past , yet George Carey , the Archbishop of Canterbury , on his recent visit to the country , underlined the growing international concern about developments there .
The Christian minority are not allowed to build churches or to teach their religion in schools .
In areas where Muslim law is enforced men and women are not allowed to travel on the same public transport , and boys and girls have to be taught in separate schools .
In the state of Kaduna it is estimated that 2000 people have been killed in fighting between Christians and Muslims over plans to introduce the new Islamic code of law .
Yet human rights groups of both faiths are now campaigning on these issues .
The resolution we have before us sends out two clear messages .
The first is that we in the European Parliament are not prepared to ignore human rights abuses anywhere and so we condemn without reservation the treatment of Bariya Ibrahim Magazu and call upon the Nigerian Government to prevent any repeat of such abuse in future .
But the second is that we are also making a commitment , as a parliament , to support the creation of a democratic and just society in Nigeria by strengthening the dialogue between ourselves and that country .
Mr President , I want to thank Mrs Evans for her contribution on this subject .
I had no contact with her but I separately put down a motion for my own group and I speak on their behalf on this subject .
My good friend Thomas Mann spoke about the denial of the right to practise religion in one part of the world .
But it is just as serious when human rights are denied because people want to impose their religious beliefs on other people .
Whether it be the imposition of one 's religious beliefs or the denial of the right to practice one 's religion , one is as bad as the other .
It is quite hard to be moderate in the language we use to condemn this barbarous and cruel act which took place against a 17-year-old girl in Nigeria .
A girl who claimed she had been forced to have sex but failed to produce in court the witnesses to support her claim .
The cruelty of the sentence , and the fact that she had given birth one month before , makes it very difficult for us to accept any assurances from the government of Nigeria that they are protecting the civil rights of their people and their own population .
We should remember that we in the European Union and the United States of America are the main trading partners of Nigeria .
We are the people who buy and sell almost all the things they want to buy and sell .
We have an obligation to examine the record in human rights of the people we do business with .
I would ask the European Commission to take into consideration standards of human rights in all the aid schemes and cooperation schemes that the European Union puts into effect .
This is the worst we have heard of to date but we understand there are amputations taking place in Nigeria for relatively minor offences .
Some people condemn globalisation , but if there is one good thing about globalisation it means that the world becomes interdependent and we have at least some pressure we can apply .
Freedom of expression in Pakistan
Mr President , I deeply regret the need for this resolution concerning journalists condemned to death for blasphemy for what is claimed to be a mistake .
It is the latest in a whole succession of human rights abuses in Pakistan : growing religious intolerance - which we have just been hearing elsewhere in the world - the lack of a fair trial , so-called honour killings of women , child imprisonment and so on .
I currently hold passport and other details for a constituent of mine , a Pakistani citizen , who has had to travel there for family reasons and in the past has had difficulty leaving that country , even under the previous regime .
This highlights the appalling state of affairs that we now see with the present regime in power in Pakistan .
The suspension of a constitution , as mentioned in the resolution , and the constitutional court , has removed a crucial safeguard for him and others like him who fear arbitrary detention .
The state of affairs there appals many Pakistanis , both within the country and throughout the world , people who are proud of their religious faith and who are also committed to fundamental human rights .
Mr President , some of the world ' s governments are violating the fundamental rules in which the common values of the international community are enshrined .
Article 18 of the United Nations ' Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that everyone has the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion .
Since 1991 , Islamic Sharia law has applied in Pakistan .
The precepts and prohibitions laid down in the Koran are the supreme law of the land .
The law against blasphemy has palpably impaired the largely peaceful coexistence of Muslims with Christians and other religious minorities .
Freedom of expression and the freedom of the press have been severely curtailed .
Once again , journalists - seven of them this time - have been arrested on the flimsy pretext that they allegedly distributed anti-Islamic writings .
It looks once more as if the whole purpose of this is to make a public example of them . But it is far more serious than that , because they could be sentenced to death .
We call on General Musharaf ' s military government to restore the independence of the judiciary and to delay no longer in allowing the courts to conduct proceedings in accordance with sound legal principles .
The Blasphemy Act must be repealed . It is being interpreted in an absolutely arbitrary manner and opens the door to all sorts of manipulation and malicious lawsuits .
The death penalty is rejected by a great majority of the people ' s representatives , not only in Europe but also in a growing number of Asian countries .
It must be abolished .
The PPE-DE Group calls on the European Commission to review all its agreements with Pakistan as a matter of urgency and to revise them as necessary .
We need cooperation agreements with the human rights organisations and with the regional non-governmental organisations .
The paramount aim of our initiatives must be to ensure that Pakistan can at last resume its journey towards a free democratic system of government .
Mr President , the ELDR Group can never approve of the death penalty , wherever in the world it is imposed .
It is , of course , that much more repugnant when journalists are in danger of being executed just for doing their job .
In January , the newspaper Frontier Post published a reader ' s letter , following which the newspaper ' s staff were taken into custody and accused of blasphemy .
These individuals ' lives are now at risk .
Fundamentalists have set fire to the newspaper ' s offices in Peshawar .
This event is a tragic illustration of developments in Pakistan where freedom of expression and human rights are not respected .
The country is now becoming ever more marginalised in the world community .
The Islamic laws , like the military ' s support for the Taliban régime in Afghanistan , are creating alarm .
The situation in Pakistan is very disquieting .
What does the Commission intend to do in order to support those groups which are working to promote human rights and to establish the principles of the constitutional state ?
Mr President , with regard to China , I would point out that the European Union is steadfastly determined to promote respect for human rights in this area , as in other parts of the world , and that we share Parliament ' s concern about religious freedom in that country .
It is true that the living standards of the majority of the Chinese population appear to have improved during the last twenty years .
Thanks to the economic reforms and to liberalisation , there have been increases in freedom and personal autonomy . It is true , however , that there is still a big gap between the international commitments made by China and the human rights situation in practice .
In 1996 , a human rights dialogue between the European Union and China was established and , within this framework , we are maintaining a frank debate on these matters .
A key topic is religious freedom , about which the European Union repeatedly expresses its concern faced with Chinese repression of religious and other types of activity to which you have referred .
We are talking not only about the Catholic and Protestant Churches , but also about any other type of faith .
Later , I shall be talking a little about Falun Gong .
Other topics raised with China are the repression of political dissent , the arbitrary conditions of detention , the frequent recourse to the death penalty and the repression of ethnic minorities .
We are also urging China quickly and without reservations to ratify the United Nations ' International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which we consider to be key factors for improving individual rights .
The human rights field is one of the priority areas of our work , in which I believe we can improve our relations with China .
As we very well know , dialogue is only an option , the purpose of which is to produce results .
There is no justification at all for maintaining the dialogue if no progress is being made .
The European Union ' s General Affairs Council openly expressed this point of view in its conclusions concerning the human rights dialogue between China and the European Union , published on 22 January .
You referred specifically in your speeches to three topics which I think are of interest .
Firstly , I should like to point out that , where Falun Gong is concerned , the Commission is especially concerned about the reports we are receiving about torture and ill-treatment inflicted upon followers of the movement , as well as about the severity of the sentences imposed upon some of its members .
The Commission has therefore repeatedly urged China to review these sentences .
We think that all the safeguards need to be fully respected in fair trials in which adequate defences are mounted .
As you may know , a decision has not yet been made about the European Union ' s position on the Geneva resolution on China .
The debate we have held today in this House will , without a doubt , be fundamental to the decision we take .
As for action in connection with Tibet , we are indeed still concerned about the ethnic minorities there .
I should also like to point out , regarding this matter , that China has been urged to make further progress towards fully respecting the cultural , linguistic and religious identity of the Tibetan people and to enter into an open dialogue with the Dalai Lama .
Regarding the situation in Laos , I should like to assure you that the Commission fully shares your concern about protecting human rights in the Lao People 's Democratic Republic .
It is true that , in the last year , some positive signs have been visible , for example the signing of the two United Nations covenants on human rights : the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights .
The problem now is for the National Assembly to lose no time in ratifying these covenants and putting them into effect , and the Commission is waiting for this to happen .
Even if this step is successfully taken , however , there still remains a lot of work to be done .
A cause of special concern for everyone is the intolerance of , for example , political opposition , as demonstrated by the detention of a number of people in October and November 1999 for demonstrating against the government .
You refer in your report to the situation of former civil servants , such as Mr Latsamy Kamphoui and Mr Sackchittaphong , prisoners of conscience who are still being detained and whom the European Union has repeatedly called upon the government to release on humanitarian grounds .
Some of you have asked what we are going to do about these matters .
I can certainly assure you that the Commission will specifically use the EU-ASEAN meetings as a bilateral context in which to raise all these problems .
These meetings will take place in Brussels in the first six months of this year , and we shall be talking about everything I have just mentioned and also about the separate and specific problems you have raised about actual cases of political prisoners .
With regard to Guinea , I should like to point out that we are concerned about the situation in that country , and especially about the ongoing deterioration in the human rights situation as a result of the attacks suffered by the United Revolutionary Front .
We fully support CEDEAO ' s attempts at mediation .
You raised the problem of refugees .
The Commission believes that absolute priority should be given to rehousing them in the camps farthest away from the border , that is to say as far away as possible from the combat zones .
As matters stand at present , repatriating them to Sierra Leone is unthinkable because two other objectives have priority : reinforcing the camps around Kissidougou , north of Gueckedou , and adapting the access roads to these camps .
The Commission is pursuing a two-pronged strategy through ECHO , on the one hand in the framework of the year 2000 intervention plan for Sierra Leone ' s refugees through which an amount of more than EUR 2.5 million has already been allocated to the operations in Guinea and , on the other hand , in the framework of the contracts which have been entered into with the associated NGOs and which are being modified to take account of recent events .
ECHO is also preparing two funding decisions for 2001 : one in favour of Sierra Leone , for EUR 11 million ; and the other in favour of Guinea , for between EUR 3 and 6 million .
Two additional topics commented on during the debate were the responsibilities of Liberia - what can be done ? - and the problems in Guinea .
With regard to Liberia , I should like to point out that , as you have indicated , the experts ' report from the United Nations on arms and diamonds in Sierra Leone makes it crystal clear what Liberia ' s responsibilities are in the conflict .
At present , possible courses of action to be taken against Charles Taylor are being debated .
What can the Commission do in the meantime ?
We can use the tools available to us and , with that in view , the possibility is being examined of instituting a consultancy procedure with regard to Liberia in application of Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
With regard to Guinea , the situation has indeed deteriorated .
Recently , the death penalty was imposed upon five people and , as a number of you also pointed out , the subject of Alpha Condé has not been clarified .
The Commission passed on the concerns that are felt about this specific matter to a Guinean delegation headed by the Foreign Affairs Minister , which visited Brussels at the end of January .
With regard to Nigeria , I should like to point out that the Commission condemns the flagellation of an adolescent in accordance with Islamic law and is concerned specifically about the application of the Sharia in some areas of Nigeria .
The Commission is aware - as I believe you too are - of the fact that the situation in Nigeria is politically very sensitive and that the new , democratically elected government is endeavouring to improve respect for human rights in Nigeria .
The Commission and the Member States will be meeting in March to try to reach some common position on Nigeria .
The meeting will consider what is the best way to deal with these various topics .
In the meantime , you ask what we are able to do .
A mission from Brussels is discussing , in Nigeria , how the future programme for that country is to be implemented .
The issues of democracy , the constitutional state and respect for human rights will be dealt with as a priority with a view to the decisions that have to be made regarding them .
The final subject you raised with me was the subject of Pakistan .
In accordance with the resolutions you tabled concerning freedom of expression in Pakistan , the Commission acknowledges that the incident which recently occurred at the border post of Peshawar is cause for alarm and especially regrettable in view of the fact that , to date , Pakistan has generally respected the freedom of the press , especially since the military coup of October 1999 .
It is true that , compared with other countries in southern Asia , its attitude is , or has been , relatively commendable .
However , the incident makes it clear that the European Union should remain alert to the issue of freedom of expression in general and freedom of the press in particular .
There is the fear that the existence of an independent and diverse press , permitted until now by Pakistan - one of the most liberal of Islamic countries - may be compromised .
In spite of the public apologies offered by the editors of the newspaper , Frontier Post , there is indeed no guarantee that no action will be taken against them .
If action is , in fact , taken against them , it will undoubtedly help create an atmosphere hostile to the press in general .
We therefore believe it is vital to carry out a very detailed investigation of the incident in order to determine whether possible interests that have not been clearly defined have led to the paper ' s being closed down .
Apart from all this , the legitimate concern for the safety of the newspaper ' s staff is , as a number of you have pointed out , connected with the application of the law on blasphemy .
The Commission believes that the military government should make a major effort to control religious intolerance in Pakistan and regrets that earlier initiatives to change the blasphemy law were blocked .
In the specific political discussions with the Pakistani Government in November 2000 , the troika , while congratulating the government on its commitment to respecting human rights and media freedom , indicated that there were still problems in a number of areas , particularly when it came to judicial practices and the restrictions upon the activities of political parties .
The troika also took the opportunity to indicate its concern about the concessions being made to a number of groups advocating intolerance .
There is no doubt at all that , in the absence of a democratic counterweight , the influence of such groups can increase .
That , then , is what the Commission is doing to improve the human rights situation .
The Commission is prepared to support any actions taken by civil organisations in Pakistan , with such actions to be funded through the European initiative in favour of democracy and human rights . It is also examining the possibility of supporting means to improve public administration in Pakistan , which would be to everyone ' s advantage .
Situation in Chechnya
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
B5-0097 / 2001 , by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the human rights situation in Chechnya ;
B5-0099 / 2001 , by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group , on the human rights situation in Chechnya ;
B5-0111 / 2001 , by Mr Van den Berg and Mr Sakellariou , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Chechnya ;
B5-0121 / 2001 , by Mrs Schroedter and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the human rights violations in Chechnya ;
B5-0128 / 2001 , by Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the human rights situation in Chechnya ;
B5-0132 / 2001 , by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the human rights situation in Chechnya ;
B5-0140 / 2001 , by Mr Markov and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Chechnya ;
B5-0150 / 2001 , by Mr Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Chechnya .
Mr President , one passage in the Russian press on the ongoing Chechen tragedy struck me deeply .
In an interview the Russian parliamentarian Boris Nemtsov describes a meeting with a young Chechen woman in a refugee camp in the neighbouring republic of Ingushetia .
I quote : ' She said to me : You Russians are busy exterminating us .
You are committing genocide .
But you won ' t succeed . Because we shall simply outstrip you in population growth . '
In order to support her assertion Nemtsov ' s interviewee told him that a large number of children had been born last year in the refugee camps in Ingushetia . The majority of them were boys , claimed the Chechen woman .
' And they will all join the partisans later , ' she concluded .
Who except God alone will be able to fully plumb the depths of the suffering of the Chechen civilian population ?
After a terrible war in the period 1994-1996 , for the last eighteen months it has again been the victim of Russian-Chechen hostilities .
The fierce , belligerent indictment of these Chechen refugees , can be put in an historical and political context .
Remember the horrors that Stalin inflicted on the Chechen people in the 1940s .
Such a destructive cry of despair demands a serious political answer .
Gratifyingly , Boris Nemtsov promises to devote his energies to this .
This very month he will present an all-embracing plan of action for the reconstruction of Chechnya .
His aims are clear : to offer a real opportunity for the host of Chechen refugees to return home and to prevent Chechen youth from joining the ranks of the ' partisans ' .
This different , sensible political note from the Russian Federation deserves the moral support of the European Parliament .
I therefore respectfully request the Council and the Commission in the forthcoming meetings with President Putin and his government to adopt this peaceful Russian solution to the Russo-Chechen tragedy .
Then Chechen and Russian blood will no longer have to flow on such a huge scale in the Northern Caucasus .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to welcome Mr Oumar Kandief , Minister for Health in the legitimate Chechen Government , who is seated in the public gallery .
He is also a doctor and a surgeon .
I would also like to thank my friend , Mr Bernd Posselt , in particular , for his efforts to ensure that Parliament is at long last adopting a resolution on Chechnya .
We should have done so a long time ago , but we have finally got round to it today .
I believe that it is a good text and I would also like to stress to my friends and fellow Members in the Group of the Party of European Socialists that the collaboration between all the groups has been valuable .
It is not the text that I had hoped for , but I believe that it is a good resolution nonetheless .
Mr Kandief could tell us and has told us , and all the Members who have met him over the last few days , a great deal about cluster bombs and needle bombs , the hospitals that he managed and which were systematically destroyed by the Russian authorities , about the acts of torture committed on the injured and the amputees that he had to look after and about the torture he was subjected to in order to prevent him from caring for the other injured people .
I urge you to invite him to your own country to appear on television and speak to newspapers .
I believe that his eyewitness account is particularly important .
Ladies and gentlemen , Chechnya is a source of shame to us and to Europe .
The events taking place in Chechnya go beyond anything we may have seen in recent years and we have witnessed many tragic events .
I believe that the European Union and the Commission have an important role to play .
Mr Poul Nielson ' s behaviour is unacceptable , appalling even .
Not once since war broke out in Chechnya , 18 months ago , has Poul Nielson found time to visit the country to take stock of the tragedy that is unfolding there. in my opinion , this does the Commission little credit .
I am not sure if we should have a collection to pay for his plane ticket , but I believe that , unless the Commission changes its policy , Parliament shall soon be calling for his resignation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament is about to adopt its 13th resolution since the outbreak of the first war in Chechnya in 1994 .
Let me make it clear that I want our resolution today to be understood on the one hand as an urgent appeal to the Russian Government to stop violating human rights in Chechnya and to play its part in the initiation of long-overdue measures of de-escalation and on the other hand - and let me emphasise this quite clearly - as an encouragement for those on both sides - Russians and Chechens - who are trying to bring about a peaceful end to this conflict at long last .
As you know , our counterparts in the Council of Europe have recognised the efforts of the Russian representatives - and there certainly have been such efforts - to improve the human rights situation in Chechnya by restoring their voting rights in the Strasbourg assembly .
This , however , was done in spite of exhortations to the contrary by human rights organisations .
I really do think this was rather an ambivalent signal to send , and I presume that the Troika and Commissioner Patten , who are in Moscow at the moment , will raise this issue with the Russian Government and will call on the Russian side to resolve this distressing situation .
The analysis delivered by the Human Rights Watch on the situation in Chechnya is very alarming .
Nevertheless , I assume that those on the Russian side who are genuinely committed to finding a non-military solution to the Chechen conflict will win the day .
The facts of the situation have to be faced ; the population of Chechnya has already shrunk to half its previous size , and it is time to pave the way for them to live in peace .
Mr President , last December the European Parliament adopted a highly critical resolution and declared that it would not remain silent in the face of continued abuses of human rights , particularly the sort of abuses that have been taking place in the last two years of the war in Chechnya .
Nor shall we permit the Commission and the Council , when they travel to Moscow as the Troika , to make do with a passing reference , between the main course and the dessert , to the murders and torture that are still being perpetrated in the camps and police stations of the Northern Caucasus .
Commissioner Patten is there now , so let me ask the Commission what sanctions he has threatened to apply if the Russian Government continues to do nothing to resolve the conflict peacefully , if it is not prepared to engage in talks and to arraign those who are responsible for the violations of human rights .
We have ample ground to stand on : we have the partnership and cooperation agreement , we have our strategy , and we are unanimous in our view that cooperation must be conditional on respect for human rights .
The carrot-and-stick method is the right approach for us , which is why investments in the oil business can only be made on the basis of a peace settlement in Chechnya .
Mr President , I cannot speak about Chechnya here without thinking back more than ten years when the Baltic States were struggling for their freedom .
Many Members of this Parliament , among them Michael Gahler , played a part in the effort to secure the freedom of the Baltic States .
I was in the Baltic States at that time too .
It was a Chechen , the Soviet general Dzhokhar Dudayev , later to become the first President of Chechnya , who refused to crush the independence movement in the Baltic States .
He took this stance in Estonia and Latvia in particular .
Thereafter , as we know , the secession of Lithuania was unfortunately a far less peaceful process , thanks to the brutal excesses of the OMON militias .
And so a Chechen played his part in ensuring that European countries , which will soon be members of the European Union , did not have to undergo the baptism of blood that one or two people had in mind for them .
As this example - along with the fact that Chechnya lies within the ambit of the Council of Europe and its Human Rights Convention - shows us quite clearly , Chechnya is not one of those problems on the opposite side of the globe but an essentially European problem .
That is why it is such a disgrace that an unholy alliance of deceit and self-deception has been forged .
The deceit is partly the product of official government propaganda in Moscow .
The self-deception is happening here .
It consists in a refusal to register what is actually happening in Chechnya .
It is not a matter of the occasional atrocity but of systematic genocide .
Mrs Schroedter was perfectly correct when she stated that half of the Chechen population has been murdered or driven out of Chechnya .
This is systematic genocide of the Chechen people for the sake of energy resources and geostrategic interests .
That is why we must exert intense pressure and say quite clearly to the Russians that the partnership agreement is rooted in human rights .
If human rights are not respected , the partnership cannot function .
We must tell our Russian partners quite clearly that this is a sine qua non in our eyes and that it is high time they started negotiating with the elected representatives of the Chechen people .
Mr President , just a year and a half on from the start of the war , Parliament ' s initial assessment has been proved right .
It has proved impossible to solve any of the problems by military means , and all parties have been the losers .
It is tragic that each side should resort to unacceptable methods in response to the other side ' s resistance instead of finally sitting down at the negotiating table and beginning the process of reconstruction .
I welcome the commitment of Parliament to respect for human rights in the refugee and prison camps .
In a situation where violence is used on a routine basis , our delegations , observer missions and resolutions may be able to ease the problem , but I am convinced that they will not solve it .
This is why I believe that one of our priorities will be to help this region to shape a new vision for the future .
The first requirement is intensive dialogue .
To this end , we should continue to use all the means available to us through our links with the Russian Duma .
Sweeping condemnations , however , are unhelpful .
We shall only be able to make progress in negotiations with the Russians if we take their concerns seriously too .
Terrorist attacks in southern Russia and military operations by guerrillas in Chechnya , I am sorry to say , are still taking place .
A short time ago , we adopted the Oostlander report , in which we explicitly welcomed the European Union ' s twin-track strategy in relation to Russia .
The human rights violations in Chechnya must be condemned , but at the same time we must continue to develop cooperation and dialogue .
In my opinion , both components of this strategy offer scope for further development .
As far as Chechnya is concerned , however , I am worried .
It seems to me that the criticism of conditions in the refugee and prison camps which is voiced by the Council and the Commission , as well as by the governments of the Member States , whenever they meet with the Russians , has become something of a mechanical routine which has absolutely no effect .
For that reason I should like to ask the Commission to specify the measures it proposes to take in the immediate future in order to make progress towards a political solution to the conflict in Chechnya .
Mr President , we in the ELDR Group are in despair and filled with impotent rage concerning what is happening in Chechnya .
The medieval warfare against civilians violates everything in which we believe in the European Union and cannot be justified in terms of the terrorist actions perpetrated by certain groups of Chechens .
What the Russians are doing infringes a long list of international obligations to which they themselves have signed up .
It may well be that we cannot do anything about it .
It may well be that it is no use threatening Russia with sanctions and isolation , but here in Parliament , in the stronghold of freedom of expression , it must be said loudly and clearly that we condemn the abuses , the executions , the disappearances , the concentration camps and the systematic oppression of a whole people .
We condemn the brutalisation which we are seeing and which offers unpleasant reminders of the past .
We urge that the way should now be opened for missions from the UN High Commission , the OSCE and the Red Cross to be permitted to evaluate the atrocities and come to the rescue of the population .
Mr President , the Commission continues to follow events closely in Chechnya , and we agree that the situation is far from satisfactory .
We ought to take account , however , of a number of recent developments .
The decisions taken recently by President Putin and the Russian Government with a view to normalising the situation in that republic in the Northern Caucasus are certainly worth mentioning .
Mr Kadirov ' s former provisional Chechen administration has become permanent .
Control of the security forces is now in civilian hands .
A substantial reduction in the troops stationed in Chechnya is planned .
It is also worth mentioning that the Federal Government has announced a substantial increase in the resources to be devoted to rebuilding Chechnya .
Despite these hoped-for improvements , the present situation is indeed still causing great concern .
Reports are still being received stating that members of the security forces have violated human rights .
The Russian administration is certainly not following up these reports properly , despite the efforts made by the office of Mr Kalamanov , presidential representative for human rights .
To give you an indication of the inadequacy of the response , the number of cases taken to the courts can be counted on the fingers of one hand and , as far as we are aware , not a single sentence has yet been handed down .
Some essential steps have been taken in the judicial area .
A number of district and central courts have been set up , and over twenty judges have been trained and appointed in Chechnya .
However , for the practical benefit of these measures to be felt by the citizens , greater cooperation on the part of certain authorities is called for , especially the military prosecutors .
The Commission has made repeated representations to this effect to the Russian authorities and my colleague Commissioner Patten is raising the matter again in Moscow today .
I am sure that on his return he will be very well placed to update you on this matter which is of particular concern to you as indeed it is to us .
I should like to emphasise that the Commission is continuing to provide political and material support for Mr Kalamanov through the TACIS programme .
It must , however , be noted that no agreement has been reached concerning the technical conditions to allow the immediate return of the OSCE support group to Chechnya .
We are working with the Romanian Presidency on this matter . We still aim to have the support group back in the field as soon as possible , but in reasonable conditions of safety and with unrestricted freedom of movement within the Chechen Republic .
I could also mention the need to improve the conditions relating to the provision of humanitarian aid . This involves travel permits and the possibilities for communication .
However , we are all very familiar with these issues and I do not think it is worth dwelling on them .
By way of conclusion , I should like to say that the situation seems to be improving , although a very great deal remains to be done .
We have yet to see the extent to which and how soon the Russian authorities implement the measures they have announced .
In this regard , it has already been stated that troop reductions will be effected as the military situation allows . This is worrying , because the reduction may be slower that we hope for .
Nonetheless , these measures are essentially positive and it is to be hoped that they will enable a permanent political solution to be achieved .
The Russian Government recognised the need for a political solution in the joint declaration made after the last summit with the European Union held in Paris last October .
Pending such a solution , the Commission will continue to seize the opportunities offered by the many regular political contacts with the Russian authorities to convince them of the need to investigate violations of human rights in Chechnya more thoroughly and efficiently . We shall also urge them to prevent such violations and , if appropriate , to punish those responsible .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Natural disasters
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
Earthquake in India
B5-0103 / 2001 , by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group , on the earthquake in India ;
B5-0112 / 2001 , by Mr Van den Berg and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the earthquake in India ;
B5-0130 / 2001 , by Mr Thomas Mann and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the earthquake in India ;
B5-0141 / 2001 , by Mrs Ainardi and Mr Miranda , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the earthquake in India ;
B5-0151 / 2001 , by Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the earthquake in India ;
Floods in Portugal - B5-0093 / 2001 , by Mr Figueiredo and Mr Miranda , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the serious consequences of the severe weather conditions in Portugal ;
B5-0094 / 2001 , by Mr Marinho and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the floods and storms in Portugal ;
B5-0095 / 2001 , by Mr Queiró and Mr Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the floods in Portugal ;
B5-0131 / 2001 , by Mr Cunha and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the floods in Portugal .
Earthquake in India
Mr President , I think that the tragedy unfolding in India demanded some response from the European Parliament .
I hope that the Commission ' s action will be fully adequate to this tragedy which has left more than a million people homeless and has caused immeasurable damage .
I believe that this is also an important issue since the European Union must strengthen its cooperation and work towards a strategic partnership with India .
I hope that Commissioner Patten , in particular , will ensure that everything is done to deal with this tragedy as best we can .
I have only one other brief point to mention to my fellow Members .
In paragraph 4 of our resolution , we point out that some buildings in this region were weakened by structural faults .
I am not at all sure that we should labour this point , given the current problems faced by the people of India .
I tabled an amendment to withdraw this paragraph .
I hope that my fellow Members will adopt this amendment .
Mr President , the worst natural disaster since the creation of the Indian Union has left the world ' s largest democracy in a state of deep shock .
It is not only India that has been stunned by events .
The pictures of the devastation in the State of Gujarat are etched in all our minds : one hundred thousand killed and several hundred thousand forced to leave their homes which have been completely destroyed - these people are now homeless , destitute and without work .
I have been struck by the scale of the rapid response from the international community and the donations from private individuals .
What fine examples of humanity and solidarity in an increasingly unfeeling world .
Special teams , including several from Europe , were on hand to pull survivors out of the rubble .
Help is flooding in .
Medical supplies , food by the tonne load , clothing , blankets , installations to help provide clean drinking water and also prevent the outbreak of typhoid , cholera and hepatitis .
Row upon row of tents have been erected to provide essential , albeit makeshift , refuge against the bitterly cold nights .
This is all a source of comfort to the earthquake victims and their family members , many of whom reside in the European Union .
The Commission has generously released EUR 13 million in emergency aid and there is a good chance that this aid package , distributed via the European Community Humanitarian Aid Office to six international aid organisations , will directly reach the earthquake victims .
The World Bank and the Asian Development Bank will also be involved in achieving the successful reconstruction of the region .
The damage to property alone amounts to over EUR 3 billion .
And what actions have the Indians themselves taken ?
They have set up a committee , supported by all parties , dedicated to active disaster management .
The authorities have acted quickly despite a series of aftershocks .
The electricity supply was restored within days and towns were able to get back on their feet as streets and squares were cleared .
We should applaud the efforts of our Indian friends .
Floods in Portugal
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as has already been stated in this House , the harsh winter in Portugal this year has been characterised by terrible floods which have caused loss of human life and enormous suffering , high levels of material damage costing billions of escudos , the destruction or damage of homes , transport infrastructure , telecommunications networks and energy grids and considerable damage to economic sectors , particularly agriculture and trade .
Now , as we all know , Portugal has one of the lowest levels of GDP per capita in the European Union and the forecast made by the Commission in its second report on economic and social cohesion estimates that last year , Portugal moved even further away from the real convergence that it had experienced since 1991 .
It is therefore crucial that the European Union provides exceptional aid in order to address the damage that has been done and to make its contribution to the huge effort that is currently underway .
We therefore urge the Commission , together with the Portuguese Government and local authorities , to provide exceptional financial aid to complement the resources that have been made available by the Portuguese authorities in order to meet the urgent needs of the communities that have been most badly affected , and to facilitate the rebuilding of infrastructure that has been destroyed and the resumption of economic activity .
A reallocation of appropriations that have already been earmarked is not enough .
I repeat that what is needed is exceptional aid .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , hardly a single winter that I have lived through has stuck in my memory , but this year , winter made itself memorable in a particularly harsh way in Portugal , as Mrs Figueiredo has just described .
Almost every single river in Portugal burst its banks and there are towns in my country which have suffered four consecutive floods in the course of this winter with the rains that have fallen since November .
The crisis was felt particularly acutely in the centre of the country , affecting the Mondego basin most tragically , but it affected communities to some extent throughout the country .
The Portuguese authorities and the civil defence forces have made huge efforts to remedy the situation .
Now , questions about reconstruction are being asked and I would add my voice to those of my fellow Portuguese Members in asking the Commission to work together with the Portuguese authorities at national and local level to aid reconstruction , to list the damage done and to support the reconstruction of the areas that have been affected with both financial and technical resources .
I should also like to express my solidarity with the victims .
Given the scale of the floods that have swept across our country this winter , and let us hope that they are over , because the bad weather is continuing , we must once again draw your attention to regional planning policies and to the need to ensure the balance of our ecosystems . In this matter , I would also ask for the assistance that would result from dialogue with other Member countries of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , nature has , once again , been merciless and the fury of the torrential rain and the unruly rivers has spread destruction and suffering . We have seen enormous material damage , families made homeless , injured and even killed .
Once again , an appeal to European solidarity is being made in this Parliament and it is the Commission ' s duty to find ways of putting this into practice .
The Commission must not hide behind a lack of funds - the people who have been affected do not want to hear administrative excuses .
It is our duty to prove that Europe is not only a generous idea but also an efficient organisation .
There are , however , two fundamental issues that are worth recalling .
The first , broader issue is that of environmental protection and climate change .
Only a few years ago , anyone who mentioned these matters was dismissed as being utopian , alarmist and even a little mad .
Today , the evidence is clear for all to see and we have to act effectively to prevent the situation throughout the world from deteriorating .
The second issue concerns my country , Portugal .
Let no one be in any doubt ; I do not intend to give in to demagogy : my country ' s government and local authorities are not responsible for the rains that fell , but they do have a responsibility from which they cannot shy away . They must show greater rigour in regional planning and greater resistance to urban speculation , they must refuse permission to build in areas at risk from flooding and establish better management of river beds and dam outlets .
We must all work together , not only in order to help the people who need urgent assistance , but also in taking precautions with the measures and actions that predict and reduce the probability of similar disasters in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Members of the Commission , as my fellow Portuguese Members have said , the abundant rainfall , the storms and the floods have caused enormous material damage , injuries and deaths in the Douro , Mondego and Tagus basins .
They have caused a genuine disaster .
In requesting the support and the solidarity of the European Union , we are not trying to solicit an emotional reaction ; we do not want to give the impression that we are courting pity or that we are merely asking for help .
The Portuguese Government has not failed to provide support for the areas that have been affected and there has been no lack of national solidarity . Financial support from the European Union , however , is just as important for Portugal as it is for the European Union itself .
In fact , even more important than the material size of such a contribution is its symbolic , moral and emotional effect .
Strengthening the sense of belonging to the European Union and the awareness of European citizenship also requires these small , symbolic gestures and brings Europe closer to the people .
The communities that have been affected by the storms and the population will , in general , feel that the European Union is not indifferent to their tragedies and problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , this is the best way for the European Union to touch people ' s hearts , regardless of how much it contributes .
This is why we are asking the Commission to use its imagination and to provide an answer to our request and to our proposals .
Mr President , regarding , first of all , the European Parliament ' s resolution on the earthquake in India , I want to point out - and a number of you have already made this point - that the Commission approved its emergency first aid to the value of EUR 3 million on 30 January , just four days after the events .
This decision , like all emergency decisions , enabled operations to be funded from the first day of the emergency . Its objective was to provide immediate aid not only through the distribution of blankets , clothes , medicines and health care and the provision of food and drinking water , but also through the creation of a field hospital in Bhuj .
As Mr Mann has pointed out , this operation involved our collaborating with six humanitarian organisations , including Oxfam UK , Care International , the German Red Cross and Save the Children in the United Kingdom .
Each of these organisations concerned itself with a specific area of activity and , in our opinion , the results have been positive .
The Commission has now announced its decision to provide a further EUR 10 million .
We expect this decision to be finalised in the course of next week , as soon as the priorities have been established and assessments have been made of needs on the ground and of the NGOs ' proposals .
It is crucial to current , and any future , aid that we avoid duplication in the use of resources , as well as the problems which might be created by types of urgent need not covered by one or other financial aid provider .
It is therefore vital to deal with all aid opportunities together and , in order to fill the gap between emergency and long-term aid , the Commission will lose no time at all in sending a study mission to assess reconstruction and renovation needs in situ .
This mission will work in close conjunction with the Member States , and its results will enable us to decide better how to carry out future initiatives in cooperation with other international institutions as well .
Regarding the specific problem of floods and natural disasters in Portugal , I can tell you that Portugal has certainly suffered a very hard winter .
There have undoubtedly been problems in many regions of Europe , involving heavy rain and storms , together with floods which have caused considerable material damage and , in certain cases , the loss of human life as well .
On 16 November 2000 , I myself appeared before this House to comment on the extremely serious floods in the United Kingdom , Ireland , Spain , France and Italy , and I should like once again to express the Commission ' s concern about these matters .
We wish to be associated with the demonstrations of support and solidarity addressed by this House to the victims of this new disaster , specifically in Portugal .
As early as 31 January , my colleague Michel Barnier used the occasion of the part-session in Brussels to express his openness towards any request from the Portuguese authorities to re-adjust the programming of the Structural Funds .
When we talk about re-adjusting the programming of the Structural Funds , we are not , as some of you may possibly have thought , talking about applying a different use to the same resources as previously existed for the country but , instead , of reconsidering the overall programming of the Funds .
I should also like to remind you that , on Wednesday , 25 October 2000 before this House , Mrs Wallström , speaking on behalf of the Commission , specified the latter ' s role in the field of civil protection and explained the opportunities offered to us by the current Budget in terms of how the EAGGF and ERDF Structural Funds might be deployed , together with the Interreg 3 Community initiative which , in its inter-regional chapter , includes cooperation in the field of natural or industrial disasters .
There is no other room for manoeuvre within the Budget .
Within the ' Community Action Programme - Civil Protection ' , the Commission is therefore prepared to consider a project to be submitted by the Member State affected , aimed at identifying the areas at risk from flooding in the European Union .
Finally , I should like once again to remind you of the Commission ' s concern and of its willingness , within the framework of what is at present possible , to respond promptly and positively to the requests which Portugal might , under this general heading , submit as a consequence of these events .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate on items on topical and urgent subjects of major importance is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
The oral question on the Stability Plan in Ireland and France is scheduled for 5.30 p.m.
I shall , therefore , suspend the sitting of Parliament for 15 minutes .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.15 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Stability plans in Ireland and France
The next item is the oral question ( B5-0009 / 2001 ) by Mr von Wogau , Mr Suominen and Mrs Doyle , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , to the Commission , on the Stability Plans in Ireland and France .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to deal with why we have tabled this issue regarding decisions in Ireland .
I believe that it should be considered that we have reached a new stage in the development of the European Union and in the integration of the economies in the European Union .
Today twelve Member States make up a Common Market with a single currency . A domestic market in the original sense .
It is imperative that economic policy in this European domestic market is drawn up in accordance with common guidelines .
In this respect , we are pleased that the European Commission and the Ecofin Council have taken action in this area .
It is the first time that a decision regarding one of these Member States has been taken in this way and this decision concerns the stability of the European currency .
As you are aware , in all debates in this House my group has repeatedly granted the utmost priority to the stability of the European currency and we shall continue to do so in future .
We believe that a stable currency is one of the key building blocks for a social market economy and that this is also necessary for the European currency .
Let there be no doubt that this shall remain a priority for us in the future .
However , I would ask whether the European Commission and the members of the Ecofin Council have picked the right target for this , the first decision of its kind .
Ireland is without a shadow of a doubt one of the European Union ' s model children . It is questionable whether other countries are in the position to reduce their deficits .
Ireland achieves surpluses .
Other countries still have a huge total debt of over 100 % while at the same time Ireland is in the process of reducing its debt to under 40 % and so can likewise be held up as a model for other European Union Member States .
While other countries are battling unemployment , Ireland has made exemplary progress in this regard with the creation of new jobs .
While other Member States are battling with slow economic growth , Ireland is enjoying growth rates that other Member States can only dream of .
It should be said , however , that the Irish economy is overheating as a result of this strong growth and that , consequently , there is a risk that this could be to the disadvantage of the Irish people .
For example , if I take rent and property prices in Dublin and compare these with those in Frankfurt it becomes quite clear that the development of these prices also has a detrimental effect on the Irish people .
In this respect clearly something must be done .
The question is , however , who shall take the action ?
Should it be the European Union who intervenes or is this a matter that should and can be settled by Ireland , the Irish Government or the Irish Parliament themselves ?
This then raises the question : who should be responsible for European economic policy in the future ?
We must work towards ensuring that this responsibility is set out quite clearly .
We must be clear on who is responsible for what , so that where there is success praise may be given and where there is failure , which may also occur , we are able to say that a particular country or a particular institution is at fault .
A clear division of tasks is now emerging within the European Union .
The European Union is without doubt responsible for competition , the competition between businesses in the European Union .
As Commissioner Mario Monti has demonstrated time and time again , the European Commission takes this task very seriously indeed .
The European Commission is also responsible for currency stability , on the one hand through the strong European Central Bank and on the other hand through finance ministers , charged with monitoring the stability and growth pact .
The European Union , is therefore responsible for competition and currency stability .
Responsibility for taxes , on the other hand , still undoubtedly lies with the Member States of the European Union .
The same applies to social security systems and education .
This then raises the question : what is happening with currency stability or , more precisely , have occurrences in Ireland jeopardised currency stability within the eurozone ?
Just imagine a different situation .
Imagine that the inflation rate in Germany stands at 6 or 7 % .
As Germany makes up one third of the gross national product in the eurozone , this would instantly lead to a sharp increase in the average inflation rates in the European Union , to such an extent that the European Central Bank would be forced to spring into action and thus the economy would be curbed .
Ireland is however a small economy with a gross national product little above that of west London .
The overheating of the Irish economy has no influence whatsoever at a European level , so there is no need for action at the level of the European Central Bank .
Ireland no longer has the opportunity as before , when the Irish Central Bank could raise interest rates , of contributing to the deceleration of the economy .
Therefore , Ireland must themselves be responsible , also for the Irish people , for reducing the overheating of the economy somehow or other . How this is to be achieved I leave up to the Irish .
I do not wish to raise this at the level of the European Union .
Now , turning to my second question .
On 12 January a decision was made by the European Commission to pay EUR 401 million to Ireland .
EUR 726 million in supplementary funds followed , funds that were also pumped into the Irish economy .
In this regard I would like to ask whether a conversation took place between Commissioner Solbes and Commissioner Barnier with a view to resolving this obvious contradiction .
In other words , what is happening in Germany , in France and in Italy gives much more cause for concern regarding the stability of the euro .
I hope that the European Commission will have the same courage , when it comes to dealing with these large countries .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , I should like to thank Mr von Wogau for having raised a subject I believe deserves to be debated .
His approach was correct when it comes to the way in which this matter is to be reflected upon , and I shall try to follow his line of reasoning .
I shall begin at the end , with the question of why our decisions do not in any way affect transfers of resources .
Why are we talking about the coordination of economic policy ?
We are talking neither about problems of regional policy , nor of competition , nor of taxation , nor of any other such factor .
I want to make an initial remark so that we are all familiar with , or are clear about , the model we have agreed in the Treaty of Maastricht , according to which the coordination of economic policies is based on a tool , known as the broad economic guidelines , approved each June by European Councils at the proposal of the Ministers of Finance .
This is the basic document for economic policy coordination , and one with which you are very familiar because you have had occasion to discuss it more than once in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
This document includes decisions of a general kind , together with decisions aimed specifically at Member States and containing practical recommendations which - I want to emphasise - are unanimously approved by the European Council . Obviously , the document also includes the points of view of each and every one of the Member States which sign the decisions .
In order to maintain a proper balance between fiscal and monetary policies , the Stability Pact is , of course , implemented alongside the broad economic guidelines .
As a result , we may sometimes have the impression that , as in the case of Ireland , actions are taken which may be difficult to reconcile with observing the criteria of the Stability Pact .
I believe it is important to say first of all that Ireland has met the requirements of the Stability Pact and continues to do so , with more than enough room to spare , and that the Irish authorities deserve every kind praise for pushing ahead with their structural reforms and running the public finances well .
It is true that the Irish economy has continued to grow very strongly in the year 2000 , but also true - and we are now coming on to the first point you raised - that it is overheating .
Is overheating important in terms of a balanced overall picture ?
I have no intention whatsoever of getting into whether each specific measure is or is not correct .
Such measures are the responsibility of the Member States , and I have no objections to make .
We are talking about general , overall positions .
Overheating of the Irish economy is not a new problem .
It dates back to 1998 and had already been revealed in the broad economic guidelines .
It was also revealed in 1999 and again in 2000 .
In the year 2000 - and I am referring here to a decision adopted by the European Council , proposed by the Ministers of Finance and applicable in every Member State - it was stated that , given the further overheating of the economy , budgetary policy had to be used to ensure economic stability and that the 2001 budget ought to be managed with that in mind .
What are , so to speak , the contents of the 2001 budget ?
I believe that knowing this may help us to clarify two issues : what is the reason for the concern of the Commission , firstly , and of the Member States , secondly .
I shall quote two facts from the 2001 budget : the fact that the current expenditure approved in the budget assumes a 1.06 % increase in Irish Gross Domestic Product , and the fact that tax is to be reduced by 0.57 % .
As a result of these two factors , total demand is therefore being stimulated to the tune of 1.6 % of Irish Gross Domestic Product .
There is another fact I think is interesting on the subject of the broad economic guidelines we were talking about .
The message is to seek or maintain a balanced budgetary policy and , if necessary , to have a somewhat more restrictive budgetary policy designed to offset any difficulties Ireland might have as a result of a monetary policy which is defined for the eurozone and is , logically enough , too expansive for Irish conditions .
If , for example , we analyse the figures which we normally use to see how economies behave and which show the main impact on the cyclically adjusted surplus , we see that , whereas in 2000 the figure was a budgetary increase of 0.4 % of GDP , in 2001 the figure was 0.9 % .
This matter is certainly being discussed by the Irish Government and the Commission .
The former believes that the figures we have calculated show an additional 0.3 % increase .
On the basis of the figures provided to us by the government - and this is the topic under discussion in Eurostat - we are able to arrive at somewhat different figures .
That is why , in the recommendation , we effectively acknowledge this situation and refer to 0.5 % .
I would turn now to a third factor . An important topic when it comes to the behaviour of economies is the way in which supply operates in relation to demand and whether the growth in demand is more rapid than existing supply .
In technical terms , we measure this using what is called the potential output gap , which shows the amount by which demand is growing in excess of supply .
In 2000 , the potential output gap was 4.5 % . In other words , Ireland was demanding 4.5 % more than what it was producing .
In 2001 , that figure has risen to 5.4 % .
We are therefore talking about a very expansionist budgetary policy , at a time when the Irish Government has committed itself , in terms of the broad economic guidelines , to a budgetary policy which , in principle , ought to be more restrictive with a view to offsetting the other problems .
Let us move on to the second point which you raised and which I think is especially interesting : the fact that the Irish economy is relatively small and its impact on the eurozone minimal .
That argument makes sense and might lead us - like many economists - to conclude by asking why , if we did not have any other types of commitment , we should take action over Ireland if that country does not affect monetary policy .
I also believe that , in connection with this argument , we ought to be asking ourselves two related questions .
Firstly , can we treat the Member States of the European Union unequally ?
And should some Member States be able to do what they themselves consider appropriate while others cannot , according to whether they are smaller or larger countries ?
The second important point is that we could discuss whether that is the model to be applied in the future . But in any case , that is not the model we are applying today in accordance with current legislation .
It is therefore absolutely vital , at least from the Commission ' s point of view , that , if we are to fulfil our role as guardian of the Treaties , we should apply the Treaties in the form in which they exist at present .
On this basis , the Commission did what it considered its duty , which was to send a recommendation to the Council of Ministers in accordance with the provisions of Article 99 ( 4 ) .
I very much emphasised the fact that , when I speak of a recommendation , I am not referring to sanctions .
I appreciate that , from the media ' s point of view , it is much more appealing to talk in terms of sanctions .
When we speak about recommendations , we are indicating to the Irish Government that the budgetary policy it has defined is inconsistent with what they agreed and will lead to additional problems concerned with the overheating of its economy .
In the explanatory statement , we put a figure on the recommendation , saying that we considered there to be 0.5 % overheating .
That is something we can discuss .
The figure will vary depending upon the methodologies we use .
On that basis , it is obviously for the Irish Government to do what it considers appropriate .
The Commission ' s position was presented to the Council of Ministers , which approved it by consensus .
That is the situation in which we find ourselves at the moment and , like yourselves , I believe it must be accorded due importance because , if it is indeed an important milestone in applying our model for coordinating economic policies , we ought not to attempt to draw conclusions of a kind which the Commission never of course intended .
Thank you , Commissioner Solbes Mira .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have to ask you to keep within your speaking time , because we must hold the votes on topical and urgent subjects at 6.30 p.m.
Madam President , Commissioner , when we in Ireland signed up for economic and monetary union , we accepted the central tenet of economic and monetary union , namely closer coordination of economic and budgetary policies of Member States .
The key elements in this process are the stability and growth pact , which is at the heart of economic policy coordination .
Secondly , we have the annual , and I underline annual , broad economic policy guidelines - a lesser known element of the economic policy development process .
As well as European-wide , there are country-specific guidelines identifying policy priorities and particular circumstances .
Commissioner , I was listening carefully to see if I could extract from what you said precisely what breaches of the country-specific guidelines Ireland is guilty of to warrant the recommendations of the Ecofin Council under Article 99 of the Treaty , last Monday , at your behest .
Our finance minister , Charlie McCreevy , told the Irish Parliament this week that he had no problem with advice to Ireland setting out the Council 's view of the appropriate policy mix to achieve economic stability .
But he felt this view should have taken the form of an opinion , as in the normal course , particularly in view of the comparative performance of the Irish economy relative to other EU Member States .
An opinion , Commissioner , rather than a recommendation .
Was a recommendation an even-handed and proportionate response ?
Would not an opinion have sufficed , given the very heavy political fall-out from the recommendation in Ireland , where we are in an election year and very likely face a referendum on Nice , this episode has been oats to the eurosceptics .
And the same applies elsewhere , particularly in the United Kingdom .
There is also nervousness about the Commission 's involvement in tax policy generally in the post-Nice situation .
This latest episode does not help .
I fail to see why Ireland 's transgressions could not have been handled more tactfully , more diplomatically , with more understanding - both by you , Commissioner , and indeed by our somewhat maverick , though genial , finance minister .
To many observers it appears to have been in the end about egos and macho behaviour all round - all in the context of an economic turnaround in Ireland in the last six to seven years that is the envy of many .
The charge is that Ireland is to seek to achieve economic stability and , in that context , our last budget was deemed to be over-inflationary .
There are occasions when " a one size fits all " economic model does not fit .
The biggest threat to Ireland at the moment is wage inflation fuelled by 75,000 job vacancies .
Securing the continuation of social partnership with our unions , employers , farmers and government and , through it , wage moderation has to be a priority for our government given its huge contribution to our economic success over many years .
I agree that a 10 % increase in the GDP per annum is not sustainable , given the pressure on labour supply and house prices .
But even IBEC , our employers ' confederation , has said that our budget must be understood in the context of social partnership .
If I had to point to one single factor that has contributed more than any other to the turnaround in the Irish economy , I would have to cite the Social Partners ' Agreement which allowed us to trade competitively in the single market and to attract inward investment because of the stability it brought to wage negotiations .
I regret the unseemly public debate over the censure , the lack of diplomacy in handling this issue by both sides and the very negative political fallout that has ensued .
Time does not allow me to run the numbers of Irish economic success .
I have no doubt my colleagues coming after me will do so .
Madam President , I do not take the same approach as my colleague , Mrs Doyle .
The Irish Government 's response to the European Commission and to Ecofin has been arrogant and reckless .
Reckless , because it has needlessly damaged the standing of Ireland in the Union and because it feeds xenophobia in Ireland by putting in doubt the possibility of the Nice Treaty being ratified .
Reckless , because it feeds Eurosceptism in the UK and Denmark and it cannot be in the long-term interests of either Europe or Ireland for either Denmark , the UK or indeed Sweden to remain outside the eurozone .
I deplore the stance taken by the Irish Government .
I believe that its position is being driven by the growing Eurosceptism in the two minority government parties .
For example the Deputy Prime Minister , Ms Mary Harney , recently indicated her preference for the American economic model rather than the European social model , stating we are closer to Boston than Berlin .
I do not agree , however , with the MEP from the PPE-DE , Mr Werner Langen , who is quoted in the Irish Independent newspaper today as saying that Ireland should be further penalised by the withdrawal of cohesion funds .
Such a step would be a gross overreaction as well as being illegal .
I would call again on the Irish Government to accept the Ecofin decision and to sit down with the Commission to discuss how it can best be implemented .
I would also call on the Minister for Finance to accept the long-standing invitation from the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of this Parliament to come and talk to us and explain the Irish position in detail , so that we can understand it and learn from it .
In the Irish Parliament this week , the Minister for Finance outlined five main points on which he claimed he was at odds with the Commission and Ecofin .
He claimed that the Commission recommendation and the Ecofin decision are unreasonable , unwarranted and a misreading of the Irish economy .
He stated that the Irish tax cuts made over the past three years have been contractionary , not inflationary .
He said that the Irish budgets have not been procyclical as measured by the Commission 's own calculations .
He stated that the Commission methodology overstates fiscal loosening this year because it does not take into account once-off factors such as a shorter fiscal year in 2001 and he stated that an opinion would have been a more appropriate step than a reprimand .
The Commissioner has dealt to some extent with some aspects of that case .
I would like to hear Commissioner Solbes address this House today in detail on those points so that we can have some clarity as to the issues that are actually in dispute between the Irish Government and the European Union .
Madam President , as an explanation of the EU ' s serious reprimand to Ireland , Mr Prodi expressed the opinion that we must also be able to punish the best pupil in the class .
That really is a peculiar observation to make .
It would be more natural to hold the best pupil in the class up as a model . That was how it was when I was at school .
Ireland ' s economy is prospering . Last year , growth increased by 10 per cent .
Unemployment is at less than 4 per cent , and the country also has a genuine budget surplus . Last year , growth increased by 10 per cent .
Unemployment is less than 4 per cent , and the country also has a genuine budget surplus .
The impoverished Emerald Isle has turned into a Celtic tiger . The EU has therefore been too hasty in issuing a warning to Ireland , since the situation of the country is being disregarded .
Ireland is a small country dependent upon foreign trade and with an economy closely linked to the British and American economies .
The falling rate of the euro has therefore had more of an impact upon Irish inflation than upon that of other EU countries .
Inflation has fallen from 6 per cent in November to 3.9 per cent in January , and there is everything to indicate that it will continue to fall .
The Netherlands now has higher inflation .
As you yourself stated , Commissioner , Ireland ' s policy cannot jeopardise the way in which EMU operates .
It is in this connection that you refer to Article 99 of the Treaty , and it is then that that argument falls down .
Ireland accounts for only 1 per cent of the EU ' s total GDP .
For Ireland , the threat of inflation is mainly from external sources , but the EU and yourself are demanding internal measures to get inflation down .
The EU ' s action is politically unwise and does not increase confidence in the EU and EMU , above all in those countries which are at present outside the eurozone .
I want to conclude by asking Mr Solbes Mira why he did not give Ireland more time .
Madam President , Commissioner , as a pro-federalist party , the Group of the Verts / ALE has no objection in principle to the European Union holding an opinion on the national policies of the various Member States .
That said , we have in the past shared and we still share the concerns that smaller countries have regarding the abuses that could result from excessive arrogance on the part of higher authorities or larger countries .
From this point of view , we consider the decision by the Commission , exercising for the first time its right to reprimand with regard to the specific situation in Ireland , as totally unjustified and , at any rate , as a remarkable blunder given the number of Eurosceptics criticising European integration .
We believe that it is totally unjustified , first of all , because the admittedly high level of inflation in Ireland may also be related to the specific nature of the Irish economy , which imports not just its oil but also most of its spare parts from two countries , namely the United States and the United Kingdom , who , over the last few years , have significantly revalued their currencies in relation to the euro .
The second reason is that there is no evidence at all that the 2001 budget is " pro-cyclical " ; quite the opposite , the American air pocket and American slump risk making it an extremely counter-cyclical budget .
The third reason is that although tax reductions by the Irish Government are , admittedly , too high , this issue should have been tackled at the time when , for years , Ireland carried out fiscal dumping by lowering company taxes , thus attracting companies from the continent .
It is absolutely incredible that this criticism should be made when the reduction in tax affects citizens rather than companies .
In more general terms , as soon as a country has accepted ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank you for having set an example while chairing what is , in a way , the closing sitting of our part-session .
I shall now turn to the topic of our debate and say that I welcome the opportunity that we have to give our views on the significance and impact of the decision that the Commission , then the Council , have taken to use for the first time the Treaty of Amsterdam provision in order to address not a sanction , Commissioner , but a public reprimand to a Member State , in this instance , Ireland , as well as to severely rebuke several other countries for not complying with all the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact .
I believe that this will provide many people with food for thought regarding the liberal logic of the current economic and monetary union , just months before the euro intrudes into the everyday lives of 300 million European citizens .
Like the others , I do not question the principle of such warnings which are the logical corollary of the coordination of economic policies .
On the other hand , I denounce the underlying attitude .
The guardians of monetary orthodoxy in the European institutions are obsessed with the idea of excessive public spending , excessive spending on social provision . They have no consideration for the shameful inequality that still exists in the social model that the European Union claims to represent ; nor do they have any consideration for the need to promote the human skills necessitated by the information revolution , which is developing at lightning speed before our very eyes and which really has yet to take off .
It is significant that health spending , in particular , was specifically targeted in the Commission ' s criticisms of various Member States , one of which was France .
On almost the same day , the Commission decided to bring a case against France before the Court of Justice since it was guilty of charging the lowest income families a lower rate of VAT on some of the price of electricity and gas .
Over-restrictive measures of this kind are not the way to survive the crisis of confidence that citizens are experiencing towards European Union institutions .
Reference has been made to the public comments made by Mr Prodi regarding the criticism of Ireland which , up until now , has been presented as a model of success .
When the President of the Commission said that sometimes , the schoolmaster must punish even the best pupil , he revealed a stunningly original perception of the new European method of governing .
I am counting on the great debate on the future of Europe , which has everyone talking , not to focus on abstract institutional reforms alone but to be based on actual experiences such as those of citizens in the countries which have been targeted by the harsh criticism of the Commission and the Council .
Madam President , first of all I want to thank you for chairing this session and also to thank the Commissioner for coming along .
Tight control of budgetary spending since 1987 , alongside a strong model of social partnership where the unions , employers and government came together , are two of the main planks of the present success of the Irish economy .
Alongside this , our intention and our commitment to investing in education and in building up infrastructure and in particular to utilise the new opportunities in information technology are the further elements of this success .
In Ireland we have a commonly used phrase - " if it is not broken , why fix it " .
Our present growth rate at 11 % is over three times the average of other Member States .
We have a budget surplus of nearly 5 % of our gross domestic product .
Our debt / GDP ratio is only 39 % .
Tax and expenditure levels at 33 % make Ireland one of the lowest tax regimes in Europe .
We have a binding commitment to provide 1 % of our annual gross national product to meet our future public pension bills .
Indeed the latest figures show that inflation , as measured on the harmonised European basis , in Ireland has now fallen to 3.9 % .
This rate of inflation is lower than in several of the larger Member States within the EU , if a comparison is made on the latest available economic data , for example , Spain .
I would also like to remind the European Commission that before the recent economic success in Ireland , the Irish people were required to make major sacrifices so as to guarantee that economic growth could take place .
Ireland does contribute and wants to continue to contribute to the positive development of policies and programmes within the European Union .
Ireland will shortly become a net contributor to the European Union budget where previously it was a net beneficiary .
As well as that , Irish waters are opened up to European fishing fleets to ensure the continued success of the European fishing industry .
I believe that the economic recommendations , which would help to improve the Irish economy , should be listened to and taken heed of .
However , on this occasion , I believe that the European Commission has misjudged the special nature of how the Irish economy operates .
Moreover , I do not think it fully appreciates how far we have travelled in actual terms in the improvement of our economic performance .
I will give to the Commissioner a list of figures to put it into context .
In 1991 the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty were agreed by EU leaders , and the green light was given to the operation of the single currency .
Ireland 's GDP in 1991 was IEP29 billion .
It is now 10 years later IEP80 billion .
In 1991 we had to borrow IEP760 million to keep public services going .
Today we have a budget surplus .
In 1991 , 1.15 million people were in our workforce .
Today we have 1.67 million .
With regard to specific events of recent weeks , I believe that any mention of financially reprimanding Ireland , which is being suggested in some quarters , would be a highly regressive step .
Bullyboy tactics of this sort are hardly the ingredients to build closer economic cooperation or coordination .
Coercion and coordination are two diametrically opposed political and human theories .
The European Union has prospered in a spirit of cooperation between various Member States working together , pursuing common political interests .
The EU will not prosper into the future if confrontation is the order of the day .
I am elected to represent the people of Ireland , and I and my colleagues in this Parliament will continue to represent what is in the best interests of the people of Ireland .
In conclusion , the holding of this debate on this occasion is very welcome .
We welcome the opportunity to shout from the rooftops how proud we are of our performance .
Madam President , Mr Solbes Mira , the economic achievements of Ireland in the past decade provoke great admiration .
Anyone comparing the macroeconomic indicators of the EU Member States , cannot escape the conclusion that Ireland is at present out in front .
The criticism by the European Commission of the policy of the Irish Government therefore seems very strange .
But on closer inspection it is nevertheless correct .
Given the overheated state of the Irish economy , there is unmistakable evidence of a pro-cyclical policy when the Irish Government lowers taxes and increases government spending .
And if Ireland is not given a reprimand now , it will be very difficult to criticise the policy of Member States in future .
Meanwhile it remains striking that a small Member State should be attacked , while the economic reforms and performance of the large EMU Member States in general lag behind .
Could Commissioner Solbes Mira indicate if he is aware that the criticism of larger Member States in the present recommendations seems to be couched in more friendly terms than in the case of smaller countries .
When it was decided to launch the Economic and Monetary Union back in the spring of 1998 , I pointed out to the Commission the precarious situation regarding retirement provision in some Member States .
Your predecessor , Mr De Silguy , simply refused to listen .
I now notice that the Commission is voicing cautious warnings about this , addressed particularly to France and Italy .
The ECB also expressed itself in disturbing terms on the subject in its monthly report for July 2000 .
If policy continues unchanged the burden of pension contribution will go through the roof in most Member States .
In the case of one Member State to as high as 20 % of GDP , maintains the OECD .
Remarkably , the present election campaign in this Member State is being fought on tax reduction !
The longer the Member States concerned delay in tackling the pension problems energetically , the greater future budgetary problems will be .
There is a financial time bomb ticking away .
Meanwhile the Commissioner is still not speaking unambiguously .
Surely it cannot be acceptable for necessary reforms to be repeatedly postponed , thus passing burdens on to future generations ?
I expect you , at the forthcoming spring summit in Stockholm , to set out the rules and specifically warn the Member States Italy , Germany , Spain , Belgium and France .
On this point Ireland has everything well under control .
It would be opportunistic to conceal this . Because in the future Ireland , the Netherlands and others will be directly or indirectly burdened with the consequences of problems that their EMU partners knowingly and wilfully left unsolved .
Madam President , we believe that the recommendation , adopted on Monday by the Council of Finance Ministers , which puts Ireland in the dock because its budget is , allegedly , expansionary , is disproportionate , to such an extent that we have to wonder why it was made .
It is disproportionate because Ireland seemed rather like the good pupil in the European classroom and its level of inflation , which , at the end of the day , really is fairly low in absolute terms , does not threaten to destabilise the whole eurozone .
Under these circumstances , why demand restrictive measures which might have a harmful effect on Ireland ?
In order to explain this , you have to look at the analysis of the new single monetary system , in which small adjustments achieved by varying exchange rates are replaced by a rigid single currency system , supplemented by strict procedures .
Therefore , adjustments through markets are replaced by centralised , administrative adjustments .
Is there any guarantee , however , that this new administrative process will produce better results than the market process ?
We do not believe that this is the case .
The only guarantee is that an economic policy that does not suit all countries will be forced onto the various Member States .
This rigid system may have disadvantages which , in the long run , will cancel out the presumed advantages of the single currency .
There is still one question that has not yet been resolved .
Is this compulsory unified policy one that has been determined by the larger countries for their own benefit and to the detriment of smaller countries , or could it one day perhaps backfire on the larger countries themselves ?
I have no pat answer to this question .
At the moment , Ireland might well believe that it is part of the first scenario i.e. that it is a smaller country being sacrificed to the interests defined by the heavyweights .
However , the question is more complex because , behind the condemnation of Ireland , there are larger targets in the firing line and France is , perhaps , the prime target .
The point is no doubt to set a precedent for , or even to reinforce the idea of , referring to the multilateral surveillance procedure under Article 99 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , so that it can be extended to other Member States in the future .
The process of constraint is , therefore , far from over .
Europe ' s disciplinary role may first affect the smaller Member States , but it may , in future , have an effect on everyone .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our discussion today is rather strange because , from what Mr Wurtz and Commissioner Solbes Mira are saying , I have the impression that they are fighting the same battle .
Both of them are saying to us that you do not have the right to grow , but you do have the right to spend .
To take the first point : you do not have the right to grow .
Here we have a Member State , Ireland , which has an impressive budget surplus , an extremely small budget deficit , a very high growth rate and a level of inflation which , while it is too high , particularly because of reasons beyond its control , nonetheless respects the major part of what we said must be respected in the stability pact , Yet you are telling Ireland that growth is not a good thing , despite the fact that it has respected the criteria .
Mr Wurtz is telling us that we must have the right to spend .
I would point out to you , Mr Wurtz , that that is not the case in Ireland .
Ireland does not spend excessively .
It has strong growth precisely because of the fact that its spending is not excessive .
The decision on France , on the other hand , was to make a token gesture and issue a minor reprimand , but to state that the situation there is quite acceptable .
Yet , I note that France patently does not respect its commitments .
France had undertaken to reduce its public spending and to make tax cuts .
This imbalance has been upset .
We can see that the trend of reducing budget deficits is slowing down in France , whereas growth is becoming stable .
We can see that France has the highest level of public spending of all the countries in the eurozone .
We can see that France ' s national budget is being used to fund spending on the wages bill , which , logically , ought to belong to the market economy .
None of this is satisfactory but you do not say anything , because France , like Germany and Italy and other countries , is too big for you to handle .
I am , therefore , concerned , Commissioner , because and I am not blaming you in order to have a real ' policy mix ' , you need to be bolder , politically speaking , to be better armed , legally speaking and to be equipped , economically speaking , with rather more complex analytical equipment than we have at our disposal .
In fact , in this matter , we are suffering from a lack of Europe rather than an excess of Europe , and it is the smaller countries that are taking the rap for this deficiency !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the Commission and the Council because we have one year before the euro is introduced for real and this economic policy coordination , which we have been hoping and praying for since we changed over to the euro , really needs to take shape .
I do not know when or how the Commission and the Council would be able to use this procedure in Article 99 , and paragraph 4 in particular , if not on this occasion .
Imagine that they had to do this next year .
I do not think that would be possible .
They have both been guardians of the Treaty as well as guardians of the general interests of Europe .
As a consequence , economic policy coordination has not yet been achieved .
Commissioner Solbes Mira has just presented a document that has been adopted by the Commission and which we shall study very closely ; in other words . It is a document which will enable us to forge ahead in those areas .
We would like to thank him in advance and we hope that we will be able to improve the system on this basis .
Perhaps what we should be criticising is the gap between BEPGs in the budget , rather than the recommendation that the Commission has just drawn up .
When BEPGs , the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines , are set out , everyone is gathered around the table - Ireland , Germany , Italy , France , Portugal , and so forth .
The issue that we are coming up against today is that once BEPGs have been adopted , everyone goes home again and adopts their own budget , almost completely forgetting what was established collectively , among equals .
The problem today is that the Commission is dismissing a budget that the Irish Parliament has already adopted and it is assessing the outcome of internal debates held in Ireland , France , Germany and Italy after the fact .
I would , therefore , like to congratulate the Commission once again for having adopted this resolution .
Mr von Wogau wonders if the Irish economy may really has such an impact on economic and monetary union .
Of course it does not , but you must go back to Article 99 ( 4 ) .
It says that the Commission must make these recommendations and the Council must adopt them when the proper functioning of economic and monetary union is in jeopardy , and also when the economic policies of the Member States are not consistent with those that have been defined collectively .
This is certainly the current scenario .
Let us move on to the question or whether a large or a small country should have been reprimanded .
Do you think that one day the Commission could have criticised a larger country which was sending out negative messages that might weaken economic and monetary union if it had not previously responded in this way to a smaller country ? - I still do not know the difference between a larger and a smaller country , but never mind .
I do not believe so and I therefore welcome the decision taken by the Commission on Monday .
Madam President , the economic unification of Europe is a great adventure , but fortunately we have fifteen Ministers of Finance who keep a close watch on each other in Ecofin .
Although we cannot be absolutely sure of that , of course , since meetings are held behind closed doors and sometimes also behind a smokescreen .
Only very exceptionally , when things are really getting out of hand in one country , does Ecofin open its doors , does the smokescreen lift and does the colleague concerned get a public reprimand .
This week , Ireland became the first country to suffer this fate .
Are things going so badly with the Irish economy then ?
Can we really not trust the Irish ?
Not at all .
On the contrary , Ireland is doing well , as has already been mentioned by many speakers .
For five years Ireland has enjoyed an average growth of 5 % , with unemployment down from over 16 % to scarcely 4 % and a budget surplus of over 4.5 % .
Admittedly there is a threat of the economy overheating and there is a risk of inflation , and that was not within the framework of the agreements made by the ministers themselves .
But all in all it is not strange that the Irish should feel harshly treated .
However , much greater risks lie in wait .
The possible next Prime Minister of Italy , Silvio Berlusconi , has announced that he wishes to lower taxation despite a budget deficit and despite a ratio of public debt and gross national product that is more than three times the size of Ireland ' s .
What we wonder is whether the Council of Ministers will administer a public reprimand here too .
Commissioner Solbes Mira , though we have doubts about the necessity of taking Ireland to task , in the latter case you can count on our support .
Madam President , I believe that the Commission 's censure of Ireland is a serious breach of Ireland 's democratic freedom .
The freedom of an elected government to frame its own budget in accordance with its electoral commitments is fundamental to democracy .
I therefore urge Ireland 's Minister of Finances not to renege on his promises to increase spending , on health in particular , and to lower taxes , especially for the lower-paid .
I hold no brief for tax cuts for the wealthy , nor is this a budget that would be proposed by the Green Party .
Nevertheless it is a programme that has been negotiated with the social partners .
Ireland has particular difficulties with inflation because of its traditional ties of trade with the UK , which remains outside the eurozone .
This is an aspect of Irish inflation which has been completely ignored by the European Commission .
In fact , if the European Commission had deliberately decided on a course which would alienate the UK from joining the euro , by revealing itself to be an out-of-date bureaucracy which tries to bully elected governments in ways that are completely outside its brief , it could not have done better .
This is absolute political stupidity to say the least .
This interference with the Irish budget is the result of the Maastricht Treaty ; the Commission is even trying to get governments to agree their budgets with it in advance , which was not part of the Treaty .
I therefore anticipate a resounding rejection of the Nice Treaty in the Irish referendum this Summer because of this unwarranted interference and because this is a very bad treaty , as many in this House agree .
Since 1994 the cumulative increase in employment has been 39 per cent .
Today the economy is close to full employment , which is a huge sea change for Ireland .
Irish unit labour costs are still more than 10 per cent below the eurozone average .
Therefore both wage rises and tax cuts for the low paid are on the agenda for Ireland in 2001 .
I believe the Commission is deliberately trying to interfere in a field beyond its competence .
We must not let this happen .
Over the last five years there has been a dangerous increase in inequality with the rich becoming very rich and the poor becoming ever more marginalised .
We will not and cannot tolerate this continuing .
I want to thank Parliament for debating this issue .
I encouraged Mr von Wogau to table this question because I believed that Parliament would treat this important precedent in a fair and balanced way - and indeed it has .
Furthermore , I recognise that everything discussed in the Commission was in secret and everything discussed in the Council was in secret .
And we had to accept the press releases from the propagandists when it was all over .
So , at least in this House we have an open and democratic airing of the whole subject , and I welcome that very much .
One thing we speakers from Ireland forgot to say was how much the European Union has contributed to the success we have .
I do not want to go into all the details , but I want to mention one factor that is underestimated , which is the way that the Irish economy - being small and open - responded to the internal market .
It is no coincidence that Ireland took off the day that borders were abolished in Europe and we got a free market .
That was important .
Another thing that is exaggerated is the transfers of money .
A Commission study , when Ireland had an economic growth rate of 10 % , showed that the transfer of structural funds to Ireland only contributed 1.5 % , if that .
So the people who say that Ireland has grown on handouts from Europe are exaggerating .
What disappoints me about all this is the shock expressed by the Irish finance minister .
He was told this by the Irish Economic and Social Research Institute , just as the Commission told him .
He was told it by the Irish employers ' association .
He was told it by the central banks .
And if he had a problem with it - with the trade unions demanding increased wages - it was because his policies had already stoked inflation and had already undermined their real incomes .
Even if we were not in the Union and in Monetary Union , we would still be affected by the decisions taken by the European Union .
In that sense , there is no such thing as sovereignty for a small , open economy like Ireland .
The minister is reputed to be a sportsman .
A sportsman should have obeyed the referee when he blew the whistle when somebody broke the rules .
Even if there is room for argument about whether the Commission was right or wrong , for our minister in his arrogance and our Tanaiste to pretend that they could not accept or understand that was dishonest and unfair .
Commissioner , I wish to begin by reiterating your words at the very beginning of your speech , to the effect that in this matter , the role of the Commission is to coordinate the economic policies of the countries of the European Union and this function has nothing to do with the normal transfer of Community funds .
Commissioner , I would like you to answer the following questions : how do you think the Irish economy can be cooled down when the rate of inflation in Ireland is higher than the interest rate set by the European Central Bank and , therefore , money in Ireland is very cheap ?
You and your colleagues , Commissioner , know that , in the United States of America , there is a difference in the rates of inflation between the various states . This does not necessarily affect the stability of the dollar , however .
Why should this situation , in the case of Ireland , whose economy only represents 1 % of the European Union ' s GDP , be crucial to the stability of the euro ?
Finally , Commissioner , you mentioned the Stability Pact several times , but not once did you mention the Growth Pact !
I would say that stability is important if there is to be growth , and I would give the example of Ireland , which has been a Member of the Union for twice as long as Portugal and Spain . Nevertheless , it has already shown such high levels of growth that it has reached the Community average .
This makes me wonder whether the Commissioner would not also like to consider the possibility of not seeing the Maastricht criteria , particularly inflation , as his Bible and whether there are not other , more important aspects for him to think about in order for Europe and all the countries in Europe to grow at a healthy pace ?
Madam President , the Commissioner finished his speech by saying that not that many consequences can be drawn from this case .
I agree , which precisely raises the question : " Why bother ? "
I accept that , as a Commission , you have the right to do what you did .
As Guardian of the Treaty , you have the duty to act , if you believe that is correct .
I accept that Ecofin endorsed the judgment of the Commission .
The Irish Government too has a right and duty to defend its policy preferences , where it feels it is right to do so .
I do not question your right , Commissioner , to do what you did , but I question your judgment .
I believe it was the wrong judgment in the context of such an important precedent-setting example .
I believe the Irish response was the wrong response because it was too petulant .
I believe both the Commission and the Irish response to the Commission 's recommendation lacked proportionality .
Two wrongs do not make a right .
In the grey economic space , the budget was inflationary , but , on the supply side , the tax change will bring greater participation in a stretched labour force .
The tax change will lower wage expectations and therefore inflationary expectations .
The capital expenditure will get rid of infrastructural bottlenecks ; the case is at best a grey case .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union ' s criticism of Ireland ' s economic policy is controversial .
As I see it , there are good reasons for supporting the Ecofin Council ' s recommendation .
The economic policy guidelines , on which all EU Member States have agreed , are concerned basically with ensuring that we do not once again slip into the galloping inflation and devastating budget deficit of the Eighties , which subsequently led to a backlash in the form of crisis and unemployment .
Ireland is the first Member State which is now seriously beginning not to meet its inflation targets .
Against the background of the crisis in the Nineties , it is therefore perhaps only reasonable for the EU to react .
Now , things are beginning to go well for Europe again .
No-one begrudges Ireland its fantastic growth .
On the contrary , it is of course one of the foremost examples of EU cooperation ' s really being able to help substantially improve conditions for an individual Member State .
However , that is why we must not forget our experiences of the crisis during the Nineties .
We must not compromise on our conviction that the fight for growth and full employment can , and must , be allied with a clear acceptance of responsibility when it comes to price stability and a balanced budget .
Why , then , can Ireland not be allowed to go its own way ?
The problem is that we of course live in an interwoven , internationalised economy in which developments in one country influence developments in the others .
As long as only one small country infringes the guidelines it has itself accepted , the problem may seem small .
Now , however , there are worrying signs that more countries may be doing this , in which case it will be important to send out warning signals early on .
In my own country , Sweden , an attempt is now being made to feature the criticism made of Ireland in anti-euro propaganda .
Just look , they say .
If we take part in EMU , we shall lose our economic independence .
The EU will even obtain power over our taxes .
I think that propaganda of that kind is nonsense .
Ireland has been criticised not because it is to reduce taxes , but because the reduction is to take place in a situation in which this may contribute to overheating and to inflation ' s taking off again .
The EU has issued a recommendation . No forcible means are to be used to take over Ireland ' s tax and budget policies , despite all that is maintained by Swedish opponents of the EU .
Madam President , I should like to thank all the speakers for their opinions .
I tried to clarify a number of points in my initial speech , but I have a feeling that I did not succeed .
Firstly , we are not judging Ireland against any other country .
We are judging Ireland against its own commitments , accepted in accordance with the broad economic guidelines .
Secondly , we are not taking a decision that has just come out of nowhere and which was not anticipated .
The Council ' s 1998 recommendation already referred to the need for a stricter fiscal policy for Ireland . In the 1999 recommendation , a reminder was issued that , in spite of the efforts made , these were still not enough and , in 2000 , after it was pointed out that the budgetary policy adopted by Ireland needed to be more restrictive , there followed a clear expansionist budget on Ireland ' s part .
When I talk about an expansionist budget , I am talking about overall figures . I have no quarrel with more health expenditure or more expenditure on reducing tax .
Those are policy matters to be decided upon at national level .
As Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs , my concern is with the overall status of the Irish budget .
However , it is not only my concern but also that of Ireland ' s Central Bank , which I assume is familiar enough with the situation of the Irish economy and clearly understands that the current budget gives a substantial procyclical boost to the economy .
That is the situation , and these are the facts we are judging .
On that basis , we can talk about what we are , or are not , to do .
My duty as Commissioner responsible for these matters is to apply the broad economic guidelines , which are compulsory in a way that the Stability Pact is not .
The Stability and Growth Pact - to answer Mrs Torres Marques - was decided upon following a Community regulation .
The broad economic guidelines are the model we duly agreed for inclusion in the Treaty of Maastricht . And what we have done is to apply this model strictly , as required .
In contrast to what some believe , it is obviously not a position of the Commission .
Rather , it is a position of the Commission and the Council . Nor , in making our proposal , did we proceed on the basis of any factor other than our own assessment of the point at issue .
No one should therefore imagine that there are motives or problems of any other kind , large or small .
We are talking about consistency with the model we had duly established .
Reference was made to a greater degree of understanding .
I believe that we have been showing understanding since 1998 but , in this situation , decisions obviously need to be taken at some point .
Reference was made to the lack of diplomacy on the part of the Commission .
I can assure you that none of the leaks that have appeared in the press come from my department in the Commission .
Obviously , it may be thought that the best pupil in the class is being punished .
As I have said , it is not a case of our imposing sanctions .
We are using a recommendation to highlight an example of incorrect behaviour in the light of the economic policy guidelines .
And this is not inconsistent with good behaviour in terms of growth and inflation .
We could talk in much more detail .
Mr Bradbourn intimated that not enough data had been provided .
I am prepared to appear before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , whenever you think it appropriate , to comment in more detail on all the data we are talking about .
Article 99 ( 4 ) - which is one of the things you are concerned about - applies in accordance with the provisions of current legislation .
There has been discussion about whether the censure of Ireland is or is not justified .
In my opinion , it is justified .
If it were not , this proposal would not have been made .
Moreover , it is justified in spite of the limited impact Ireland has on the overall European economy .
Clearly , there are - and I repeat - two reasons why I think the censure is justified : firstly , because of the obligations accepted by everyone in terms of the model we have defined ; and , secondly , because I do not believe that anyone can seriously defend the view that , in terms of the model we have implemented , a country can be treated unequally on the grounds that it is large or small .
We can talk about other subjects which have also been raised : the problems concerned with Ireland ' s contribution to European growth , specific problems , the development of inflation etc .
I think that all these technical subjects can be discussed .
It is true that nominal inflation has gone down in the last two months in Ireland .
Nonetheless , when we talk about the overheating of the Irish economy , we are talking about underlying inflationary pressures , the operation of underlying inflation , the increase in salaries , the increase in the cost of living and many other factors fundamental to any correct assessment of what is happening in Ireland .
Is our approach wrong ?
Here , we are embarking upon a subject that is difficult to assess because it is necessary to ratify the Treaty of Nice and because it is a factor that will impact upon other models .
I would ask you whether you believe that policy assessments of this kind exempt the Commission from its duty to apply the Treaties in the forms in which they are established .
In my opinion , the Commission has acted with sufficient prudence after having repeatedly urged the Irish Government to take a different course .
The Commission presented the matter to the Group of Euro Countries and to the Economic and Financial Affairs Council .
The decision was not approved by chance .
The matter was debated by the special group of the Economic and Financial Committee after each and every one of the arguments put forward by the Irish Government had been analysed .
And , in spite of all that , the decision was taken , as I have just said , on the proposal of the Commission and , so to speak , with the assent of the Council of Ministers .
In my opinion , the Commission did what it had to do .
I would again emphasise the significance of the term , ' recommendation ' .
I am not talking about a sanction but about a recommendation , and I believe that we cannot draw any conclusion which takes us farther away from the content of that Council decision suggested by the Commission , namely to apply a standard which is there in the Treaty for the purpose of resolving a series of practical problems raised in the model we have established for coordinating economic policy . Although a different model may apply in the future , that is the one that is in force today .
Thank you , Commissioner Solbes Mira .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , as you will see there are very few people here .
The situation was the same last month .
I made the suggestion last month that we could use the additional two or three hours on Monday evening for debate so that Members could attend this vote as well .
Could you tell me if that suggestion has been looked into and what the response of the Bureau or the Conference of Presidents was ?
I am told that your suggestion is still being examined and that no satisfactory solution has yet been found .
Mr President , I have another suggestion . We are currently preparing an amendment to the timetable , which means , as of next year , we could have an extra day in Brussels .
I think that we are departing from the agenda . At this point , we are due to proceed to the vote on the urgent resolutions .
VOTE
The next item is the vote on the urgent resolutions .
Before the vote on the resolution on religious freedom in China
Mr President , regarding the following resolution , my group felt bound to sign the joint resolution on religious freedoms in China in order to demonstrate that , in our view , there are no borders when it comes to defending freedom of conscience and freedom of expression .
On the other hand , most of the Members of my group are totally opposed to any reference to the Falun Gong movement in this resolution .
We have therefore requested a separate vote and a roll-call vote on the two paragraphs relating to this issue and we shall vote against these paragraphs .
This is exactly the procedure scheduled , Mr Wurtz .
Mr President , I would just briefly like to say that it has been proposed that we should start earlier on a Monday and leave earlier on a Thursday .
I must say that this is absurd since it would mean that many of us would have to travel here on a Sunday so that others could have Friday free .
It always used to be the case in Europe that Sunday and not Friday was a day of rest .
Mr President , I do not want to debate this either , but I have to clarify that what Mr Posselt said is wrong .
I did not suggest starting earlier on a Monday .
I suggested using the evening hours on Monday , which are now free , for debat