Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Thursday 15 February 2007 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
( DE ) Mr President , I have a couple of questions to put to you and to the Secretary-General of this House .
I learned as early as last Thursday that a ceremony commemorating the victims of terrorism was to be held here this afternoon before this plenary sitting began .
I take it as read that it was of an appropriately dignified character , and do not indeed doubt that it was , for I see the occasion , and the need for such a ceremony , as important .
What I am not willing to accept , however , is the way in which this was prepared and staged , and I would also like to tell the Secretary-General , Mr Rømer , that I intend to energetically follow up what he said in the Conference of Presidents last Thursday , so I will tell the plenary that I , the chairman of my group , had no advance notice of this event whatever .
I do not know whether the members or chairmen of other groups were informed of it , but I , in any case , was not .
When I , last Thursday , asked the Secretary-General and you how this had been prepared , I was told - for you left the answer to the Secretary-General - that it had been done in close cooperation with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and , that appearing to be to be an acceptable explanation , I declared myself content with it .
Since then , I have learned that neither the deputy chairman of that committee , Mr Lambrinidis - who is a member of my group - nor my group 's coordinator , Mrs Roure , had had any word whatever of this event .
I think this House has earned the right to be allowed to take part in an event of this kind , and I would have been happy to be present in my capacity as a group chairman .
I do not think it helpful that Parliamentary business or initiatives of this kind should be staged in this building without Members of this House being present , and so I ask that , the next time events of this kind - which are , as I have said , useful - are prepared and held , a better job should be made of it .
I personally , as President of this House , took it as read that the procedure would be the same as it was last year ; we will check to see if something different was done then .


I myself presided from 3 p.m. onwards and wanted to do so until half past three , but the sitting then dragged on longer as the young people - whom it was very nice to see there , may I say - and the group chairmen were not so punctilious in keeping to their speaking time , and the President was not in a position to tell the young people to stop speaking after four minutes , so that I myself was unable to keep a very important appointment at half past three .

The whole thing lasted until just before 4 p.m.
The sitting had been chaired before 3 p.m. by Mr Cavada , the chairman of this House 's home affairs committee ; the rapporteur was Mr Sifunakis , who is a member of your group , and Commissioner Špidla was also present .


What I would recommend is that we should check to compare what was done last time and what was done this year .
As for next year , I would ask - and I am grateful to you for saying how very useful you , too , find this - that we should try for a bit more transparency next time around , but there is one thing that will not be possible , for the Chamber was packed out with 580 young people in it , and if we invite all the Members of this House , there will not be enough space .
We should , though , give some thought to how this House can be properly represented through the political groups .
Can we agree on that ?
Statement by the President
Perhaps I might make a comment to the topic we have just discussed .
Yesterday - Sunday , March the eleventh - was the third anniversary of the terrorist attack in Madrid on 11 March 2004 , when 192 people were killed .
The day of this appalling event has become a European day of commemoration for the victims of terrorism .
It is a day for keeping memory alive - the memory of the victims of terrorism - and for solidarity with them and their families , with those who lost their lives and also with those who still suffer the effects of it , whether physical or psychological .
It is a day for fostering awareness , for , following the attack on Madrid , the bombings in London on 7 July 2005 resulted in more victims within the European Union , and , elsewhere around the world , too , it is still too often the case that too many people are being killed by violence motivated by fanaticism .
Terrorism is an attack on freedom and democracy .
Terrorism is an attempt at making things happened through blind violence and , in the process , destroying values , the values that are the foundation of the European Union and its Member States .
Terrorism is a crime that cannot be tolerated under any circumstances .
It represents one of the greatest dangers to the security , stability and democratic values of the international community and is also a direct assault on our citizens .
The European Union and the international community of states must be determined in fighting terrorism in whatever shape or form .
There can be no justification for terrorism , and , in fighting it , we can allow ourselves no weakness ; that is why we need a strong and united Europe .
If we are to fight it effectively , we need to go beyond mere close cooperation and develop a coherent common policy that meets the needs of the public while also reflecting our understanding of human rights and human dignity .
Let me , then , say once more that this House does not see Guantanamo as compatible with our European legal order , and that we must ensure , in joining together to fight terrorism in Europe , that we do so in a manner consistent with the values that we are defending .
On the occasion of this day commemorating the victims of terrorism , we must again declare ourselves willing to fight terrorism in whatever form and also to take the action needed in order to do so .

We must not forget the victims of terrorism ; the punishment of their murderers is a debt we owe to them , but a determined policy must also have the object of preventing , in so far as possible , terrorism and terrorist acts on European Union soil and anywhere else in the world , in line with the principles of the international community and our system of law .
On 5 March this year , Daniele Mastrogiacomo , an Italian journalist and Afghanistan correspondent for the newspaper ' La Repubblica ' , was abducted by the Taliban .
He was simply doing his job , which was to report on the situation in that country .
I would like to take this opportunity of expressing this House 's solidarity and my own with Mr Mastrogiacomo 's family and with the newspaper ' La Repubblica ' .
I would also like , speaking on behalf of this House , to express the same solidarity with the German citizen and her son , both of whom were abducted in Iraq in February .
We urge and demand of the persons who are holding Mr Mastrogiacomo and the organisation Kataib Siham al-Haq , which abducted the two German citizens and long-term residents of Iraq , that they should let these people go free - free and unharmed - without delay .
We must not allow ourselves to be blackmailed by violence .
I now ask that we remember the victims of terrorism .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Documents received : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Oral questions and written statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Membership of political groups : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft of the agenda for this sitting , as agreed by the Conference of Presidents meeting on Thursday , 8 March 2007 , in accordance with Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been circulated .
It has been requested that the draft be amended as follows :
Monday :
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has moved that there be no motions to close the debate on the oral question to the Commission on Community measures to provide cross-border health services .
Who wishes to justify this motion ?
( FR ) Mr President , my group believes that this proposal by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to submit an oral question with debate and resolution on the provision of cross-border health care is inappropriate for the simple reason that the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , backed by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , is currently debating a draft report that relates to the same subject , namely health services in the European Union .
The vote on this resolution is in danger of being redundant and , above all , is in danger of cutting short the debates taking place in the two other committees .
My group could therefore just about endorse the presentation of this oral question with debate , but it requests that the resolution be left in abeyance and dealt with at the same time as the report by the committee concerned .
According to the information I have , this report is scheduled for the May plenary session .
Let us therefore avoid any duplication of effort and let us try to do some serious parliamentary work .
In other words , let us wait for the background report by the committee concerned to become available .
( DE ) Mr President , I can , in fact , do no more than repeat what my colleague Mr Goebbels has already said .
We , in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , are currently drafting a comprehensive report , which will also include opinions from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and the Committee on Legal Affairs .
It would , of course , be good if our committee 's ongoing work were not to be prejudiced by the adoption of a resolution that had to be cobbled together within the space of three days , whereas we have been spending many weeks preparing a good document that , it is to be hoped , will enjoy broad support .
I think the sensible thing to do would be to have a debate on this - that is something we can certainly accept - while not adopting a resolution on it .
Mr President , I understand the courteous and moderate way in which the request has been put by the colleagues opposite , but I have to say that I think it is based on a misunderstanding .
I am grateful for their support .
However , we are not talking about two debates on the same issue , but about a report by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , which is not yet completed , concerning the exclusion of health services from the Services Directive .
An opinion from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety is winging its way to that committee and , in due course , we shall have a full debate on that .
This resolution is not about services but about patients .
( Applause )
It is about the consequences for patients of the judgments of the European Court of Justice .
When colleagues say that this debate might be untimely , they are right because it is very late .
This resolution was not cobbled together in three days but was put together by the Committee on the Environment last December , when it was carried unanimously by that committee .
The Health Commissioner , Mr Kyprianou , told us on numerous occasions that he was waiting for the resolution and asked why he could not have it because he knew that it had been carried .
Therefore , it is long overdue .
It is quite separate from the report by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and we will give that due respect when it comes .
However , for now , I ask Parliament to agree that the oral question should be accompanied by the resolution , which did not come before us in January or February , but surely can now do so in March .
( Applause )
( Parliament rejected the motion . )
Tuesday :
Motion by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Mr Virrankoski 's report on biotechnology : Prospects and challenges for agriculture in Europe to be sent back to the committee .
. - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the vote on the report held in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on 24 January was split down the middle : of the 43 members present , 22 voted in favour , 15 voted against and 6 abstained .
Due mainly to the fact that it focuses on GMOs , when biotechnology is far broader in scope , this report , which is entitled ' Biotechnology : prospects and challenges for agriculture in Europe ' , has provoked numerous reactions , and not only within our group .
For that reason , and due to the ensuing risk of this report - which is fairly crucial for a subject as important as biotechnology - failing , it would be helpful if the report were referred back to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development so that it can re-examine it and perhaps arrive at a more balanced proposal that receives more votes .
I would add that I met Mr Virrankoski to discuss this issue - I am grateful to him for the constructive meeting that we had last week - and that it seems , moreover , that my fellow coordinator , Mr Busk , shares this opinion , if the e-mail that he sent me is anything to go by .
( FI ) Mr President , biotechnology offers massive opportunities for European agriculture , although it presents challenges for it as well .
For this reason , a report such as this cannot be treated as a yes or no issue : instead , it needs to be examined thoroughly and without bias .
Accordingly , I am in favour of it being referred back to the committee so that we might get the greatest possible support for it in plenary .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )

( MT ) I ask that this debate on hunting in Malta be concluded without a resolution because I feel that such a resolution is unnecessary and unjustified , and for three reasons . Firstly , spring hunting is , in itself , illegal , its being through the use of a derogation that European law allows the practice of hunting at this time of year .
Secondly , the use of a derogation to allow spring hunting was the specific subject of negotiations between Malta and the European Union in the period prior to accession , and there is therefore no reason why this chapter should be re-opened .
Thirdly , if spring hunting is to be abolished , then this should be done on a scientific basis and not in response to political pressure .
( MT ) I agree with my colleague , Mr Busuttil .
I believe that we are talking in this case about an agreement between the European Union and Malta , approved by both Parliament and the majority of the Maltese and Gozitan population of my country .
I believe that it is at this stage unnecessary to come up with a resolution that goes against what was decided on between the Maltese people and the European Union , because I feel that we would in that way be sending out the wrong message to every European citizen , namely that the very European Union that originally endorses an agreement tries to put a stop to it after a while .
I therefore believe that this is not the time for a resolution on the matter .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reason why we asked for and accepted this debate and why a resolution is needed is precisely because Malta has failed to abide by the agreements .
It is obvious that that is what the problem is .
Otherwise a resolution would not have been put forward ; we would not have received the results and the very explicit recommendations of a fact-finding mission sent to Malta ; and the Commission would not have recommended , as my fellow Members are very well aware , that the Maltese Government should not authorise the spring hunt in the country this year , in view of what has happened in previous years .
The reason , therefore , why we are calling for a debate and resolution is exactly the opposite of what my fellow Members maintain : since there is a violation of Community law and since we must apparently legislate less , we had better concern ourselves with applying this law .
I hope this House will act in accordance with the decision made earlier and draw up a resolution on this topic .
( Parliament rejected the motion . )
Wednesday :
Motion by the Presidency of the Council for the debate on the statements by the Council and the Commission on the Berlin Declaration to be taken following the debate on the report on the European Council and the statement by the Commission on the meeting of the European Council ( 8 / 9 March 2007 ) .
( DE ) Mr President , starting the agenda in this way with a brief debate on the Berlin statement is a good choice .
If the declaration is worth anything , let it be debated briefly and early in the morning , rather than at the end of a long and perhaps rather problematic debate on the Council , with different groups pulling in different directions .
I think it is certainly appropriate that we should first have an hour 's worth of debate on the Berlin statement , followed by an exhaustive one on the Council .
( Parliament rejected the motion . )
Thursday
Debates on violation of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( Rule 115 of the Rules of Procedure ) : Motion by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to delete the word ' Nigeria ' and replace it by the wording ' arrests of activists contending for the rights of women in Iran ' .
( DE ) Mr President , we have seen that World Women 's Day was marked in Iran by demonstrations by women , which were then violently suppressed .
Over recent weeks , pressure on women 's organisations in Iran generally has increased , and it is for that reason that we think it more relevant and more a matter of urgency that this be debated rather than the subject in relation to Nigeria .

( DE ) Mr President , although I am sure that Mr Gahler is right to say that this is an important problem and one that we should not disregard , I do nevertheless believe that we should not drop the subject of Nigeria in favour of something else .
What I would propose is that we leave Nigeria on the agenda and take the subject of women in Iran during the next part-session in Brussels , for example in the format of a brief oral question to the Commission or the Council as to what they envisage doing in order to support women in that country .
We would be happy to agree to that , but this time we should leave the agenda as it is .
In that sense , I am against the motion , but would offer the opportunity for an in-depth discussion of the issue at another time - that time being in the course of the next part-session .
( Parliament rejected the motion . )
( The agenda was therefore adopted . )
Corporate social responsibility ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Howitt on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on corporate social responsibility : a new partnership .
rapporteur . - Mr President , companies , politicians and above all people understand that the problems of world poverty and of environmental degradation remain stubbornly prevalent in today 's world .
For ten years , many companies have begun to examine how they can manage their own social and environmental impacts through initiatives for Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR ) .
Business cannot be expected to take responsibility alone for meeting these challenges .
However , it is now time for the communications , the conferences and the codes of conduct to begin to make a significant and measurable difference and a move from process to outcome .
In this vote , the European Parliament will draw attention to the limitations of voluntary CSR reporting and of social auditing as it exists today .
We will say that the drive for ever lower prices can prejudice fair treatment for people at work .
We will insist that CSR can only work by adopting a multi-stakeholder approach , internationally-agreed standards and independent monitoring and verification .
We will call for actions to tackle corporate abuses in the world 's developing countries and to provide means for redress for its victims .
The Commission 's communications seem to me to opt out of this debate , to prescribe an ' anything goes ' approach to CSR and to risk Europe falling behind , compared with the rest of the world .
However , tonight I am not proposing that we reject the Commission 's approach .
Indeed , I am asking the European Parliament to contribute constructively by seeking to rewrite some of the agenda and , where the Commission is making commitments , to come forward with detailed recommendations to turn fine words into concrete actions , to give full transparency to the evolving alliance for business , to rebuild confidence in the European multi-stakeholder forum and bring the NGOs back to the table , to make a genuine financial contribution to enabling CSR to grow , to genuinely put into operation support for CSR principles in Commission policies and programmes , including enterprise , employment , corporate governance and , in particular , trade and development programmes .
I know that Commissioners Verheugen and Špidla will not be able to accept all of Parliament 's recommendations tonight .
However , I am heartened and grateful for the private meetings I have held with them as this report has evolved .
I now call on them publicly to promise that decisive progress will be made on CSR at EU level within the life of this Commission .
I also know that some Members in the debate will seek to oppose the report : I say to them that this report represents a carefully crafted compromise between the political groups .
Indeed , I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the shadow rapporteur .
The one clear piece of new legislation we will support will be for mandatory environmental and social reporting by business , reiterating our previous position and sending a powerful political signal from this Parliament .
All of our other proposals are about more effective use and implementation of the existing regulatory framework and support for voluntary action .
I say to the opponents inside this Parliament and to the one or two associations outside that , in their enthusiasm to block action at EU level , I do not believe that they do justice or genuinely represent the best interests or the best of business when it comes to CSR .
Take the Danish pharmaceutical company Novo Nordisk , speaking on behalf of the business leaders ' initiative for human rights , which told us : ' Minimum standards are essential for a level playing field to be developed in this area ' .
Take the European Investment and Research Service , who told us : ' If you can go some way to rekindling the interest of the Commission in a more substantive approach to CSR , that would be most welcome ' .
Or take the French business confederation MEDEF , speaking of behalf of Business Europe : ' I want to thank you very much for the quality and the relevance of most of the questions and suggestions put forward by you . '
Now is not the time to retreat .
It is time to be ambitious and to show vision and take all of these and others together .
One of the key ways we can get greater enthusiasm , dynamism and consensus behind EU action on CSR is by championing it in global institutions and better implementing global CSR initiatives here in Europe .
There is also the strategic partnership that I propose between the Commission and the global reporting initiative , a new business dialogue between the EU and Japan on corporate social responsibility , and the use of the fifth anniversary this year of the World Summit on Sustainable Development as an opportunity for us in Europe to lead the international debate for intergovernmental initiatives and corporate accountability , which was agreed at Johannesburg .
When the Commission published its communication it said it wanted Europe to be a pole of excellence for CSR .
When I read it I feared that CSR in Europe was instead falling down a black hole .
However , if we can agree substantively on many of the recommendations in this Parliament report , I believe that we can make the Commission 's aspiration come true .
Mr President , honourable Members , it is indeed true to say that Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR ) is marching ahead in Europe , and last year 's communication from the Commission triggered a great wave of activities and new ideas .
It is because CSR can make a great contribution to sustainable development and enhance Europe 's potential for innovation and its competitiveness that it is closely tied in with our strategy for growth and employment , the object of which is not only to create more jobs but also , and primarily , to create better ones .
We are talking here not about short-term successes or apparently favourable quarterly results , but rather about the need for our companies to adjust in the long term to the changed conditions under which we have to compete in the world as a whole .
Favourable social conditions may well be an important factor in competition , but producing them is not a responsibility for policy-makers alone ; businesses have a responsibility of their own , and it goes beyond mere obedience to the law .
They are responsible for the social climate , for the environment , for equality of opportunity , for training , for innovation and for structural change ; to sum up , they are responsible for the people who work for them , and for the location where they are based .
The Commission welcomes Mr Howitt 's report , which is evidence of deep knowledge and competence and not only essentially endorses the Commission 's aim of strengthening CSR in Europe , but also makes an important contribution towards achieving it .
I certainly agree that the debate should aim to achieve concrete results ; that the multi-stakeholder approach should embrace all the interested parties and groups affected ; and that the whole process should be even better integrated into the Lisbon Strategy .
You will be aware that the Commission believes that the openings for regulation in this area are limited .
We do not believe that an enterprise 's culture can be imposed from above or standardised by legislation , and that is why the Commission has been unwilling to take a decision in favour of proposing a regulation on CSR or the standardisation of it at European level .
If something , somewhere , has to be regulated ; if we , by reason of our political responsibility have to insist on businesses doing something , then we have to summon up the courage to enact the relevant legislation , which must be specific and practically relevant to the area in question , but corporate social responsibility is , by definition , something that goes beyond companies ' obligations under the law and is more than that which we lay down in regulations .
We want to support businesses and to encourage them to make use of the internationally recognised instruments , which are available in great numbers .
The Commission is also supporting CSR in the global context , for example , through the EU-Africa Business Forum , brought into existence by my fellow-Commissioner Mr Michel , in which representatives of businesses from both continents met in November 2006 to discuss social responsibility .
The Commission is continuing to discuss with developing countries the progress being made in implementing the basic standards of the International Labour Organisation , and , in Europe , we are promoting the further development of relevant instruments within the various sectors , alongside multi-sectoral initiatives .
My fellow-Commissioner Mr Špidla and I are meeting more and more business people who are getting committed to and involved in making Europe a front-runner where CSR is concerned , and who see it as putting their businesses at a definite advantage on the market .
In the short time in which it has been in existence , the European CSR Alliance has set in motion some impressive and exemplary initiatives , and far-sighted managers and investors have long known that a company with a good record of CSR is usually a successful one , as , indeed , is evident from the prices at which such businesses ' shares are quoted on stock exchanges .
The Commission calls on Europe 's businesses to make CSR a European brand and to compete for the best ideas .
We are convinced that a European company must be one that acknowledges its own social responsibility and acts accordingly .
That is something on which the Commission and your House are in complete agreement .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my colleague Mr Verheugen has characterised the general framework of corporate social responsibility .
I feel I must emphasise that this is about voluntary commitments on the part of businesses , commitments that clearly go beyond what the law requires .
This must not of course restrict the right of any lawmaker or relevant authority to draw up any law it deems essential .
Given that the general framework has been described sufficiently clearly , I should like to present a number of specific areas in which we support corporate initiatives and which form part of the March 2006 strategy .
First of all , businesses play a major role in professional cohesion and also support social cohesion insofar as they hire workers and are involved in human resources management .
Secondly , 2007 has been declared the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All .
We have neither the right nor the means to deprive ourselves of our diverse talents , and therefore we support corporate initiatives aimed at equal opportunities .
Thirdly , an important part of the intergenerational pact , which ageing Europe desperately needs , is cohesion and the retention of older people in employment .
The other priorities in the March communication , such as health , investment in lifelong learning , innovation in training , science and operating on a global scale are equally important .
The text you will be debating addresses these very issues .
If we want to ensure that corporate social responsibility continues into the 21st century there needs to be dialogue with the whole community , and for this reason in December we held a multi-stakeholder forum on corporate social responsibility .
At the same time , it was decided to convene a European level discussion body from one of the plenary sittings , which will bring together representatives from civil society , the world of business and academic institutions .
These forums have made it possible for us to assess the results of initiatives launched since 2004 .
As regards Commission initiatives I believe that corporate social responsibility is becoming increasingly influential across all of our policies , and in particular in external EU policy .
Issues of common interest for the future have also been staked out , such as education , research and working conditions across chains of subcontractors .
This will clearly have a major impact in fostering more secure social conditions in regions outside Europe for subcontractors who work for European firms .
There is much work to be done but we are on the right track .
It can be seen from our debates and discussions with interested parties that corporate social responsibility is an increasingly important issue .
It is important to maintain existing conditions and to be unstinting in our efforts .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur and congratulate him on his report .
I think he has managed to present a report that can secure widespread support in this Chamber .
I think it is important to make some remarks about corporate social responsibilities .
First of all , the main task of companies is to deliver the services and products they are established for and to be run at a profit , because otherwise they will not survive .
If they cannot fulfil these main tasks , they will fail in their fundamental social responsibility as employers and as producers of services and goods .
I think it is important to underline this when we discuss how to define corporate social responsibilities .
Our point of view - because we have discussed this question in the ITRE committee as well as within our group - is that it should be a matter of voluntary responsibility .
It has to be performed on its own merits and as a part of the responsibility that the individual company has in society .
Companies have a social role in society .
They must be good employers , delivering services and products of a high quality , because otherwise they will lose credibility and they will lose out in the market .
But there are also grounds for saying that they must behave well in their own terms , because good and strong companies who stand up for fundamental values , whether in Europe or anywhere else in the world , are contributing to a better world , but also to a better economy and to better products and services .
There should be voluntary responsibility , because otherwise legislation would be needed and that is another matter .
If we try to streamline too much , we will lose the variety and the dynamism that each company can deliver by making the most of its opportunities to be a good employer , a good company and a good service and product provider .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( EL ) Mr President , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , in its opinion on corporate social responsibility , calls on the rapporteur for a holistic understanding of this issue , because it believes that the role of companies is fundamental as regards respect for the values underpinning the European Union , irrespective of where they trade , within or outside the European Union , and irrespective of their size , of whether they are small or medium-sized enterprises , multinationals and so on .
At global level , core standards of the International Labour Organisation are promoted through corporate social responsibility .
Within a framework of voluntary action , they can introduce measures to support female human resources , within the framework of national and Community legislation on gender equality and non-discrimination , both during the recruitment procedure and during the procedure to promote and elect women to the administration bodies , to the board of directors , when promoting the planning of actions for corporate social responsibility .
We congratulate the European Commission on reinforcing the new alliance and we do not believe that it will be a repetition of the multi-stakeholder forum .
A charter of good practice to which companies subscribe voluntarily will help to promote actions for the living and working environment and facilitate a better combination of professional and home life alongside cultural and educational services .
Finally , we are calling for good corporate social responsibility practices to be promoted and rewarded , especially in the gender equality sector , but not with a mandatory report by companies .
Commissioners , allow me to express the view that the possibilities of voluntary application of corporate social responsibility , not as a means of advertising or competition , should be planned in the multi-stakeholder forum , which is a forum for discussion between all the social partners , and we hope that there will be significant female participation in it .
Mr President , far and away most of the EU 's businesses have committed themselves to social responsibility , to socially and environmentally responsible action , to the protection of people and their environment , and to security of production .
They support cultural and religious facilities , sports and clubs .
As both Commissioners have just said , though , it is and remains a prerequisite that these things should be done on a voluntary basis , something laid down in the European Parliament report back in 2003 , and , a year later , on the occasion of the founding of the Multi-Stakeholder Forum .
If you want to maintain the voluntary character of this commitment , you have to reject binding regulations and suffocating bureaucracy .
A comprehensive reporting system ought , if at all , to be expected only of large companies ; SMEs , which make up over 90 % of all companies , cannot cope with it , for they quite simply lack the human and financial resources required to give an all-round picture of their CSR .

My group 's shadow rapporteur , Mr Bushill-Matthews , has succeeded in reaching some compromises that have the effect of defusing the Howitt report , which my group in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs was right to reject .
I count it a victory that the demand for the award of public contracts to be made dependent on compliance with social and environmental clauses has been largely struck out .
Firms must be able to win a public contract even if they do not have an ecologically-correct pot of flowers in front of the factory gate and even if the menu of their works canteen does not include alternative meals .
Paragraph 11 , which calls for the setting-up of a central point of coordination for CSR , is problematic , as are paragraphs 39 and 55 , which advocate the appointment of an ombudsman for CSR .
I am opposed to any extension of enterprises ' liability and obligations to account for their corporate social responsibility , and regard such dirigiste manipulations as unacceptable .
Finally , we are talking today about an own-initiative report , one that many do not take seriously on the grounds that it is thought to be no more than a declamation .
What I say is : principiis obsta - resist that which is only just beginning !
If this House calls for some of all this to be made mandatory , then legislative measures from the Commission are no longer far away .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) A transnational company has , within its network in one of the new Member States , employed people living with handicaps as cleaners in a city struggling with social problems .
The company received subsidies from the local authorities for these employees with handicaps , thereby depleting almost the entire funding source available for this purpose .
In my view this mode of behaviour does not meet our expectations regarding corporate social responsibility .
The efforts to recover costs can and must in all cases be harmonised with social goals .
This is pointed out in Richard Howitt 's excellent report .
I would add that a favourable economic environment has since the early 1990s attracted numerous transnational companies to Central and Eastern Europe .
Certain regions of the new EU Member States continue , however , to experience multiple disadvantages .
To use a distinctive phrase : they are in a sense the European Union 's internal peripheries .
Therefore we must make it clear to transnational companies as well that their actions must follow the principle of ' think globally - act locally ' .
This will help avoid that certain regions of the Union become peripheries that only ' think globally ' .
This is why I consider Richard Howitt 's report to be important , and this is why I hope that it does not sink under arguments over formalities , but will develop its role within the European social model of CSR .
Corporate social responsibility does not simply mean avoiding doing harm , but is an ordered system for positive actions .
The question here is not whether or not certain actions can be prescribed , but rather whether they can fulfil expectations in view of a better world .
It is my belief that they can .
We can expect that they treat employees as human beings , in their entirety , with their rights , state of health and cultural and social traditions .
Richard Howitt 's report is a very important step along this path .
( ET ) I am certain that corporate social responsibility promotes sustainable development and also the improved implementation of the Lisbon Strategy in such matters as the more sensible use of natural resources , improving the results of innovation activity , the reduction of poverty , and also , of course , improved compliance with human rights requirements .
Corporate social responsibility should also act as an additional measure for the management of industry and restructuring , and act so that new areas are added to it ; for instance , lifelong learning , equal opportunities , social involvement , sustainable development , and also ethics .
Companies ' participation in such social activities must be voluntary .
If we wish to move forward towards the creation and development of traditions in the area of corporate social responsibility , it is inevitable that we follow agreed and internationally recognised principles .
We have no other framework or agreed system with which we could adequately measure companies ' activities in connection with corporate social responsibility .
Thus the creation of the institution of ombudsman would be premature and pointless at the present moment .
The imposition of a package of regulations would not have a positive effect , and would instead lead to negative counter-reactions .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his eight years of persistent activity in aiming to achieve this objective .
Thank you for giving me the floor .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Howitt on his report .
However , I am not sure that I am so happy about the deal he made with the PPE-DE Group to weaken what we will vote on tomorrow .
Yesterday I participated in a citizens ' consultation , and it is quite obvious what citizens want - they want Europe to be more active on environmental issues .
I think that last Friday 's Council was well received by citizens .
The second thing that citizens want is greater social responsibility , and I am afraid the Barroso-Verheugen Commission went in entirely the opposite direction when it took office .
So , Commissioner , you have already turned somewhat on environmental and energy issues under pressure from science and from citizens .
I hope that this report by Parliament , especially if it is not watered down too much tomorrow , will help you to reconsider your social agenda .
It was the Commission not being active enough in the multi-stakeholder dialogue that played a large part in frustrating NGOs to the extent that they left the table completely .
There are some good bits in the report which will be voted on tomorrow .
I just wanted to highlight one issue : the deletion of paragraph 63 , in which we call for global leadership from the European Union on this issue .
Why is this important ?
With more Chinese oil and mining companies investing in Africa and other areas , if Europe does not elevate corporate social responsibility from a purely European issue to a global , UN issue , our companies will lose out , so I do not understand how the PPE-DE and the PSE Groups can delete a paragraph from the original report as voted on that calls for us to be much more proactive on a global level .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate and thank Mr Howitt for his initiative and his report , and to endorse the series of amendments adopted in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
As has been demonstrated , the main problem or the main question in our debate is over whether regulation is in fact needed in this area or whether a voluntary approach will suffice .
I for one am not in favour of excessive bureaucracy and superfluous regulation .
In questions such as corporate social responsibility , however , it is clear that relying on the goodwill of businesses is simply not enough .
Otherwise , a part of the population of Europe will find itself facing an unequal situation .
I feel , though , that what is needed is a workable legal instrument that would force companies to fulfil their responsibilities not only in the social field but also in the area of protecting working conditions , health at work and the environment .
Although I warmly endorse this report , I have tabled two amendments in conjunction with members of our group , the purpose of which is firstly to sound a warning about the current situation and the problems faced by workers regarding , for example , company relocations , low salaries , precarious work and insufficient health protection at work , and secondly to express our objection to the policies proposed by the Commission in the area of social responsibility , which often do not match the goals and the principles on which corporate social responsibility should be based .
I hope we will succeed in producing not only a statement of intent , but also the practical instruments needed to take practical action .
If not , we will end up with mere window-dressing , and I believe that the citizens expect more from us than that .
Mr President , in this House we talk constantly about the Lisbon Agenda , which is supposed to make the EU the world 's most competitive knowledge-based economy by 2010 .
The Commission President , José Manuel Barroso , likes to boast about his plans to control excessive regulation to help enhance the competitiveness of European economies .
Yet this report , as originally presented , sought to create mandatory regulation of a wide range of areas of corporate activity , including employee relations and the environment .
But these areas are already heavily regulated , indeed massively over-regulated , by EU legislation already on the statute book .
What we were proposing to do here was to double up on existing regulation with all the potential for ambiguity and confusion that would have created .
Mandatory CSR would be hugely damaging to competitiveness , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises , to which we constantly pay lip-service but which we constantly seek to strangle with oppressive , intrusive and unnecessary regulation .
However , there are now agreed amendments which firmly establish the voluntary nature of CSR and I for one strongly support those amendments .
I agree with the rapporteur that we need to promote CSR , but we also need to protect the enterprise , productivity , competitiveness and wealth-creating capacity of European businesses .
We should also be aware of existing best practice of CSR amongst existing major businesses .
Last summer , I had the privilege of visiting the Gates Foundation in Seattle , which of course is run by Bill Gates of Microsoft .
This Foundation 's spending on philanthropy exceeds the GDP of a number of small countries .
Arguably , it does more to relieve poverty and hardship in Africa than EU aid does and , because it is a private sector organisation , its spending is hugely more efficient .
I believe that , with the amendments that we are proposing to put in place here , we should be able to support this report .
( PT ) Mr President , the main function of business is wealth creation , but companies are , in certain circumstances , capable of being more than merely wealth-generating machines .
Companies can also be seen as communities in which people live and interact ; people can view their company as their place of professional fulfilment , and even , in many cases , personal happiness .
Successful companies , those capable of creating wealth , are those that normally enjoy good relations with their partners , customers , suppliers and with the community in which they operate .
Successful companies are those that adopt transparency criteria in their relations with the authorities and operate on the basis of codes of conduct and ethics , which are sometimes extremely stringent .
If one were to describe companies that exist for a long time in human terms , there are companies that function with a strong personality , with a particular culture that they have managed to create and develop and that identifies them and distinguishes them from the others .
These are companies , one might say , with emotions and feelings .
Companies such as these opt to give more to the community over and above their traditional functions and thereby take on a greater responsibility ; this is what might be termed ' social responsibility ' .
I feel , however , that corporate social responsibility is not something that can be decreed or imposed , but something that must be entered into willingly .
Corporate social responsibility can never be imposed from above .
If it were , there would be a risk of reducing its role to a public relations exercise aimed at creating a smokescreen and at enabling companies to sidestep their responsibilities of addressing social and environmental issues .
In which case corporate social responsibility would be a fraud because it would be insincere .
I endorse the report before us because , in its final version , my view on the issue was ultimately taken into account .

( ES ) Mr President , I am obliged to begin by thanking Mr Howitt for his wonderful work and for his extraordinary willingness to receive the contributions that other members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have presented to him .
He is also showing great capacity and flexibility on such a complex issue , opening himself up to dialogue and agreement with other groups in Parliament .
As others have said , I believe that corporate social responsibility is good per se .
This must not lead us to think , however , that it is not possible to improve our current framework and the relatively short experience we have acquired in the European Union .
I believe that the world 's problems are increasing at a considerable speed , both environmental problems and the problems faced by people who are deprived of all kinds of rights .
I therefore believe that we must make an additional effort .
That is all Mr Howitt is asking us for in his report .
I hope that the Commission , whose Communication has had a mixed reception , not very positive in some cases , will see this as an opportunity to take more account of social responsibility .
Much can still be done , avoiding false debates on what should be voluntary and what should not .
We must continue moving forward with a view to creating criteria to make responsibility objective .
Companies will be free to adopt codes of conduct , but they cannot be free when it comes to respecting the codes of conduct that they have adopted .
There must be transparency , there must be more than philanthropy in this notion of corporate social responsibility .
We Europeans offer the world a model based on the sustainability of our economic model for us and for others .
We can go further on the control and verification of these obligations that have been taken on freely .
We have directives in the European Union . Directives that have not been transposed in the Member States on union law , on environmental responsibilities .
The Commission can make commitments and not take the laissez faire , laissez passer approach to everything .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , for a few minutes now , each of us , in turn , has been repeating the fact that we do not want the forthcoming provisions to result in so many additional constraints and regulations .
We want a commitment on the part of business leaders , we want them to be proactive , we want this proactive approach to be applied internationally , we want SMEs to commit themselves and , as the rapporteur said , above and beyond declarations , we want something concrete .
As a company director myself for over thirty years , well , I want things to be able to materialise .
With this in mind , I have a proposal for you , Commissioners .
A system is already applied internationally by hundreds of thousands of businesses .
This system coordinates the social responsibility of businesses via the ISO 9001 , ISO 14001 and ISO 18001 standards , which ensure that business relationships with customers are better , that practices are totally environmentally-friendly and that hygiene , health and safety rules are complied with in full .
Therefore , allow to me to suggest , Commissioners , the use of these three management standards with the aim of having businesses throughout our Europe genuinely assume their social responsibilities .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his work on this excellent report .
One of the key points to come out of the report is that we are not just looking at corporate social responsibility within the European Union , but beyond the Union as well , and at the behaviour of European companies elsewhere in the world - a move away from the double standards of how you operate here with one legislative framework and what you think you can get away with somewhere else .
What we have heard from the Commission on the Africa Forum is a good initiative , but we need to look much more closely at how companies behave in conflict zones .
We have the leadership on the diamond process at the moment and we need to move forward on that .
I also note from the report that voluntary reporting is now stabilising and that not all voluntary reports cover supply chain compliance , which is one of the most important mechanisms we have to drive up standards , to ensure brand protection for companies behaving well and to ensure that they avoid the actions of companies which behave irresponsibly .
I look forward to Parliament 's report on socially irresponsible corporate behaviour so that we can look at the contrast in how we work .
( PL ) Mr President , I am aware that the concept of corporate social responsibility is becoming an increasingly important part of the debate on globalisation , competitiveness and sustainable development .
According to the definition of this concept , companies voluntarily take account of the social and economic impact of the activities they undertake .
In the framework of implementation of social responsibility on a voluntary basis , companies decide to go beyond the minimum legal requirements and commitments resulting from collective agreements , in order to respond to social and environmental needs .
I should like to make it very clear , from the floor of this House , that it is precisely the voluntary basis of the action taken and of companies ' response to the notion of social responsibility that is vital .
As corporate social responsibility is based mainly on decisions taken by companies on a voluntary basis , I believe that the imposition of any kind of additional duties and administrative requirements would most probably prove counterproductive .
It would also be at variance with the principles of better legal regulation and with efforts to simplify and improve the functioning of the European Union .
It was with this in mind that I tabled 10 amendments to the text presented by Mr Howitt , and I am pleased that the spirit of these amendments has been incorporated into the compromise text proposed by the rapporteur .
I should also like to take advantage of this opportunity to underline the importance of introducing methods for the exchange of good practice concerning implementation of the notion of corporate social responsibility .
In practice this can be achieved in the framework of the European Alliance for Corporate Social Responsibility .
From the floor of the House I would like to commend the European Commission on its commitment .
The Commission recognises that the companies themselves are the main players on this stage , and has announced its support for this body , which represents a sound and open way of exchanging good practice between all types of companies be they large , small or medium-sized .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like first of all to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Howitt , on his systematic work and his constructive proposals .
The concept of corporate social responsibility seems to be more topical than ever .
On the one hand , the dramatic change in the climate , due in large part to the uncontrolled use and consumption of natural resources and , on the other hand , the worrying spread of poverty , in conjunction with the reversal of the demographic pyramid , appear to be the result of attempts to downgrade employment and overturn the social acquis .
Nonetheless , if we want to flesh out the bones of this concept , at least three preconditions need to be met : firstly , the Commission needs to take serious account of the proposals tabled by Parliament .
Secondly , it should be acknowledged that companies need to accept their responsibilities towards the environment , society and the workers which derive from their economic activity , without of course this being seen as a sacrifice on their part .
Thirdly , priority should be given to supporting investments designed to promote workers ' knowledge and the development of new technologies , especially those which are more environmentally friendly .
Both these sectors should be seen as basic pillars of corporate social responsibility .
Finally , this is an excellent opportunity to prove that the competitiveness must not be at the workers ' expense , but must go hand in glove with respect for environmental equilibria , the promotion of dignified working conditions and social progress in general .
Mr President , over the past seven years I have had the pleasure of debating CSR with Richard Howitt on and off for a considerable time .
It has , of course , been a most enjoyable experience - as it says here !
It has certainly been a challenge , but I am sure he would be the first to admit - and I see him chortling over there - that it has been a challenge for both of us .
I would like to thank him for the way that he has risen to that challenge , because clearly we have both been approaching this issue from slightly different standpoints , although in our ways , like all the other speakers , we are equally wishing to champion the cause of CSR .
I should just like to take issue on two tiny points with which he opened his comments .
Firstly , he said he was disappointed that the Commission report almost indicated that it was opting out .
I disagree with that .
I think its report was very positive and we should welcome it .
Secondly , he said that he hoped that the Commission would help bring the NGOs back to the multi-stakeholder forum table .
In fairness , it was neither the Commission nor the multi-stakeholders that encouraged them to leave .
They themselves chose to leave .
It is up to them whether they wish to come back or not .
Some of them at least had a minority view - in a democracy that is perfectly permitted .
However - if the interpreters can rise to this challenge - we should not allow the tail to wag the dog .
It is up to the NGOs to return .
I will not comment further on his speech , nor , indeed , make other comments in detail about colleagues ' speeches other than to say I am sure the President and Commissioners are aware that - with no disrespect to any of my colleagues including myself - sometimes our speeches are for different audiences because we have to impress constituents back home .
There is nothing wrong with that ; we are politicians and that is something we have to do .
However , I would invite you particularly , rather than just listen to us talk , to read what we say , to read what we are voting upon because the text is very significant .
There are some aspects I still dislike about the text .
I agree with Mrs Oviir from the ALDE Group in that I do not like the idea of an ombudsman , but it is an idea .
There are a number of ideas that I do not particularly welcome , but they are ideas and all these ideas are generally worth serious consideration .
However , the text is what is important .
I particularly invite the Commission to think of the three reports : the original report that went to committee ; the report that was amended and voted against by 15 members of the committee ; and the final report as it is likely to emerge tomorrow .
That report I believe will be very much on your side .
If I may say so , Commissioners , I think you are a great double act .
Tomorrow we will show we are a treble act and wish to follow your lead in advancing the cause of CSR .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , what seems clear first of all is that more and more companies see social and environmental responsibility as an opportunity , as an instrument for sustainable development , for growth and for creating jobs , and also as a good instrument for helping companies and workers to adapt better to the changes demanded by the globalised economy of the 21st century .
I would like to comment on two issues in particular .
Firstly , that it is clear that companies are the main players and that we must also take account of other parties such as consumers and non-governmental organisations .
Above all , however , I believe that we must take account of the central role of unions , and codes of conduct cannot replace the crucial role of unions and collective negotiation under any circumstances .
Secondly , it is clear that corporate social responsibility must be a factor that increases competitiveness , but behind the labels relating to corporate social responsibility there must be realities and not just mere propaganda .
Otherwise , we will undermine them and consumers will not trust those labels and we will stop moving towards corporate social responsibility and its capacity to create more competitive companies .
Many companies are currently making decisive efforts towards corporate social responsibility and they naturally know that it offers added value , and I am sure that those who do it in a clear and fair way will not object to it being verified by means of objective data .
( HU ) Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to welcome the report by my fellow Member Mr Howitt .
The debate concerning corporate social responsibility is a very sensitive subject on which people are divided , since we would like to ensure a strong European social environment , while at the same time wishing to enhance the competitiveness of European companies .
The current practice of corporate social responsibility , or CSR , is an excellent example of the fact that strengthening the social and environmental dimension does not necessarily mean a decline in companies ' competitiveness .
We need to strengthen the European social model , but we must avoid introducing a mandatory model based on a single pattern .
A better regulated voluntary model offers greater opportunities both to producers and to consumers , rather than new administrative burdens that are difficult to bear .
If we reinforce voluntary CSR by defining minimum standards with which we can avoid excessive increase in expenditure on the part of smaller companies , then this will be able to increase their competitiveness , provided consumers are sufficiently informed about CSR-type production and business practices .
We need to increase consumer awareness and information , as this creates a market for responsible production .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission is grateful for the constructive and frank spirit of this debate .
I would like to stress once more that Mr Howitt 's report contains numerous valuable suggestions that the Commission will be happy to take into account in the further development of its policies on CSR .
This will bring us , together , a good way further ahead .
Businesses need a clear legal framework ; they have to know what they have to do and what they must not do .
If they do not , they cannot function on the market .
Businesses have a social responsibility ; that is why there are thousands of rules , at the European level and in the Member States , compelling companies to discharge their responsibility to society .
All the legislation we have enacted - be it on the protection of consumers , health and safety at work , protection of the environment or social security benefits - is intended to compel social responsibility on the part of business and set standards that we believe absolutely have to be met .
The intellectual problem we have with the debate we are having is that I , for one , find it difficult to imagine how we are supposed to fashion a legal framework for something that is not prescribed by law .
The idea of creating a regulatory framework for CSR means that one would be enacting a law regulating how companies have to handle things that the law does not require them to handle .
That is inherently contradictory , and the Commission really did want to put this debate behind it , and , for once , to see real progress being made ; that is why , last year , we encouraged European businesses to get this Alliance for CSR up and running .
As I told you , and as you can also read in the Commission 's report that you have before you , this has already come up with some pretty remarkable ideas and initiatives .
There are two very important things - to which Mr Turmes referred - that I would like to discuss .
The first is the Multi-Stakeholder Forum , in the holding of which the Commission was heavily involved , and which made some important proposals that the Commission is taking on board .
There was very broad support for the Commission 's stance .
Some non-governmental organisations did not come on the grounds that their line differed from that taken by the Commission , and I find that a peculiar way of behaving in a democratic society - taking part in a discussion only if you are sure that everyone else is going to agree with you .
I therefore expressed regret at the non-attendance of these non-governmental organisations , which were few in number , but we want to continue to engage in dialogue with them , and I have specifically asked them to rejoin us in this work in future .
As for the global dimension , which Mr Turmes also had something to say about , the Commission is wholeheartedly supportive .
Before the end of this year , we will be staging a major conference on the subject of the international dimension of CSR , a topic that we have already broached in our dialogue with the other regions of the world , most notably with the developing economies such as China , India , Latin America and Africa , but which we are also discussing with the USA , the Japanese and other European partners , and it is a subject that we want to move forward at the global level .
Reference has been made in this debate to the existence of an ISO standard for corporate social responsibility .
Such a thing does , indeed , exist , but it is a voluntary standard ; for companies can decide for themselves whether or not they want to use it , and the good thing is that more and more European companies do , and also make use of it for marketing purposes , telling their customers - society at large - that ' we , X Ltd , act in accordance with this standard ' and they also want to be judged on that basis , for they see it as useful in terms of their market success .

I would like - and I am also speaking on behalf of my fellow-Commissioner Mr Špidla when I say this - to offer your House our continued close and constructive cooperation on this matter , and will reiterate that we have , in Mr Howitt 's report and in the debate , found many important suggestions , which the Commission will take into consideration as it continues to work on this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) Business , or entrepreneurship , is the deciding factor for the development of people and society .
Business has to consider products , organisation , marketing , design and production processes .
The key factor in business , however , is its human capital , which must always be promoted and protected , and human capital is the result of education : education about safety , trust , creativity , the ability to learn , and a taste for what is useful and beautiful .
To become competitive in the marketplace , companies need to be able to make the most of these aspects and also to exercise strong social responsibility in caring not only about their product but above all about their work and their workers .
If entrepreneurs exercise this responsibility of their own free will , it creates a virtuous circle among company , capital and work , helping them to compete effectively in the global marketplace .
Cross-border collective copyright management ( debate )
The next item is the report by Katalin Lévai , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the Commission recommendation of 18 October 2005 on collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights for legitimate online music services ( 2005 / 737 / EC ) .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking the shadow rapporteurs and other colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs for the overwhelming support they have given me .
The unanimous support of the Committee on Legal Affairs was a great honour and privilege for me .
Let me start by underlining the importance of the copyright sector , which represents 5-7 % of the EU 's GDP .
It is therefore important to ensure that copyright and neighbouring rights in this increasingly growing digital domain are managed properly to the benefit of all involved .
For this reason , I have to say that I am not at all happy with the ' soft law ' approach taken by the Commission , since it failed to involve the European Parliament and the Member States in regulating this area , which is of growing economic importance and therefore absolutely relevant to the proper functioning of the internal market .
The Commission has set a precedent in a very important and sensitive domain : by failing to consult Parliament or the Council , it has bypassed the democratic process .
I believe we all agree that the legislative triangle cannot be ignored .
I am fully committed to the preservation of European cultural diversity .
I believe that this issue should be placed in the front line of the debate .
Any potential negative effects on cultural diversity in Europe must be avoided .
The Committee on Culture and Education has done an excellent job in highlighting the undesirable implications - one could even say negative effects - for cultural diversity of the Commission 's recommendation .
As you may have noticed , the Culture Committee 's major concerns and demands , as well as compromise suggestions from all parties , are reflected in my report before you .
Summarising my report , I would like to say that my proposal preserves the reciprocal system of collecting societies in Europe , but makes sure that they all respect the principle of good governance .
We will encourage and support the introduction of competition among collecting societies in a controlled manner and not the ' big bang ' approach .
We would like to guarantee that individual rights holders can continue to join the collecting society of their choice .
We will promote the availability of the world repertoire for all collecting societies - large and small .
We will argue for solidarity and equal treatment between authors and publishers affiliated to collecting societies .
We will ensure that a few large rights holders cannot place the repertoire they control exclusively in the hands of a few large collecting societies , thereby creating an oligopoly situation in Europe .
We would like to ensure that users of music from online and mobile services can obtain a one-stop shop when seeking a licence for the whole of Europe , but prevent them from forcing down the level of remuneration for authors .
We would like to ensure that collecting societies can continue to play an indispensable role in promoting new and minority repertoire locally .
Finally , I would like to emphasise again that , by calling for a directive that reflects these objectives , we will demonstrate our overall support for strong cultural diversity in Europe .
During the improvement of the report , I tried to cooperate as closely as possible with all the interested parties - above all , the excellent shadow rapporteurs - to find the best and most balanced solution on this culturally and economically important area .
I am very grateful for their precious advice and suggestions .
My objective has been to find a good balance of interests , a balance between the necessary introduction of competition and cultural diversity , a balance between rights holders and users of music , a balance between big and small collecting societies , a balance between the big rights holders and niche authors and composers .
I have tried to propose a European solution in a very difficult and sensitive domain and I hope that it has been successful for the European Union and that we all shall benefit from it .
Mr President , honourable Members , I should like , if I may , to thank Mrs Lévai for her report on the Commission recommendation of 18 October 2005 on collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights for legitimate online music services .
I should like to point out that the catalyst for the Commission recommendation was originally authors ' fears : authors , composers and music publishers warned the Commission that they are not earning royalties from the use of their works on line .
From our analysis it is clear , however , that it is too complicated for individual countries to manage the use of copyright works on line , particularly in a digital environment .
As a result of the complex relationships between the collective management organisations ( CRMs ) policing these rights in each individual country , it seems that royalties do not reach authors and other right-holders .
The purpose of the Commission recommendation is therefore to ensure that authors , composers and music publishers do receive their fair share of online royalties .
Similarly , I believe that it is possible to improve the system of issuing licences in such a way that it facilitates the development of new online services while also protecting and providing genuine support for the interests of copyright-holders .
To put it clearly , the recommendation does not propose a concrete model for issuing licences , but puts forward the principle that when it comes to managing their online rights , right-holders should be free to choose the most advantageous and efficient form of management or licensing .
The aim therefore is to ensure that right-holders earn royalties from the online use of their music works .
This will in turn enable us to ensure complete protection for the value of the right-holders ' works .
This is in no way a race to the bottom .
This objective serves the interests of rights-holders and is reflected in the recommendation 's regulations relating to administering transparency , resolving disputes , the responsibilities of copyright managers and the balanced representation of all categories of copyright-holders on the boards of CRMs .
The Commission welcomes Parliament 's overwhelming support for this report .
Even though we are still monitoring the impact of the recommendation and gathering the opinions of the interested parties , a number of initiatives have already been put in place with a view to strengthening management .
In 2006 , for example , the world trade association of music publishers and the umbrella organisation of European associations for the collective rights of authors adopted a joint statement establishing a set of rules for online copyright management .
Various right-holders including smaller CRMs and publishers have expressed enthusiasm for the business opportunities opened up by the recommendation of online music services .
In the issuing of online service licences , the Commission sees an opportunity for the entire EU to acknowledge the value of music and to support different cultures and their musical works throughout the EU .
The creation of new markets with specific music genres and the discovery of a genuine Internet public will unquestionably help support cultural diversity .
The report calls for the Commission to propose a directive on this issue .
The Commission would note that the online market is developing and we must be extremely careful not to restrict its potential with an overly rigid approach .
What is more , as I have said before , it is only now that we are looking into what the situation will be like after the recommendation has been adopted .
I can assure everyone here that our goal is to guarantee right-holders royalties from their works and the users of rights the necessary licences in the simplest and most straightforward way .
I believe it is vital to support and preserve Europe 's cultural diversity .
The Commission will naturally keep Parliament informed .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like first of all to congratulate and thank the rapporteur , Mrs Lévai , on her excellent cooperation and the outcome of her important work in the report on collective copyright management .
It is a fact that the composition of the committee is an important step towards the future convergence of the various practices in the 27 Member States .
I consider that close cooperation between right managers must be maintained for the benefit of all sides .
In the digital age in which we live , the effective safeguarding of copyright and related rights is exceptionally important in order to limit piracy and ensure that royalties are paid to right-holders .
In its opinion , the Committee on Culture and Education approaches the protection and collective management of copyright from the side both of musical authors or lyricists and composers and interpreters .
The present regime , as regards on-line services , is considered not to be adequately effective either for right users or for right-holders .
Television and radio stations frequently fail to pay the royalties owed for the repertoire they use in their various broadcasts .
All right-holders , be they authors or composers , publishers , disc producers or performers need to be treated equally .
However , the biggest problem of the music industry today is still piracy .
The present system of mutual collective copyright management must , in my opinion , be maintained , so that competition can be established on the basis of the services which can be produced and the commission charged by collective right managers .
Finally , as we know , music is not a commodity .
That is why we all have a duty to protect and reinforce creativity in Europe .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am now speaking in my capacity as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The Commission 's recommendation for the collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights throws up a multitude of problems , for it secures neither the rights of the artists nor the diversity of the music on offer in Europe , and there are gaps in the assessment of its potential impact .
The chosen legal remedy is unacceptable ; recommending three options at the same time does not really do anything to solve the problem that Mrs Lévai has set out so clearly in her report , and which the compromise before you aims to address .
What that means in detail is a ' no ' to territorial restrictions on use , a ' yes ' to fair and controlled competition in the collective management of rights , ' yes ' to the modernisation of the online music market , but not at the expense of cultural diversity and the protection of the artists , and ' yes ' too to transparent rights management companies .
What is worthy of criticism about all this is that the Commission is trying , by means of a recommendation , to circumvent the rights of this House , and so we call upon it to present , through the codecision procedure , a proposal for a suitable legal instrument , founded , of course , on extensive consultation with all the interested parties .
Thinking forward to the forthcoming ruling on the CISAC case , I would like to appeal to the Commission not to use ' soft law ' or agreements as means of voiding Parliament 's rights of codecision , and I ask the Members of this House to give their assent to Mrs Lévai 's report .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , both the main report by the rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs , Mrs Lévai , and the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education , by Mr Mavrommatis , as well as the various speeches we have heard so far , demonstrate that there is considerable consensus amongst the Members of this Parliament with regard to the Commission 's recommendation .
Firstly , we object to the method being used . The use of a recommendation , of the instrument known as ' soft law ' at European Union level , is always very dangerous , bearing in mind that the European Union has its own legislative instruments , such as the framework directive proposed by Mrs Lévai .
Secondly , there is an objection in terms of content .
The Commission 's recommendation may already be producing undesirable effects on the shape of the intellectual property market subject to certain oligopolies , that is to say , the so-called ' majors ' , the main organisations that control radio broadcasting .
The Commission 's recommendation may encourage these ' majors ' to withdraw their repertoires from the current system of collective rights management societies , which makes it possible to safeguard rights . If that happened , the result would be that the ' minors ' , that is to say , the small organisations protecting intellectual property , would not be able to protect intellectual rights .
When it comes to culture , to music , the market is not the most important thing . The most important thing is musical production .
The culture of each of the peoples of Europe .
It is not a question of creating a great market , because in a great market the Gresham law would end up being applied , according to which bad money takes the place of good money .
In other words , we are on the point of reaching a situation of an entirely unified market , in which a few ' majors ' or very important organisations will end up monopolising the market , imposing their conditions on authors and ultimately preventing intellectual creativity in the European Union .
We therefore support the report by Mrs Lévai and the opinion of Mr Mavrommatis , and we do not believe that this is a time to approve any amendment to these reports .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I am speaking here as shadow rapporteur in the Committee on Legal Affairs on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Whilst we support the gist of the Lévai report as it was approved , we would like to add something , because the objective of the recommendation is to break the monopolies of management societies and make them more transparent thanks to the control measures that are to be put in place .
The compromise amendments are imperfect in places , lack either clarity or consistency and even restrict the scope .
Our amendments on which we will be voting tomorrow complement the approved report and aim to make it easier to break the monopolies , make the market more transparent whilst ensuring that it becomes workable and that the authors and right-holders are proven right and can collect their compensation .
In Amendment 5 , we ask the Member States to put the licences out to public tender every couple of years , just to keep the monopolistic management societies under pressure .
Their monopolies are not a problem per se , but there is no form of control at the moment .
A study by the Dutch competition authority has shown that every country uses different guiding principles .
Since they are monopolies , it is impossible to inspect them , as a result of which it cannot be verified whether the compensation requested is exorbitant or whether the government costs are exorbitant .
This should nevertheless be possible .
I hope that this will come off thanks to the amendments we tabled .
Moreover , we are seeking , by means of our amendments , to broaden the scope , since , for example , broadcasting - when we talk about transmission via the Internet , i-pods and suchlike - falls within the scope of copy broadcasting , which is now being restricted .
We should like to reintroduce this in order to come as close to the original Commission proposal as possible .
As matters stand , there has been too much in the way of listening to management societies and not enough listening to right-holders and authors .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are today debating a difficult and controversial issue .
As regards dealing with the common problem of cross-border management of copyright and related rights regulating legitimate services in the field of online music , I note the lack of Parliament 's formal involvement .
I believe this is most inappropriate particularly as the issue was already raised in the resolution of 15 January 2004 .
I also note a lack of consultation regarding future regulatory work in this area .
It is difficult to regulate the legal situation of a particular sector without becoming familiar with the stance of those concerned .
The Commission 's recommendation seeks merely to regulate the online sale of music recordings .
Owing to its imprecise wording , however , it could also be applied to other online services such as broadcasting services .
The aforementioned lack of precision could lead to uncertainty as to the applicability of various systems of issuing reviews .
All this could result in a lack of legal certainty and detrimental effects , especially for online broadcasting services .
There is also a risk that rightholders complying with the aforementioned recommendation in respect of their interactive online rights would deprive local collective management of copyright entities of other rights such as those relating to broadcasting , thus preventing users from acquiring user rights for a broader and more diversified repertoire from the same collective management of copyright entity .
Rightholders should have the possibility of benefiting from protection of copyright and related rights wherever those rights are established for the whole period of their validity , regardless of national boundaries or of the way they are used .
A multi-territorial licence system should therefore be established .
This would ensure greater legal protection for commercial users in relation to their activity and support the development of legitimate online services , at the same time increasing the flow of income for copyright holders .
The freedom to provide cross-border collective management services means that rightholders have a Community-wide free choice of collective management of copyright body , which is essential for the provision of legitimate online music services .
This right includes the possibility of entrusting rights to another collective management of rights body or transferring all or some of the online rights , regardless of the European Union country concerned .
I believe that increased but also controlled competition in the area of collective management of copyright and related rights in the music sector on the Internet may prove beneficial to all .
Pursuant to the Committee on Culture and Education 's stance , it may also serve to support cultural diversity but only on condition that fair principles and transparency are guaranteed .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is not just about lofty conceptions of competition or the free choice of artists , or about the inadequacies of the rights management company system ; this is quite clearly about diversity , about the reduction of the market to mass production , or about the upholding of the European quality of diversity .
Yes , there are inadequacies , and they do have to be done away with , but I do not believe it is at all possible to do that in the way the Commission has tried to .
This report has occasioned a great deal of activity on the part of the lobbyists .
We got loads of letters ; I am sure you got some too , perhaps from ' Writers and Composers for Choice ' , but , if you read that letter and look at the signatures , you cannot be sure that all the artists actually know what they are supposed to have signed .
I know people whose names appear on this list , but had not the least idea that their names were being used by an organisation in a letter of this sort .
That shows the efforts of a number of rights management companies that want to create a monopoly for themselves in a poor light .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's approach , the result of which is the recommendation on collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights for legitimate online music services , is unfortunately further evidence of the unacceptable , and indeed completely needless , circumvention of the democratic decision-making process as regards the role of the European Parliament .
I should like to highlight a number of points in the report before us , which broadly speaking I welcome and on which I congratulate the rapporteur and those who worked with her .
In particular , I wish to highlight the need for the equitable treatment of all rights-holders and the protection of the system of agreements and the free choice of licences as well as higher levels of protection for right-holders .
As regards the issue of future competition , attention should be paid to the possible misuse of monopolies when it comes to the collective management of authors ' rights .
The more we speak about economic competition across the whole spectrum of intellectual property rights , the more it is vital for that competition to be regulated , controlled and fair .
I am highlighting this because provisions aimed at protecting economic competition in the area of intellectual property rights have been extensively applied , and in a number of cases competition is given precedence over the exercise of those rights .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Lévai for her constructive cooperation on the report and the EU observer for its useful conference on creative rights .
I should also like to thank Pia Raug who , instead of just giving up , convinced the majority of us .
A year ago , the arts were in danger of losing out to the market .
People in the Commission were used by multinational companies to implement what is known as a soft-law instrument , which would never have got by elected representatives .
Tomorrow , we shall have a large majority in favour of the arts in all their diversity , and the Commission will then withdraw its threats of legal action against copyright managers and shelve its communication on the music market .
Writers , composers and users are to be listened to , then .
A fresh start should be made with a proposal for a directive that we in the European Parliament too are involved in negotiating .
The vast majority of Members of the European Parliament want to ensure an all-round supply of music .
We shall never allow the supply to be determined by a handful of multinational companies .
We also want to ensure that less visible artists can find their public .
As consumers , we will not be satisfied with popular music from only the biggest countries .
Nor will we let the multinationals ' friends in the Commission expropriate KODA and other copyright law companies that , every day , make great efforts to ensure the accessibility and equal treatment of music intended for both a broad and a more restricted audience .
All users can now be satisfied with one contract with one agency , which then settles up with the others .
The system is basically sound but requires more administrative transparency in places .
As music users we are happy to pay a fair price to writers and composers , but we want to pay as little as possible to bureaucrats and multinational giants .
The Lévai report is a balanced one and does Parliament credit .
( PT ) I shall begin by saying that I am an associate member of the Sociedade Portuguesa de Autores ( Portuguese Authors ' Society ) , the Portuguese collective rights management society ( CRM ) in this area .
The report by Mrs Levai and Mr Mavrommatis deserves to be adopted .
The freedom for authors and composers to be represented by the CRM of their choice is as fundamental a principle as the ban on major publishers entering into exclusive agreements with CRMs .
The mandate granted by a major publisher to a given CRM should also be able to be granted to any other CRM . That mandate should , moreover , only be able to include the centralisation of licensing for multinational companies , with the licences for national companies remaining the responsibility of local CRMs .
The availability of the global repertoire should be preserved for all collective management societies through licences issued to users . For this reason , as the report says , it is vital to prohibit any form of exclusive mandate between the major right-holders and the collective management societies for the direct collection of royalties in all Member States , given that this would lead to the rapid extinction of national societies .
The network of national societies should be preserved so that they all have access to the global repertoire and everything possible must be done to safeguard cultural diversity , in view of the indispensable contribution made by these national societies via what they do in their respective countries .
That being said , it is at least bizarre that a recommendation by the Commission has been deemed to be the right way to address the issue of CRMs , not least because , according to the Commissioner , the Commission is not yet au fait with the current state of affairs .
The Commission will hopefully welcome the call , in one of the recitals in the report , for it to draw up a proposal for a directive . After all , it is clear that given what is at stake this proposal must be implemented as quickly as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank Mrs Lévai for her report and for the hard work that she has done , but what a shame that Parliament had to grab at this report , otherwise it would have passed us by .
I want to add my voice to the choir of those who have already complained about the process , about the choice of method .
The Commission has the right to choose a recommendation , but it is a political choice and it has two effects .
First of all , in an area like this a soft law instrument may unfortunately give rise to uncertainty , to a lack of legal clarity , but more importantly it avoids this House .
It avoids democracy .
That cannot be acceptable and I think this is our biggest complaint , not so much about the content , but the way in which this has been done in an attempt avoid the legislator .
It seems to me even more startling , having participated in the last mandate of this Parliament , when we had a colleague , Mercedes Echerer , who spent months , even years , working on an own-initiative report in this area .
Parliament 's interest in and commitment to this issue were well known , so to find ourselves coming back and being faced with a mere recommendation , with all its difficulties , faults and inconsistencies , is just not good enough .
I apologise for not having addressed the substance , but it is the process which concerns me most .

( FR ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Lévai and Mr Mavrommatis for their excellent proposals .
This report is timely because intellectual and artistic property is now being called into question in the European Union .
On the undoubtedly legitimate grounds of the technology revolution , which is profoundly changing the way in which we access artistic creations and cultural assets , the Commission has been proposing for some months to reduce the pay of authors , composers , performers and all rightholders in general .
It fully supports the view shared by manufacturers and consumers that online distribution can be free of charge .
I condemn this deadlock , this illusion of free online services .
If creators and performers are no longer paid by copyright and related rights , one day there will no longer be any creation , any new music , or any new films .
What will we put on the network then ?
We were able to stop the draft Commission recommendation , which attacked the system of compensation for private copying , but it is still on the table .
In each of our countries , we have transposed the 2001 Directive and safeguarded the status of rightholders .
The Commissioner for Competition has decided to put a stop to the territorial scope of national collective rights management societies .
The recommendation on the collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights for online music comes under the same dangerous concept .
It has also had a harmful impact , since the German and British societies have created one joint society to which a very important record producer has entrusted the exclusive rights to its international catalogue .
Mrs Levai is therefore right to challenge the Commission option , which relies more on an inadequate consultation process .
Her proposal , which safeguards local repertoires , does seem to us , however , to be a little too favourable to distributors and thus carries the risk of dumping , to the detriment of rightholders .
However , I hope that this report , in its current form , is adopted so that the Commission knows that , where very sensitive areas are concerned , the European Parliament refuses to see European law escape the legislator and wants all points of view to be taken into consideration without bias .
This is also what is meant by cultural diversity .

- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too - just like Mrs Wallis - remember the last mandate of this Parliament , for this House has always had its problems with the rights management companies ; I would refer the House back to the Echerer report , in which we demanded of the Commission a specific piece of legislation on their transparency and the regulation of them , to the Zimmerling report , in which this featured , and to the deliberations on the directive on copyright and related rights in the information society .
For those reasons alone it is perfectly right and proper that the Commission should be giving thought to how this problem should be handled , for it is not tolerable , in the long run , that there should be twenty-seven monopolies in this field and no internal market , but nor do we want these twenty-seven monopolies to be replaced by a few oligopolies , and that much became abundantly clear from the deliberations we had in committee .
I want , though , to take this opportunity to make it clear that rights management companies do not exist for their own sake alone ; they are a sort of necessary evil , existing where they are needed , as mediators between those who create the product and those who use it .
Where that is not required - and such a situation is indeed conceivable - no rights management company is needed .
What I have learned , though , from many discussions and hearings - and not least from these companies lobbying activities - is that this business is much more complicated than we had originally thought .
In the course of the process , a lot of stakeholders changed their minds ; the big management companies suddenly decided that they were all for liberalisation , because they worked out that the market would give them the chance to form an oligopoly , while many users suddenly changed their minds and decided against all-out liberalisation , in which they saw more drawbacks than benefits for themselves .

What is needed here , quite simply , is the very careful drafting of any proposal for legislation ; it is self-evident that we have to do something about this , and that things cannot carry on the way they are , but our expectation is that the Commission should actually produce that proposal , and that we should then be able to get to grips with it with all the ways and means afforded by parliamentary debate .
That is the crucial message that this report carries , and that is also what we expect of the Commission .
My thanks go to the rapporteur and to the shadow rapporteurs .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( FR ) As far as boosting the growth of online music services within Europe is concerned , we agree with the Commission on the fact that the development of these services hinges on a change in the systems of collective management and of the granting of copyright licences at Community level .
Indeed , these improvements have become necessary as a result of the emergence of new services such as Internet radio , streaming and downloading services for which a fee must be paid .
The absence of a copyright licence in the EU has been one of the obstacles preventing new Web-based music services from reaching their full potential .
However , the European institutions must legislate with caution on collective management systems , which are highly complex .
In particular , they should keep a very close eye on the excesses of a system in which the freedom of rightholders to freely choose a management society within the EU would result in a concentration of rights and would undermine cultural diversity .
In this regard , we endorse the majority of the rapporteur 's comments , together with the idea that a rights manager must be authorised to supply commercial users with a pan-European , multi-repertoire licence for the online use of musical repertoires , throughout the EU .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Lévai , and congratulating her on her work on the European Parliament resolution before us today .
Technical progress and the development of our civilisation have resulted in the emergence of a new generation of cross-border commercial copyright users .
They are the suppliers of Internet music services .
This shows how the market in copyright and related rights is evolving and developing , which further confirms the need for the initiatives taken in this area .
The proper development of the European music market calls for a study to be undertaken on the impact of multi-territorial and multi-range licences for online music services and of the effects related to the socio-economic situation of the rightholders .
It is also important to ensure that the European market in online music services is able to develop freely without detriment to European cultural diversity .
The European Parliament resolution before us today deserves our support .
Nonetheless , it is essential for the Commission to undertake an in depth study of this problem .
The results of the study should be submitted to the European Parliament .
In addition , I should like to point out that as we engage in this debate we should also bear in mind how we might respond to future needs resulting from the nature of collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights .
Prudential assessment of acquisitions and increase of shareholdings ( debate )
The next item is the report by Wolf Klinz , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 92 / 49 / EEC and Directives 2002 / 83 / EC , 2004 / 39 / EC , 2005 / 68 / EC and 2006 / 48 / EC as regards procedural rules and evaluation criteria for the prudential assessment of acquisitions and increase of shareholdings in the financial sector C6-0298 / 2006 .

Mr President , honourable Members , I should like to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and in particular Mr Klinz for his excellent report on prudential assessments in the financial sector and for the amount of effort that has gone into achieving a common position between the three institutions .
We share Mr Klinz 's view that this proposed directive will make the whole approach to acquisitions in the financial sector more effective .
We must clearly ensure that commercial decisions on acquisitions in the financial sector are clearly and transparently vetted by the relevant body .
Legitimate commercial decision-making must not be frustrated by overzealous bodies or by political interference .
Where both the acquirer and his target are under inspection , the bodies responsible must work together , exchange information and help each other out .
This will serve to speed up the assessments process .
It is frequently said that we should not indiscriminately open our doors to the invasion of capital from third countries or to the takeover of our institutions by big business .
I firmly believe that even though we have to protect the interests of our markets , our institutions and our consumers , we must continue to honour our commitments in international forums such as the WTO .
We must also ensure that our trading partners also honour their commitments .
The current state of affairs is most encouraging .
Several institutions based in the EU have successfully penetrated third countries where they have concluded mergers and takeovers in the financial sector .
At the same time , however , we should not overlook problems in the EU , where organisations from some Member States have faced problems relating to the acquisition of firms in other Member States .
The purpose of this directive is neither to encourage nor to discourage acquisitions in the financial sector .
Our objective must not be to disturb the normal functioning of the market .
We must ensure , however , that there is a solid framework in place leading to the assessment , and then the approval or rejection , of potential acquisitions .
The key point here is that prudential assessments must not become the mere exercise of discretionary powers , as this would result in delays and obstructions and would be ineffective and uneconomic .
Also covered in the report are issues of hostile as opposed to friendly takeovers .
Hostile takeovers are part and parcel of the normal functioning of the market .
The Commission believes that the authorities should adopt a position in favour of such initiatives or against them .
Irrespective of whether an initiative is friendly or hostile , the decision rests with the shareholders .
There need to be willing sellers in any acquisition .
If , according to the directive , the prudential criteria have been met , there is no reason to query the value of agreements between willing purchasers and sellers .
To summarise : clear , fair and predictable approaches and processes are of vital importance to the proper functioning of the internal market .
I believe that with this directive we will remove the current ambiguity .
Thank you for your attention .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , representatives of the Council and the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , after a mere six months , the Council , the Commission and Parliament have come to an agreement on the revision of the directive on the prudential assessment of acquisitions and increase of shareholdings in the financial sector .
It is thanks to the prompt work of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and to the purposeful trilogue negotiations that it will be possible to complete this dossier before spring is out , on the assumption that ECOFIN , on 27 March , agrees to it .
That is visible evidence to the public that Europe , even with twenty-seven Member States , is capable of taking action and capable of taking important decisions quickly , even - as the Commissioner has just described - with a complex dossier such as this one .

It is for that reason that I should like , at the beginning of my speech , to briefly thank all those concerned for their good cooperation , especially the shadow rapporteurs Mr Purvis and Mr Muscat , the chairman of the Committee Mrs Berès , and all those Members who have helped to make it a matter of probability that the directive will , tomorrow , be adopted by all of us , from whatever political grouping , in a block vote .
I would also like to highlight the constructive cooperation with the representatives of the Mediterranean states , whom we have been able to convince that their concerns about the fragmented shareholder structure that is so widespread in their countries have been taken into account .
Last of all , I extend warm thanks to the Finnish and German Presidencies of the Council and to the Commission , which have competently accompanied our project and ensured smooth cooperation .
We need this revised directive .
In the past , on more than one occasion , individual enterprises have failed to acquire shareholdings in other countries or to take over whole companies in them , simply for lack of an unambiguous legal framework that would have laid down uniform assessment criteria and hence a uniform procedure for the supervisory authorities .
That will now change .
The object of the draft directive put forward by the Commission last autumn is greater legal certainty , undoubted reliability and clearly-demarcated decision-making processes , and , since all the interested parties are agreed on these , we have therefore supported it .
All three institutions - the Commission , the Council and Parliament - believe that this is the direction in which we must go and that the highest possible degree of harmonisation is needed if people in all the Member States of the European Union are to be able to participate in the market under what really are equal conditions .
Nevertheless , there were , inevitably , differences of opinion on one point or another , particularly as regards the test period or what alternative courses of action might be available if the decision turned out to be negative , that is to say if the application for the acquisition of a shareholding or for the takeover of a whole business were to be turned down .
It did , however , eventually prove possible , through negotiations , for these problems to be resolved and for us to reach a consensus .
In future , then , cross-border mergers of credit institutions , insurance companies and investment firms will be made increasingly easier , and there are four reasons why this is the case .
Firstly , the supervisory authorities will , in future , have at most sixty days in which to rule on an increase in a holding .
That period will be able to be interrupted only once , and for a period of twenty days , for the purpose of obtaining further information when the potential acquirer is from another EU Member State , or for thirty days if from a third country .
Distinguishing in this way between companies from the EU and those from third countries takes account of the fact that the latter 's supervisory and market structures are often not identical with those in the European Union , and that European authorities are therefore not always fully informed about circumstances in those countries .
It follows that the supervisory authorities must be allowed more time in which to obtain and evaluate specific information , while the companies from third states also need more time in which to prepare , translate and submit such information .
The different suspension periods make both these things possible without breaking WTO rules .
Secondly , the five test criteria are unambiguous and final , and they enable the Member States to use them to define the list of specific information that the potential acquirer must submit , which must include the mode of acquisition of the shareholding and the nature of the potential acquirer , so that less information will need to be sought in the event of straightforward and clearly understandable increases in holdings than in the case of those that are more complex and may involve more than one sector .
The intention is that , two years following the entry into force of this directive , the Commission will conduct a review to establish whether the requests for information are relatively similar across the Member States or whether a divergence is becoming apparent , and it may well be that the Commission will have to intervene and ensure that no such divergences occur .
Thirdly , as the Commissioner has said , the supervisory authorities are required to cooperate closely , although it is specifically laid down that the final decision rests with the authority with jurisdiction over the targeted company , and it is this authority that must also give the reasons for any adverse decision .
It is not planned that the publication of those reasons be made mandatory , but the company whose plans for acquisition were thus turned down will be able to demand it .
It is equally possible that individual Member States will publish the reasons in accordance with their own laws .
Fourthly , the Commission wanted , for the purposes of ascertaining compliance with the directives , to have direct access to the documentation , but that we refused .
Our reason for doing so is that the directive will , in future , make for greater legal certainty and clarity .
I am firmly persuaded that this will amount to a further step closer to more cross-border consolidations and hence to an increasing integrated internal market .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Klinz for all his valiant work in getting this agreed .
Although we support the compromise with the Council , it does water down the Commission 's original intent and , frankly , the Commission 's original text would have been better in our view .
Mr Klinz , as I say , strove valiantly to keep as close as possible to the original intent and to improve on it .
My group would have been happy to have tightened it , with more transparency and less wriggle room for protectionists .
The Commission 's original deadline of 30 days for a prudential assessment has been extended up to a possible 90 days for non-EU acquirers , but the crucial point here is that at least there will be an absolute deadline .
Thus , we can hope to avoid situations where a protectionist regulator can block a takeover by delaying tactics .
In the interests of transparency , we would have preferred disclosure of the reasons for a supervisor 's decision , and this would have helped to develop a body of precedent and common practice around the EU .
Sadly , there is a continuing preference in some Member States for secrecy .
Once again , the threat of hedge funds was raised in the context of amendments tabled by my group , which were designed to avoid difficulties for investment managers .
We must get away from this knee-jerk reaction to hedge funds and private equity funds .
They are helping to improve our economy just because they are active and demanding shareholders .
I hope now that supervisors will be persuaded to work more and more closely together , exchanging information and building up relationships of trust .
It is in their own interest and , more importantly , it is in the interests of the financial services industry and of the whole EU economy .
We are working towards a more open and competitive European market in financial services .
This particular result is not all that I and my group would have wished .
The fault for this lies mostly with the Council of Ministers , but we will be watching to see that it is operated in a proper spirit , rather than using every possible loophole and ambiguity to obstruct it .
We must turn lip-service to the Lisbon Agenda into action , and this is one small step in that direction .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( MT ) The obvious result of this work is that we now have a clear timetable for how long regulators will take to carry out a procedure in the field of takeovers , and I believe that the remarkable result we have achieved is due to the excellent work of Mr Klinz and to the work we did together .
As with any compromise , we would obviously have all liked some things to have happened differently .
However , I feel that we have achieved a very good result .
I wholly agree with Mr Purvis that we now have a specific number of days at the end of which a decision will be taken regarding takeovers , and this is the greatest achievement that has taken place during these negotiations .
I also believe we have improved on the work of the Commission because we are giving the regulators the time needed to do their work .
It is futile to try to exert pressure in order to shorten the amount of time required to take a decision if this ultimately leads to a situation of more haste , less speed .
In this field , I believe that regulators , especially the small ones with fewest resources , must be given all the time they need in order properly to come to considered decisions on important matters such as this .
I believe that this is an extremely judicious step towards achieving a transparent and European perspective in this field .
Finally , although it is , unfortunately , technically impossible to include them in this legislation , the aspects we must take into consideration in advance include the social and corporate governance perspective in the field of takeovers .
This is not strictly related to the field of legislation , but it is an area that our citizens are asking us to consider in depth .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his good work and support the ideas expressed by many colleagues . However , I would also like to mention another aspect , quite often forgotten , especially by members of our Commission ; namely , that we are talking about a process that is not new .
Financial groups are already operating in the European Union , and we know that for the uniform development of each country 's market we have to ensure that these major groups do not crowd smaller enterprises out of the market , as these are the innovators and they are not in a position to trample the interests of consumers .
I can give you an example of my own country , where the major financial groups are so well established that they make profits of 90 % , which clearly demonstrates that customers are suffering .
In other words , when making decisions about company acquisitions and takeovers and the formation of new financial groups , we must let the supervising bodies assess the structure of these groups and the extent to which these new financial groups will be amenable to innovation and will manage to respect their clients ' needs .
We surely cannot overlook the fact that , while we are currently occupied with the activities of financial groups , they have still not clearly specified what would happen if one of their subsidiary firms in one country or another were not operating effectively , and , let us say , it were to go bankrupt .
We still have no reply as to who would compensate the clients .
I think this is a complex problem , one that has to do with organising better supervision .
Therefore , an essential part of the process is the supervision of mergers and capital enlargement in the financial market in such a way that it would be possible to defend the interests of small enterprises and consumers .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I too would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Klinz , for today 's outcome is a very positive one , in that it was achieved rapidly through the good cooperation of the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
The reason why a speedy result was necessary was that at the nation state level , there is an increase in protectionism , not only in the financial sector but also in others , for any Member State will be pleased if a company based there can invest in another country and take over businesses in it , but heaven help a company from another country that tries to do likewise ; that is when they pull out all the stops and get tough , not only in the financial sector , but also in energy , as we have seen , for example , with Endesa and E.ON.
That is why action to deal with this became necessary .
I am glad that it was possible to agree on criteria and deadlines , but I have my misgivings about the role played in the debate by the supervisory bodies , who , back in the days of the ' Basel II ' debate , had not done very much to clarify how they were supposed to monitor the integration of financial markets .
In saying this , I am certainly not advocating a European supervisory body , but , given the way the supervisory bodies in Europe have organised things , their primary interest is in staking out their national boundaries , and so the first move should come from us at the European level , and from the Commission , with an invitation being extended to the supervisors to engage in dialogue on the subject .

I would also like to say something about hedge funds , which Mr Purvis has already mentioned ; although I agree with him wholeheartedly that these should not be demonised , I would like to see discussions - which I believe should include other parts of the world in particular - about the need for the Commission to act in this area , to conduct a one-off evaluation - of the kind that has become a permanent feature in other areas - of how hedge funds should be handled , of how the utterances from the Bundesbank and the European Central Bank on the stability of the financial markets should be understood , and to make a presentation on the subject .
Having heard what this House has had to say to the Commission , I get the impression that someone is now refusing to put in the work , and I would be delighted if someone were to pick up this ball and make progress in this area .
Commissioner Špidla , there seem to be a lot of proposals being made in your area of responsibility , so perhaps you can fire up Commissioner McCreevy with the ambition to do likewise .
( ES ) Mr President , cross-border issues and the acquisition of shares in banks , insurance and investment companies are less than in other sectors .
One barrier is the uncertainty in the procedures for prudential assessments before national supervisors , given the lack of criteria on the unity of the acquirer and the detailed regulation of the procedures .
The proposed directive deals with these problems and harmonises their treatment .
The amendments approved in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs make the requirements clearer , facilitate supervisory action , protect confidentiality and improve control .
Their result in general is positive and I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Klinz .
One sensitive issue is that , in cases of great dilution of property with low participation , great influence can be achieved .
We have therefore defended the obligation to notify any significant participation and we support the idea of the Member States being able to set a transparency threshold of less than 10 % for receiving information and determining its existence .
Mr President , like all my colleagues before me , I too would like to thank our rapporteur Mr Klinz .
All in all , we can be satisfied with the outcome of this directive .
It supports a valuable aim : facilitating consolidation of the financial sector in Europe .
Without fluid financial markets , other forms of market integration will fail .
The financial world must show the way ; it cannot be prevented from making decisions about investments and mergers by arbitrary restrictions , as has been the case until now .
From now on , the rules for national authorities will have to be transparent and strictly prudential in nature , and I am hopeful that they will stick to the letter of what has been agreed .
No more pseudo-prudential protectionism , please !
The decision by the competent authority on approval or rejection of the action should be as swift and as expedient as possible .
Just as has now been agreed in the directive , we are in favour of very tight deadlines for decisions .
Furthermore , actions which target investment gains first and foremost , and which do not alter ownership structures , need not arouse the kind of national fears we are seeing in the market .
Consolidation in the financial sector should , as far as possible , be about market incentives and conditions , not political considerations .
On the aggregation of holdings , let us also remain faithful to what has been agreed .
If the decisions on holdings are made by independent investment entities , there is no need to aggregate holdings inside one group of companies .
We have conglomerates in this market and we need to guarantee that independent actors can act freely .
This also concerns the hedge funds mentioned by my colleagues .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Community action on the provision of cross-border health care ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on Community action on the provision of cross-border health care , by Karl-Heinz Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety B6-0013 / 2007 ) .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I am not sure whether I can say that we have come a long way since we first discussed this issue , but I can certainly say that we are on the right track .
You will remember that our first discussion on this issue was even before the final outcome of the Services Directive .
Parliament requested that a proposal on healthcare and health services should be brought forward and I promised that , as soon as the Services Directive was sorted out , I would do so .
That is what I did last September in bringing forward this proposal .
Many issues have been described already and I will try not to repeat them .
However , we tried to maintain , firstly , the special character of health , healthcare and health services in the European Union and to meet the challenge not only of achieving the social objectives , but also of benefiting from the internal market .
It is true that the Court set out the parameters and the rights in its judgment , but I believe that those rights should be seen not as a problem , but as an opportunity and I tend to agree with that part of the motion for a resolution .
We have the realities before us , as described by the European Court of Justice .
The point now is how to make them work for the benefit of patients , the Member States , national health systems and providers .
We can do this not only for patient mobility , but also for all other aspects of cross-border healthcare .
I agree that the ultimate target must be that a European citizen should be able to receive the best healthcare where he or she lives .
We should meet our aim of ensuring equality of health in the European Union .
However , we know that this is a long-term objective and also that , under certain circumstances , it may not be possible , feasible or even desirable , depending on the financial , as well as - most importantly - the scientific aspects .
Sometimes , we will still need to make use of the cross-border possibilities of healthcare .
As I have said , we launched the initiative in September 2006 .
The idea was to have a broad consultation , which ended on 31 January 2007 .
In the communication we described and analysed all the problems and issues , which are complicated .
We have to follow a step-by-step approach .
We will need a package to sort out and deal with all the aspects of cross-border healthcare , but that does not mean that we have to wait until they are all resolved before we present a proposal : we can do that in phases .
We are now in the process of analysing the contributions .
We have had more than 270 from the Member States , from regional and local authorities , and from European national and regional organisations , representing patients , healthcare providers , health professionals , social security institutions , health insurance , universities , and hospitals , and even from individual citizens .
Although I do not want to prejudice the results of the in-depth analysis , it must be said that the first assessment confirms the need for Community action to address the range of issues set out in the consultation paper , for example , legal certainty and support for cooperation between health systems .
In addition , even though there are many different views on the details of specific aspects , the overall picture is clear : there seems to be potential added value for patients , professionals and health systems overall from some form of Community action on health services .
The Commission is in the process of analysing a summary of the report on all the contributions already published on our website .
A summary report of the contributions will be drafted to provide an idea of the views and ideas sent in and should be available this spring .
However , the views and the input of the European Parliament are extremely important to us and will be a determining factor .
We will ensure that any future proposals on health services under this initiative are consistent with ongoing work on services of general interest and , of course , on the ongoing modernisation of the regulations on the coordination of social security systems .
There has to be coherence and coordination among all these initiatives .
On the basis of the consultation and its outcome , the Commission plans to bring forward practical proposals later in 2007 .
Our aim is to find a solution which provides real added value without creating more red tape and which respects the principle of subsidiarity .
Mr President , Commissioner , we remember all of the debates that we had in our Parliament , during the debate on the Services Directive , to exclude health services .
We felt that health was not a service like any other and that it was absolutely crucial to talk about it in a different way and , above all , not to regard health services merely as being an internal market .
Through its policies , the European Union is encouraging people to move around , and that inevitably has consequences for healthcare .
It obviously has consequences for health professionals , who have demands in relation to legal certainty , and , of course , for patients , who are anxious to receive quality care .
Hence there are a number of problems , as my colleague , Mr Bowis , has pointed out : language problems , the problem of monitoring care , the problem of the accountability of health professionals and of the quality of care .
I think it important to say that patient mobility must not under any circumstances lead to the dumping of health systems , or make health care less secure .
That is absolutely crucial .
Nor must the mobility of patients and health professionals create two categories of patient : those who can access other types of health care on the other side of the border and those who cannot .
It would therefore be interesting to further develop harmonised health indicators at European level .
The same goes for the completion of more exhaustive studies , which would enable us to better understand local needs and to do more to target those members of the public who are likely to seek treatment in another Member State , so that we can provide the most suitable legislative solution .
To do that , we need a mechanism for gathering data and for exchanging information among national authorities .
Finally , we need to keep a close eye on the current excesses with regard to self-diagnosis and self-medication via the Internet , which knows no bounds .
It is vital that we concern ourselves with patient information and have a genuine European label so that patients using the Internet can be provided with a viable form of security and information .
Commissioner , rest assured that you will have our full support and trust for the proposal that you will submit to us shortly .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , you know from our discussion in committee that this issue is extremely important for myself and for the PSE Group .
We see health services as one of the pillars of the European social model , and the underlying values of that model - universality , access to good quality care , equity and solidarity , to ensure that services are provided on the basis of need and not the ability to pay - are fundamental to us and to that model .
We feel that any initiative you take on cross-border healthcare should be built on these principles .
It should be about healthcare for all and not about market opportunity for some providers .
I think many other colleagues from different groups have already said this .
Mr Bowis talked about the legal certainty that is needed in a range of areas .
These are the questions that people write and ask me about .
They have heard about their rights , they are not sure how they can exercise them , so yes , we want a clear legal framework for patient mobility and for the movement of professionals , not just to give them rights , but so that citizens know that those healthcare professionals are properly qualified , are fit to practise and that information is shared between Member States .
Finally , Commissioner , you said that you recognised that healthcare has a special character .
The health ministers agreed a set of values and principles in June last year , and I wonder whether you will be taking that on board when you draw up your proposals later this year ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , we strongly support the Commission 's consultation efforts and the European Parliament resolution outlining the main priorities for public health in the future Community framework .
But we should think and plan more broadly : the final goal of future legislation should be better health for European citizens , not only when they cross the border , because by then it might be too late .
In addition to the resolution , I would like to call for your support on the following : basic standards for healthcare should be agreed in order to guarantee patients ' safety and the quality of healthcare ; the introduction of a common classification of health services , without interfering with Member States ' competences on organisation , will create transparency for both patients and the financial institutions ; and the ' one-stop shop ' approach to be introduced in the Member States ' health administrations will facilitate patients ' choice and the right to complain .
The last issue I wish to emphasise is crucial for the full functioning of any new legislative framework on patients ' rights : a common charter on patients ' rights should be included in the future Community framework .
Patients should be able to exercise their rights in the European Union regardless of the ownership of medical facilities , national social security schemes , organisational management of the national health systems or whether medical treatment is provided in the home country or in another Member State .
All this is needed for a new European regulatory healthcare framework that would contribute to improving access to the best quality healthcare and to ensuring the safety and rights of all public and private patients in Europe , with particular consideration given to ethnic minorities - for example the Roma population - as well as refugees , migrants and the homeless .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Commissioner , the fact that thought is being given to cross-border patient mobility is , in itself , a good thing , but patient mobility , however , is entirely different from the mobility of commercial health services .
These terms are too often mixed up .
Discussion of patient mobility should not in any event lead to the national healthcare systems being undermined or to Member States passing the buck in an attempt to make their own health care systems reliable , whether in terms of quality or quantity .
Nor should it lead to the liberalisation of the healthcare market or force patients out of their own countries to seek care .
Patient mobility is a patient right and should certainly not become the excuse for applying the Services Directive to healthcare services .
This House has taken a clear stand against this and would be robbed of its credibility if it were now to take a different line .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , as I have only been allocated one minute 's speaking time on the subject of cross-border healthcare , I shall be brief .
I simply wanted to point out that , although this brings real benefits to a specific group of patients who are in a position to choose treatment in different Union countries , there are also unfortunately very negative consequences for certain healthcare systems , as well as for many patients from the poorer Member States .
These patients ' access to health services is restricted because of doctors ' migration or for financial reasons .
For the wealthy old Member States of the Union , the priority is to improve the development , competitiveness and security of their own healthcare systems , which are described as European .
The aforementioned countries take no account of the resulting costs to be borne by other far poorer countries .
One cannot fail to notice in particular that the rich are becoming richer and safer , whilst the poor are becoming ever poorer .
In addition , all this is being described in terms of sustainable development , equal rights and opportunities or as part of the principle of subsidiarity .
The latter has had a regrettable consequence for European citizens , namely that the lot of the rich and strong is improving at the expense of the poor and weak .
( SK ) I regret to say that I regard the Commission 's communication on healthcare services as unsatisfactory .
The Commission has failed to come up with adequate and specific proposals for coordinating healthcare provision , since such service provision falls under the purview of national authorities .
Furthermore , the communication unequivocally defends the notion that healthcare services should be regulated by the principle of free movement of goods .
In this regard I would like to emphasise that patients are not goods and healthcare professionals are not the same as other service providers .
The European Parliament subscribed to that principle some time ago , as it excluded healthcare provision from the Services Directive .
Despite the fact that cross-border health services only account for about 1 % of healthcare provision , the Commission 's communication focuses on patient mobility , cost refunds , etc .
One should realise , however , that patients are not small-time traders and that patients do not seek healthcare abroad in order to generate savings but because such care is not available at home .
It is therefore , quite unacceptable that Article 95 , which regulates the free movement of goods , should be the sole legal basis of the future directive .
The Commission should focus on other pressing problems in the European Union .
For instance , on why the mortality rate due to colon cancer is 40 % higher in Slovakia than in Sweden or on how the EU could contribute to improving healthcare quality , for example through the use of structural fund allocations more efficiently for healthcare purposes .
I only wish patients could join forces with health professionals to bring about change as effectively as farmers can .
Perhaps then we would see benefits going not only to farmers and cattle but also to human beings - in other words patients .
The Commission also draws our attention to recipient countries .
In this respect I would like to highlight the countries of departure .
In Eastern Europe we are beginning to see so-called white holes , or areas where there is a shortage of healthcare professionals .
( SV ) Mr President , I want firstly to thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for having put this excellent question to the Commission and providing the opportunity to hear the Commission 's reaction to important questions put to it .
It also gives those of us in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection the chance to put forward what we think is important .
Health is an area in which the Member States have competence and in which the principle of subsidiarity applies .
That does not , however , mean that people should not be entitled to health care and medical treatment in other Member States .
We cannot maintain that we defend the patient 's right to safe , high-quality care if we do not allow those who need , for one reason or another , to seek health care in another Member State actually to do so .
We must do our utmost to preserve these rights , in spite of the various problems of which all Members are so well aware - problems , yes , but also positive aspects , especially on the information side .
It is also obvious - or , in any case , it should be - that the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice cannot be weakened by secondary legislation .
There is such a thing as established practice , and the Treaty gives everyone who wants to do so the right to make services available in another Member State , in full accordance , mind you , with the laws of that Member State .
As I see it , the Commission should withdraw all legislation in which the Member States and the governments try to limit existing primary law for patients or service providers .
It is important that the proposal produced by the Commission should be a step forward , rather than backward , and we have high hopes of Commissioner Kyprianou in this regard .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , health services , which have been excluded from the Services Directive , constitute a crucial pillar of the European social model .
They contribute to social , territorial and economic cohesion , are a mission of general interest , and are also consistent with the Lisbon Strategy .
The Commission consultation must not be reduced to the free movement of health services , or aim at simply implementing an internal market in these services , as this would lead to a two-speed system , from which only the well-off and best informed patients would benefit .
The consultation must provide an opportunity to clearly define the role and added value of the Union , in order to guarantee a high level of health protection while respecting the national characteristics and powers of the Member States .
The mobility of patients and professionals must be guaranteed , with respect shown for the following fundamental values and principles : universality , solidarity , quality , security and durability .
It is imperative that a European legislative framework and , more specifically , a directive on health services , be adopted in order to increase the legal protection of patients , health professionals and health insurance systems and thus to restore the confidence of all Europeans in all Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , health knows no frontiers , or at least , one hopes that that is the case .
In exactly the same way health services should not stop at borders either , in other words , they should be of high quality and available to every citizen of the EU wherever he or she may be .
We are now at the beginning of a debate rather than the end of one , so a vigorous debate is desirable and will get us where we want to go ; health is not a commodity , and the internal market is , after all , no more than the space within which these services are provided .
These services need to be subject to special rules , with questions relating to the guarantee of quality provided , patients ' safety , the safety of medicines and of medical products , to redress in the event of faulty or failed procedures , and to centres of excellence being examined in depth .
The patient , who is to be protected , is the subject of particular concern , being , in cases of doubt , the weaker party , and often , indeed , the one who is at the mercy of others .
We are , as matter of principle , in favour of patient mobility and of the mobility of service providers , but reimbursement , which is a quite essential element in the cross-border trade in medical services , is subsidiary , and this has to be made plain right now , even though things are only at an early stage .
I do not , at present , see any chance of a European health insurance fund , and do not indeed think one is germane to our purpose , on the grounds that all the 27 national systems have their own problems , and , here too , where reimbursement is concerned , we are talking not about an open market , but rather about state-run and dirigiste systems .
In my own country , which has an extraordinarily complex system of payment to beneficiaries , such an opening-up would raise at once the discrimination against the country 's own nationals , since the benefits paid are capped rather than open-ended .
It think it still appropriate that primary responsibility for this dossier should remain with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety rather than with the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank Members for a very interesting debate , which will be very useful and will provide guidance for us in the next steps of drafting a proposal , along with the outcome of contributions from the other stakeholders , from consultations and from the Member States .
Just to cover a few issues : first of all , we will certainly be taking into account the health objectives and social values adopted by the health ministers last June , and this will be one of the considerations in our proposal .
At the same time , we will also be looking at the important issue of patients ' rights , which is part of our consultation on Community action .
It is clear that we will look at these issues ; what tools will be used will , of course , be decided after proper analysis of the consultation and based on the responses provided .
I would like to confirm that what we plan to do is to take a step forward and not to reduce or undermine patients ' rights as recognised by the Court , but to improve them and make them work , make them more concrete , and to make it possible to apply them equally among all European citizens .
Information is an important factor in this respect .
As we have already stated , we will take subsidiarity into account .
However , I have to remind you first of all that we do not propose harmonisation of national health assistance - this is not the intention .
But , at the same time , I have to remind you of the European Court of Justice judgment on the Watts case , which provided that there are situations where Member States , based on other Treaty provisions , will have to apply to amend and adjust their national healthcare systems .
Finally , I think there is a misunderstanding here .
First of all , there are no proposals in the communication because it is precisely a consultation document .
We did not want to pre-empt the positions of Parliament , the Member States and the stakeholders , so it is intentional that there is no proposal at this stage .
It is just a description of the problems .
Freedom of movement and patient mobility is not something which is being introduced by the European Commission - I think we discussed that in the past as well - it is something which has been recognised , whether we like it or not - and I hope we like it ! - by the European Court of Justice , which has established that the internal market rules apply also to health , even if this is publicly funded .
So this is not a question of a Commission initiative introducing a new concept but how we in the Commission , together with Parliament and the Member States , can make this concept , this reality , work for the benefit of patients without being to the detriment of the national healthcare systems , their viability and their operation .
This is a big challenge for us but I think it is a big opportunity as well , and we can make it work for the benefit of citizens .
To conclude the debate , I have received one motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
One share , one vote - Proportionality between ownership and control in EU listed companies ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the oral question to the Commission on one share , one vote , by Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - B6-0014 / 2007 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission on the proportionality between ownership and control in EU listed companies , by Giuseppe Gargani , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs - B6-0016 / 2007 ) .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , thank you for allowing this debate to be organised on the ' One share , one vote ' oral question .
On 26 September 2006 , a joint press communiqué from Institutional Shareholder Services ( ISS ) and the European Corporate Governance Institute ( ECGI ) informed us that they had won the contract to compile a study on the ' one share , one vote ' principle .
This is a point which our Parliament , during a previous parliamentary term , debated at length , not least at the time of the report on takeover bids .
At the end of that long , well-argued and transparent debate , it was decided that , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , the Member States would be allowed a certain amount of freedom regarding the ' one share , one vote ' strategies , so as to define the way in which these strategies would work .
The importance of management and of the other players as parties to corporate governance , whether they be employees , creditors , customers or suppliers , was also greatly emphasised on that occasion .
Nevertheless , as far back as October 2005 , Mr McCreevy was confirming his determination to undermine the balance that had been reached at the time of the debate on the Directive on takeover bids , even before the workings of that directive had been evaluated and , what is more , even before that directive had been completely transposed into the Member States ' domestic law .
At the same time , when considering the issue of shareholders ' status within companies and of seeing which shareholder strategy would be most conducive to an industrial strategy and to the development of Europe 's strengths as a business location , we see day after day that it would be beneficial , at times , to open a debate on the issue of building loyalty among one branch of shareholders .
Finally , we are aware of the importance that the current Commission , under Mr Barroso , attaches to impact studies , especially when it comes to defining the right strategy to be followed .
At the time when this debate was launched , I said , ' tell me whom you propose to have carry out the impact study , and I will tell you what their conclusions will be ' .
It seems to me that , in this instance , it is very likely that I will be able to predict those conclusions , insofar as those who have won the contract to carry out the study on the ' one share , one vote ' principle are well known for having on many occasions advocated this very principle .
We are therefore obliged to ask some questions , and that is the subject of the debate that we are going to initiate .
Why fund a study to the tune of EUR 450 000 when we already know what its outcome will be ?
What is the advantage of giving lobbies the means to fund their arguments , which are glorified by the results of a study backed by the European Commission ?
I very much doubt that the joint contractors selected to carry out the study will really meet the general criteria of independence and objectivity that are required .
It is also important to point out in this regard that , at the same time , in the United States , ISS 's activities are coming under more intense scrutiny from the financial markets supervisor , the SEC , and from the New York Stock Exchange , suspecting , as they do , a high risk of conflict of interest .
Like the SECSI and the New York Stock Exchange , we should be alert to the disproportionate accumulation of information and influence by some large players in the chain of intermediaries and advisors involved in the exercise of shareholders ' voting rights in companies , and not react impulsively by giving added weight to those very shareholders .
Let us remember that , when our Parliament had the opportunity in July to give its verdict on the recent developments in , and prospects for , company law , it requested an objective analysis of the empirical and theoretical evidence regarding the effects of the different ownership models in the Member States on economic efficiency , owner-control of businesses and the possibilities for cross-border transactions .
At the time , however , we also requested a sound analysis of corporate law as regards the wider economic and legal context in the Member States and the different models of corporate governance .
I do not have the impression that what the Commission has started by endorsing the proposal for a study by these two institutes provides us with the conditions for a debate that is equal to the challenge represented by the ' one share , one vote ' issue .
I hope , Mr Kyprianou , that you will be able to convey the concerns of this House to the Commissioner responsible , Mr McCreevy , and that , once the conclusions of the study are on the table , these concerns will be firmly established in people 's minds so that we can hold a responsible and effective debate on this issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can wholeheartedly endorse what Mrs Berès has just said , for the subject matter of both oral questions is , in principle , quite similar .
The reason why the Takeovers Directive is the way it is is that the ' one share - one vote ' principle does not exist in Europe , and that has to be spelled out plainly .
Another reason why it is the way it is is that , back when the Takeovers Directive was being hammered out , it was not possible to secure the acceptance of the ' one share , one vote ' principle .
I was prepared to accept it at the time , but neither here in this House nor in the Council could the necessary majorities be found to support it .
I think that those who speak in public debate read too much into the report that the Commission has now put forward on the implementation of the Takeovers Directive , for the report , in fact , says nothing more or less than that the directive has , by and large , been properly implemented by the Member States , which have availed themselves of the option provided by it , which is precisely the intention behind the legislation .
Things will get interesting , though , only when the Commission does as the Takeovers Directive itself requires and , in 2011 / 2012 , produces its first report on the use to which the Directive is put , for then we will have reached the point at which we will be able to arrive at conclusions as to whether what we have done with it - that is to say , setting a benchmark and leaving things to market forces - has or has not been successful , or whether it will then be necessary to consider further legislation , but that point will be reached only in 2011 or 2012 , when we have the first definite report on the application of the directive ; it has not been reached now .

I might add that we - by which I mean this House and the Council as legislator - laid down , by a large majority , certain things on a wide variety of issues currently under discussion , including , back then , the Takeovers Directive , insisting , for example , that the so-called ' break-through rule ' - which is , of course , the decisive benchmark - should apply to all pre-bid and post-bid defences , although there would , of course , be certain exceptions to it .
We did not include those aspects that present no obstacles to takeovers , and we did this on the basis of simple accounting examples and the results of simple mathematical procedures , one of these being the so-called preference shares , which were exempted from the ' breakthrough rule ' from the very outset .
Why was this so ?
One reason why was that the owners of preference shares are paid more than are others ; a second was that company law limits them to a maximum of 50 % of capital , so that they can never , in fact , tie down more of the capital than can the actual ordinary shares , which carry with them an entitlement to vote .

It was for similar reasons that we , at that time , exempted French shares with double voting rights from the breakthrough rule , one reason for this being that these were not voting shares of a particular class , that might be said to be guaranteed in the long term , but rather intended to reward long-term investment , with these voting rights being converted , after a certain period of time , into normal voting rights ; the second being that , with the breakthrough rule , the reaching of 75 % - which is , as a rule , the quorum at which the breakthrough can kick in - no longer raises the issue as to whether the shares are double-vote or ordinary .
If I hold them , I always have a majority in the general meeting .
That is the reason why we made an exception for these voting rights .
We did , however , include multiple voting rights and limitations on voting rights in the breakthrough rule , since these are real obstacles to takeovers .
Here , too , one finds the peculiar situation that there is a disparity between ownership on the one hand and control - that is to say , majority by number of votes - on the other , and we took the view that the application of the breakthrough rule to these would be justified in so far as companies or Member States avail themselves of this option .
I just want to reiterate something to which Mrs Berès has referred , namely that we , in the Szejna report , forcefully put forward the view that market forces should , in the first instance , be allowed free rein , so that we could see how this directive proved itself in practice , and that we would decide whether further steps were needed when the Commission , in 2011 / 2012 , had brought out the first report .

Having now heard that the Commission is mulling over the idea of producing a recommendation on this subject , let me be quite frank in saying that I am less than enthusiastic about this , and that for two reasons , the first of which is that we , in this House , take an increasing sceptical view of recourse to this sort of ' soft law ' .
Moreover , the Commission is also running the risk of this House adopting such a recommendation in the form of an own-initiative report , into which it would put something quite different to what the Commission , in its recommendation , has envisaged , and if that happens , the recommendation will be rendered worthless , for a recommendation is effective only if it can be taken as read that the legislator will be prepared , in subsequent proceedings , to support such a regulation , but if the legislator says ' no ' to it , the recommendation is of no value .

The second reason is that I am not wholly clear in my own mind as to what such a recommendation would be meant to accomplish .
In Article 10 of the Takeovers Directive , we laid down comprehensive rules on transparency according to which all enterprises have to set out openly all the existing obstacles to a takeover .
Those transparency rules are stringent , and I wonder just what the recommendation is meant to achieve over and above that .
There is yet another reason for this question , and the wording of the Committee on Legal Affairs ' question alludes to it .
We are of course interested to know what view the Commission takes of the development ushered in by the Advocate-General 's summing up in the Volkswagen case , when he , for the first time , had to deal , not with traditional golden shares , but with restrictions on voting and other rules , and he saw these as being contrary to the Treaty in much the same way as golden shares are .
Do we actually need to legislate if the ECJ follows this ruling ?
Does it not mean that all obstacles fall away of themselves ?
It would be interesting to hear the Commission 's view of this .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank Members for their questions .
My colleague , Mr McCreevy , regrets that he cannot be here this evening , but I can assure you that he will be informed of the results and content of the debate this evening .
It is true that a study was launched in September , and its intention is to cover the various aspects of proportionality between capital and control , how this is applied or not applied in the Member States , how it affects the deviation from the principle and how it affects institutional investors .
The study was also designed to analyse the relevant regulatory national frameworks .
The contractors were chosen in the usual simple way .
There was a public invitation to tender and the choice was simple .
The best author was chosen and the specific contractors made and presented the best offer .
However , I have to clarify two things : there will not be an impact study , so research will be carried out in a factual way on the current situation in the Member States , and no proposals or recommendations will be brought forward .
Both the contractors and the subcontractors have a strong record of original , independent , high-quality research in areas of company law and corporate governance , and their European presence constitutes a significant advantage in terms of providing comparative analysis covering different legal traditions .
The subcontractors are of high standing and specialise in corporate law and securities regulation , and the study team provided the best offer based on scientific competence , professional reputation and integrity .
As already mentioned , the study will cover multiple voting rights , non-voting preferential shares , company pyramids and other instruments which fulfil the same function of protecting controlling shareholders , and the study will include golden shares and the attribution of special rights for public authorities , as already mentioned .
In this respect , the Commission has noted at this stage the Advocate-General 's opinion on the Volkswagen law .
The Advocate-General considers this to be as an unjustifiable restriction that infringes EU law .
The Commission awaits the Court 's judgment .
As far as the directive on takeover bids is concerned , we know it aims at eliminating certain defences applied by companies in takeover situations .
One such defence for companies is to leverage voting rights vis-à-vis capital , but experience shows that , faced with potential takeovers , the vast majority of Member States are reluctant to neutralise their companies ' disproportionate voting rights .
Nevertheless , it is still early days for the implementation of a directive .
The Commission does not intend to reopen a debate on the takeover directive at this stage .
Whatever the policy indications the Commission draws from the proportionality study are , they will not apply to takeover bids .
The Commission believes that these two should be considered as two separate initiatives .
To conclude , I would like to emphasise that a decision on any future steps on the issue under discussion on the proportionality issue will be taken in the light of the outcome of the study .
Whether we present a proposal , and what the content of this proposal will be , will depend on the outcome of the study and of the impact assessment that is currently being carried out in parallel .
We are therefore still at the study and first procedural phase .
We will , as always , take very seriously the position and the views of the European Parliament .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , we must thank Mr Kyprianou for being with us until so late , although the discussion would probably have been much more interesting if Commissioner McCreevy had been with us , since we hold a constant dialogue with him on this kind of issue .
It is clear that this discussion has hardly begun .
Parliament and the Council adopted the directive on concentrations of capital .
We have recently adopted a directive on the rights of shareholders , and it is clear that fundamental problems are emerging with regard to the structure of companies .
The democratic principle of ' one vote , one share ' is not currently functioning throughout the European Union and , as Mrs Berès pointed out , we are now facing the possibility of great market manipulations by means of certain operators .
It is clear that impact studies can be useful , but impact studies are only useful if they are carried out properly .
This Parliament 's concern is that wolves should be put in charge of the sheep , so to speak .
In other words , if impact studies are carried out by big companies that specialise in market manipulation , then those companies ' recommendations are naturally going to move in the direction of greater market manipulation .
As Mr Lehne has pointed out , the Court of Justice 's virtual decision on the Volkswagen affair is going to have an impact on the future development of European Union law , but this Parliament does not want the Commission to take the recommendation route , the so-called European Union ' soft law ' route , under any circumstances .
A more appropriate route is legislation , although it may not yet be the time to legislate , bearing in mind that we have not yet had an assessment of what is happening in the field of concentrations of capital .
There is currently a kind of great revolution going on in Europe in relation to concentrations of capital , with great political involvement and great uncertainty in cross-border operations , given the co-existence , for example , of public protection systems and private systems .
This issue is of very great significance politically speaking , but it also has certain legal aspects .
I believe that it is important that we point out , firstly , that Parliament does not take a positive view of what is known as ' soft law ' , which requires legislative status , that Parliament welcomes impact studies , but that they must be carried out objectively and not be left in the hands of sectors that may carry them out in a way that benefits themselves , and that there may not be any need to rush into any kind of legislative measure without having studied the situation first .
I believe , however , as I said before , that we are at a time of great change throughout the European Union 's system , and the consolidation of a European law in the field of concentrations and shareholders ' rights requires much more study and above all much more cooperation between Parliament and the Commission .

I hope that Mr Kyprianou will communicate to Mr McCreevy our interest in this issue , our concern and our desire for Parliament and the Commission to carry on discussing it as we should do .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the principle of ' one share equals one vote ' is a very attractive one in what is termed ' shareholder democracy ' , and Commissioner McCreevy - who is responsible for these things - fears that any deviation from it might diminish transparency and curtail the shareholders ' rights , but modifications do not necessarily have to be damaging in their effects , for they can bring with them more competition and innovation , while at the same time taking account of the different types of shareholders , who have differing interests and behave in different ways .
The Commission is now planning to publish , in the autumn , a recommendation on the principle of proportionality between capital and control , which will be based on the results of an extensive study .
Mr Lehne has already referred to the problematic aspects of this recommendation , and Mrs Berès has - I think rightly - surmised that a survey entrusted to ISS , the European Corporate Government Institute , and Sherman [ amp ] Sterling might well not be as objective as the matter in hand might require , and so I appeal to the Commission to delay its practical proposals until after extensive and objective consideration of how things stand in Europe and after a critical and all-embracing assessment of our experience with the Takeovers Directive .
What is important in this is that consideration be given to the advantages and disadvantages of all systems deviating from the ' one share , one vote ' norm , whether pyramid structures in Italy , preferential shares in Germany , double voting in France or the ' A ' and ' B ' shares found in the Nordic countries .
We have to carefully distinguish between , and balance against each other , the desire to make the shareholder 's control proportionate to the shares he owns and the company 's desire for contractual freedom , between stable shareholding structures on the one hand and sufficient discretion on the other , with it being guaranteed in each instance that any deviation from the ' one share - one vote ' standard will be transparent , and that the shareholders are entitled to know whether or not the shares they own or acquire limit their ability to play a part in determining the business 's direction and their control over the way it is managed .
( NL ) According to this morning 's Dutch papers , ISS , the company we are talking about , is advising its customers to thwart the plan to pay out an extra loyalty dividend to the shareholders who leave their shares in that company for three years or more at the forthcoming shareholders ' meeting of DSM , a major Dutch multinational .
I think this plan by DSM is , in fact , a fantastic idea to promote responsible shareholdership .
Extra dividends could be a means to achieve this , but so could higher vote weighting , which could be another legitimate form .
This is why I have always opposed those who persistently advocate what they call shareholder democracy on the ' one share , one vote ' principle .
This was broached for the first time when we discussed the Take-Over Directive .
The original intention of the thirteenth directive was certainly not to create the kingdom of corporate control by shareholders on earth , but simply to protect minority shareholders and allow for a decent buy-out .
A handful of fanatic interested parties , however , managed to make this one share , one vote idea absolute , the key advocate being ISS . Not only based on ideological motives , but also because their trade simply consists in collecting voting rights and granting proxy services to shareholders .
With all due respect for the Commission 's statement , I consider it highly unusual that an inquiry should be launched within a party that is so outspokenly prejudiced and implicated .
I have just been familiarising myself with the way the inquiry was conducted ; I have seen the questionnaires that are still being circulated among investment companies on the one hand and companies on the other , in which companies are simply being asked whether they use certain Control Enhancing Mechanisms ( CEMs ) , including pyramid structures , certification , gold shares , and suchlike , while investors are approached in a totally different way , being presented with a number of leading questions that gauge their views about all these bad measures .

I can probably predict the outcome of this inquiry .
In a nutshell , I already have major reservations about the outcome of the inquiry and do not think it can be a sound basis for further conclusions and intentions , such as drafting recommendations .
We should first of all look into the reasons why companies have these CEMs and why , in this day and age , in which shareholder activism on the part of hedge funds is rife , there is a renewed need for protection against short-term investment activity .
A fundamental debate with this House will be needed before the Commission is ready to develop any measures or any further activity .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Members for the debate .
I will be very brief .
First of all , I would like to say to Mr Medina Ortega that I am sorry that I could not stimulate a more interesting debate , since I am not the Commissioner responsible .
However , it was very interesting for me because it reminds me of my previous life as a lawyer .
I find these issues extremely interesting .
Let me assure you first of all that I will of course brief and inform my colleague .
However , I understand that you will all have the opportunity to discuss these issues further with the Commissioner responsible because he will be attending both the ECON and JURI committees sometime in March and all these issues will be taken into account .
I would like to repeat that what the Commission does will depend on the study and the impact assessment .
With regard to the study , the choice of contractors was made on the basis of our rules and regulations , taking into account the requirement of the European Community .
Again , I would like to remind you that it is a factual study that will not put forward recommendations .
This will be done by the Commission itself .
So , I am sure that the outcome will be a balanced and proportional view , depending of course on the results of the study .
( FR ) Mr President , we have listened carefully to the Commissioner 's reply .
Nevertheless , the message that needs to be conveyed to Mr McCreevy is as follows : we certainly cannot tell what the Commissioner will make of the results of the study , but our concern stems from the study itself , even before the results are known , given the issues that have been outlined by the authors of this study .
I believe that this is the message that needs to be conveyed to Mr McCreevy .
Mrs Berès , I am sure that Commissioner Kyprianou has understood you perfectly .
The debate is closed .
Number and numerical strength of interparliamentary delegations ( deadline for tabling amendments ) : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m. )
Closing of the session
I declare the 2006-2007 session of the European Parliament adjourned .
Opening of the session
I declare the 2007-2008 session of the European Parliament open .
Opening of the sitting : see Minutes
Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order under Rule 166 concerning Annex II ( A ) of the Rules of Procedure of this House .
I tabled an oral question to the Commission which was supposed to be answered today and I have received a formal answer from the Presidency saying that my question was not acceptable , apparently in application of Annex II ( A ) of the Rules of Procedure , which says that a question cannot be admissible if it has been answered in the previous three months .
But no such question has been answered in the previous three months .
Apparently this provision is being applied with regard to a reply given by the Commission to an oral question with debate .
Well , Annex II , which is quoted by the Presidency , applies to questions by MEPs regulated by Rule 109 of the Rules of Procedure , and the oral question with debate is regulated by Rule 108 of the Rules of Procedure .
So , since Annex II is a restriction of the rights of a Member of Parliament , an extensive interpretation could not be allowed to apply Annex II to questions in Rule 108 instead of Rule 109 .
So , I would ask the Presidency to reconsider and to allow the question to be tabled in application of the Rules of Procedure .
We will look into it and inform you accordingly .
Documents received : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Annual political strategy 2008 ( debate )
The next item is a statement by the Commission on the Annual Policy Strategy for 2008 .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , Honourable Members , I am indeed very pleased to present you with the Commission 's annual policy strategy for 2008 and I am of course looking forward to a valuable political discussion .
Let us first take a quick look over the context for the next year .
In two weeks , we will celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome , and the Berlin Declaration will be adopted .
The year 2008 should be an opportunity to look forward .
We hope that the roadmap to be agreed by the Council in June will create the conditions for achieving a clear and constructive institutional settlement next year .
This is necessary because Europe needs reform .
It would also allow us to send a positive signal before the European elections .
Meanwhile , we will see further consolidation of the Union .
In 2008 , we expect to see a number of Member States joining the Schengen area .
We also hope that additional Member States could adopt the euro as soon as they fulfil the criteria .
On the future financing of the European Union , and as agreed by Parliament and the Council , in 2008 the Commission will be working to present a review of the budget .
In a few months we will launch a broad consultation to allow citizens , stakeholders and those involved with institutions to express their views on the priorities of the EU and the resources needed to address them .
The strategic objectives defined by this Commission at the beginning of its mandate remain valid : ' prosperity , solidarity , security and a strong and open Europe in the world ' still summarises the core ambitions of the Commission , and we are happy to see that both Parliament and the Council have backed us .
In the modern world , a number of highly important issues are not confined to just one or the other of the strategic objectives .
They need to be taken forward together across policy areas , and I see three of these as being particularly important for 2008 in the APS .
Firstly , energy and climate change .
The very positive results of the European Council last week with clear , binding decisions were built on the proposals presented by the Commission in January which brought fresh ideas and policy directions in Europe .
Now we must deliver .
Whilst we hope to have practical proposals on energy on the table in the third quarter of this year , much work will be needed in 2008 .
The key elements of the energy package must be put in place .
A well-functioning internal market , a vibrant , renewable sector , energy efficiency and solidarity and interconnection will all be taken forward .
We will also push for strong commitments by the EU and global stakeholders to reduce CO2 emissions beyond 2012 when the Kyoto Protocol expires .
Secondly , the renewed Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs remains the main instrument for promoting a more prosperous , environmentally responsible and socially inclusive Europe .
We are making good progress in partnership with the Member States .
Next year we will reflect on how to press ahead with further reforms .
Following on from the single market review and the social reality check which will be presented this year , the Commission will launch a series of initiatives to make sure that the single market continues to deliver on its economic promises and that it allows citizens to reap the benefits .
Thirdly , migration in its various facets is a key challenge for the European Union .
Properly managed labour migration can make a positive contribution to our economies and to our societies and we will present two draft directives in this field .
We also plan to propose further measures to achieve a common European asylum system by 2010 .
We will also need further action on preventing illegal migration , combating the ruthless business of human trafficking and protecting our common external borders .
Let me now come back to the strategic objectives and give you a few examples of other key initiatives .
As concerns prosperity beyond the continuing consolidation of the internal market , ' greening ' the transport sector will be a key theme , with action on urban transport , legislation on nitrogen oxide emissions from aviation and on emissions from ships .
The Commission will also take preparatory action to ensure the European Institute for Technology is operational as from 2009 .
In the field of solidarity , the Commission will present a health check of the common agricultural policy , which will pave the way for the future CAP .
Based on social stocktaking and the mid-term review of the implementation of the social agenda , the Commission will propose initiatives to promote solidarity and access of citizens to rights and opportunities as well as action to tackle discrimination outside the labour market .
We also intend to propose a new EU action plan on drugs and initiatives to tackle child poverty and protect children using the internet .
To promote security and freedom , we plan to propose new measures for managing our external borders and to set up a European surveillance system to help Member States to deal with growing flows of illegal immigrants .
To support the fight against organised crime and terrorism , we expect to see a centralised data base of fingerprints becoming operational and the Commission will also launch a policy to tackle violent radicalisation .
Ensuring internal and external coherence and fighting for a Europe with a strong voice in the world will be another key area for action .
We are ready to play a strong role following a status settlement for Kosovo and we will continue the accession negotiations with Croatia and Turkey .
We will pursue negotiations on new agreements with Russia and Ukraine and develop our ties with key partners .
As regards trade policy , alongside continued efforts to deliver the Doha Development Round , action will centre on the Global Europe external competitiveness agenda .
The Commission will also work closely with Member States and partner countries to make sure that the European consensus on development makes good progress and strengthens our partnership with the African Union .
I would like to say a few words on better regulation , which , as you know , informs all the Commission 's work .
I am convinced that the Commission and Parliament have a mutual interest in cooperating even more closely than today in this area .
Cooperation means agreeing on common priorities and on strategic choices .
The Commission 's strategic review on better regulation of November 2006 set out our political priorities in detail , taking into account the views expressed by the European Parliament in its April 2006 part-session , which was devoted to this issue .
If need be the Commission will be ready to come back and discuss better regulation in more detail with Parliament .
Let me also emphasise a novelty in our strategy for 2008 .
Following the example of the work programme for this year , communication priorities are an integral part of our policy strategy , focusing our messages on a limited number of issues that are of key concern to people , and communicating these clearly reflects and contributes to our overall communication strategy .
Finally , I would like to underline the criteria that we applied for ensuring an allocation of staff which matches our policies .
Additional resources will be used exclusively to cover needs due to enlargement , whereas all other needs will have to be served through internal redeployment within the Commission .
The presentation of the annual policy strategy marks the beginning of a process leading to the adoption of the Commission 's legislative and work programme at the end of this year .
I feel strongly committed to this process , even though it could still be improved .
Together we should make the dialogue between the committees and the Commissioners more political .
In the resolution adopted last year , Parliament expressed its intention to involve the political groups more consistently and at an early stage of the procedure .
I hope that this will be the case .
A political , frank and constructive dialogue between our two institutions on where Europe should put its political weight and where it should invest its resources in the next year is of major importance , so let us work together for the benefit of Europe .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is nice that you were able to come after all , Commissioner .
We are glad you are here .
We have no cause to be over critical , since the presence of Members is in inverse proportion to the importance of this project .
This debate makes sense if , when formulating the final legislative programme in the autumn , the Commission listens to what Parliament has to say .
A number of my fellow Members will be commenting on the details .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ) is in principle prepared not only to give the Commission 's work its political backing in Parliament , but also to go along with the objectives it defined at the beginning of its mandate : prosperity , solidarity , security and freedom .
I am pleased to confirm that , starting from these objectives , you are also developing the correct political measures for the areas on which we now have to work : growth , employment , climate change , energy , the knowledge-based society , consolidation of enlargement .
We can argue about the details .
I have one criticism of what you say , Commissioner .
You announce a common European asylum system for 2010 .
Forgive my saying so , but the Treaties open the way for minimum standards in these fields , but not for a harmonised European asylum system .
Please check very carefully where you are leaving the level of the Treaty here .
That is a sore point for me .
This legislative programme is interesting not for what it contains but for what it does not contain .
You say in the introduction that these measures meet the citizens ' expectations of where Europe should act .
You paint a picture of a Union that is able to respond to the challenges of globalisation .
Over all , you draw a comparatively rosy picture of this European Union , especially so far as the citizens ' expectations are concerned .
If that is the case , then why did the citizens of France and the Netherlands say such a clear No to Europe ?
The Treaty itself hardly gave them any reason to , hardly any of them read it .
There is a deep unease about the European Union , and if you investigate that unease , you find there is a reason for it - not the only reason , but a reason nevertheless - and that is European bureaucracy .
It gives many people the feeling they are having their minds made up for them and having policies forced upon them , being exposed to decisions where nobody understands why they have to be taken in Europe and not in the Member States .
This feeling of being treated like children provokes rejection , leads to falling turnouts in elections and , if the process continues , it will boost political forces that are really against Europe , and that ought to worry us .
We in Parliament , too , must ask ourselves how long we can claim to be the European nations ' legitimate representatives if the election turnout is always less than 50 % .
One of the sources of unease is European legislation .
That is why this is the right time to talk about it .
You speak yourself , Commissioner , of an ambitious drive towards better regulation .
How true and how worthy of support !
You have our full political support in that .
So far , however , you have only mentioned the target : a 25 % reduction .
You do not say how that target will be achieved .
Better regulation is more than anything something which is meticulous about respecting the limits of subsidiarity and respecting the competence of the Member States rather than craftily pushing those limits back .
The European Commission has in its hands a key to regaining the public 's confidence .
We also need a new culture of subsidiarity .
Every piece of draft legislation should take care not to regulate every detail , but to weigh up carefully where the Member States ' regulative competence begins .
Point the way , Commissioner !
Less central lawmaking will be Europe 's gain .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , our group believes the Commission has done a number of good deeds .
We nevertheless hope that in its remaining time in office the Commission , together with the European Parliament , will be an even stronger driving force for the European Union 's development .
We will fully support it when the Council hesitates and procrastinates and does not really want to take Europe forward .
I would like to begin with a positive example , energy policy , and in this connection of course climate policy , a subject that is very close to your heart .
It was absolutely right to insist that there must be binding targets , especially for renewable energies .
It was equally correct to look for a pragmatic solution in the matter of competitiveness .
So far as nuclear technology is concerned , it was absolutely right to accept that there are different approaches .
There is one thing I would like from the Commission here , however , something that may perhaps reconcile the different approaches , namely a high standard of safety and also corresponding obligations on nuclear power plants and the countries that use nuclear technology to provide information .
I would like the Commission to come forward with proposals on this .
In energy foreign policy , too , it is important to press on further , on the one hand saying we want to diversify and on the other supporting diversification .
It is also extremely important to nominate the Commission coordinators who will ensure that we forge a variety of links for energy supplies .
If the Polish Government believes it needs to develop an energy policy together with Ukraine and some countries of the southern Caucasus , then I hope the Commission will get on with developing an all-European energy policy .
Secondly , also on energy foreign policy : I know that the Commission is making preparations for cooperation with the Black Sea and Mediterranean regions .
There , too , it is important that the Commission is not hampered by the Council in its proposals - for cooperation in energy , for migration policy and especially not for visa policy .
I was very sorry that the Commission did not object when the Member States originally went so far as to tighten visa policy for our neighbours by demanding higher fees .
I hope it will be successful in negotiating a sensible visa policy with all our neighbours , especially of course the Balkans .
Finally , I would like to come to the matter that lies close to our hearts : social competence .
Mr Nassauer is not wrong in saying why many people in Europe are sceptical about the European Union , the Commission and even the European Parliament .
It is also because the social dimension is underexposed in the Commission 's work .
You admit it yourself : in the most recent documents you have published , whether about the internal market for the citizens or social reality stocktaking in Europe , you write quite clearly why this scepticism and this detachment have come about , saying that there is no point in the internal market unless the ecological and social consequences are seen and these aspects are also strengthened .
But when I look at the actual proposals , they contain too little of this social component .
When I look at two studies recently published in Europe , one about women 's pay on the labour market and the other about poverty , then it is a sign of our inadequacy that we have poverty again in Europe and that the differences between men 's and women 's pay are still so great .
The social task has not therefore been completed , and so if we are for the internal market , the social component must also be included .
If the left and the right have recently had election results that in fact stem from social ills and the feeling that the social aspect is being overlooked , that we are again pursuing a narrow-minded national economic policy and we believe that is the way to deal with globalisation , it is also because we have not sent the citizens enough signals saying ' yes to the internal market ' and ' yes to social Europe ' .
That is very important for us and we would like the Commission to do more here .
Mr President , Commissioner , when discussing your paper , our group took the view that the Commission has found the right course and is pursuing that course with great confidence , sticking to the areas of policy that it defined at the start of its work , and that it is taking them forward in a way that gives the impression that it is acting with conviction .
That comes out in the very first sentence of your work programme , where you say that the policy areas in which the Commission is to be active will meet with broad agreement .
We welcome that .
We welcome this self-confidence and we also welcome the fact that the Commission has found a clear course .
We still want stronger leadership , however .
And to stay with the image of a course , we would like you to sail more strongly with the wind , so that you will go faster .
That was early praise , so to speak , but in essence we are saying that this is a good programme ; in our opinion , however , it is not enough for the situation in which Europe now finds itself .
What we are missing above all is a clear word about Europe 's future .
In the 24 page working paper you devote all of three lines to Europe 's future , but the question of where we are heading , what our common ' progress ' should look like , is not answered , and this strategy for a work programme does not even attempt an answer .
That we are all working together for Europe is not taken for granted as much as this paper suggests .
As Mr Nassauer has already said , it is unfortunately not accepted by the public as much as we would like .
That is why it is important that the Commission sets the direction here .
We want the Commission to spearhead the movement , demanding clear instructions as to where the European future is actually to go .
Your strategy is to supply results .
We think that is good .
Results are fine for showing the areas in which we are in fact visibly active .
Only again and again we have the problem that national politicians , mostly from governments , take the credit for successes , while Europe has to take the blame for failures or unpleasant consequences .
The Council 's good results are the most recent example .
In Germany , at least , these good results are being credited to Mrs Merkel and the groundwork done by the Commission and European Parliament is not noticed at all .
To that extent , the strategy of delivering results is a very ambivalent strategy .
Moreover , for all the welcome initiatives you present there are some that make us wonder what the grounds are for your satisfaction .
You speak , for example , of a renewed consensus on enlargement .
We cannot see that .
You also want a common central database for fingerprints .
There is no consensus for that either .
It surprises us , especially in the light of the fact that , at the start of his term of office , Commission President Barroso styled himself a champion of civil rights .
Such a database is the opposite of what he announced at the start of his term of office .
My colleagues will speak further about the various areas of policy .
I would just like to mention one fundamental structural point that we have always raised in past debates .
For the sake of being closer to the citizens and of making this document easier to handle , we would like you to say precisely what are legislative initiatives , what has nothing to do with legislation , what are new initiatives and what are follow-up measures , so that we really know what concrete steps we can expect in the coming year .
Of course we would like the citizens to be involved .
The Commission is keen on communication .
We believe that is right .
The more interactive that can be , the better .
If , for greater visibility for the policy of results , we can have these debates on strategy not only in the European Parliament , but also in the national parliaments , that would be an important step towards making clear where which policy comes from in the common Europe .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would also like to address the question of how Europe is to find its way back to its citizens and to discuss climate and energy policy as an example .
I believe there has seldom been so much attention paid to the particular role and task of Europe as in the last few weeks , when everything has focused on the big question of climate protection policy and energy policy , that is on the biggest environmental policy issue of all .
I was very pleased with the outcome of the summit , because even though there is still a lot to negotiate in the small print the summit still achieved what the public expected after being made aware of the issues by Al Gore or the Stern report .
What the summit achieved was to give the public the impression that we are initiating a paradigm change , that we are bringing renewable energies out of a niche and that we will in future be backing energy efficiency in quite a different way than before .
The key thing now is that we should also live up to the expectations we have awakened in Europe .
If I may say so , Commissioner , I am not yet so sure that we will , because Mrs Merkel had scarcely announced this summit decision and declared the successes when it started all over again in the nation states and to some extent in the Commission , too .
Everything was called into question again .
As always , Mr Verheugen came out against the progressive trio of Commissioner Piebalgs , Commissioner Dimas and Commissioner Kroes .
And I am not so sure whether Commissioner Barrot will be able to implement the results of the summit properly , neither - I am saying this expressly here - do I have any confidence in Commission President Barroso and the energy policy revolution he proclaims .

You really are the right person , Commissioner , to try and see that , for example , the debate about the European constitution gets a better future by ensuring that the great expectations that we European politicians have awakened these last few months are not disappointed again .
The negotiations on the small print of the summit declaration are only just starting , and I can see some powerful , influential men on the European stage , including Mr Verheugen and Mr Barroso , who despite Chirac 's departure in France are building a kind of old boys network standing in the way of the sustainability of these summit decisions .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , quite honestly I am not particularly convinced by the Commission communication on the Policy Strategy for 2008 .
Why should that be ?
For one thing , it is rather like a store catalogue and the priorities are not established clearly enough .
For another , there are many points that are highlighted as ' key actions ' but they are very vague and say very little .
To mention a few examples : the initiative aimed at reconciling family and professional life , legislative initiatives to strengthen consumer protection , further initiatives to implement the EU Maritime Policy - we find one initiative after another , but in what specific way consumer protection is to be strengthened , what you intend to propose in that area , does not appear .
All too often there is nothing precise .
With regard to the social situation in the European Union , you announce - as it says here - a social reality stocktaking , and at the same time you announce visionary initiatives to promote solidarity and access of citizens to rights and opportunities .
I have to say I was quite amazed to read that here .
Do you really believe you can convince the public about the European Union and especially about Europe 's possibilities , and allay people 's fears for the future , when in this paper you as good as admit that you know nothing of the social reality in the European Union ?

My fellow Members Mr Nassauer and Mr Swoboda have already raised this question .
I do not believe you will win the public over again like that .
Now a word on the subject of cutting red tape and better regulation , which is said to be at the heart of the Commission 's daily work .
Better regulation does not start simply by presenting a much more detailed strategy ; it is important and essential to assess its impact , and it will in fact be interesting to debate the results of the external evaluation of the impact assessment system .
I would like to stress , however , that better regulation must not necessarily mean deregulation or boil down to minimal regulation .
Finally , Madam Vice-President , I would like to ask what is happening about the announced withdrawals of legislative proposals .
In my report , Parliament asked that the Commission 's annual legislative and work programme should show precisely which legislative proposals the Commission is thinking of withdrawing .
Could you say briefly what is planned for the way ahead until 2008 ?
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the climate change initiative has been raised to the very top of the agenda .
Despite serious doubts about the extent to which CO2 causes global warming , the EU is determined to lead the world in reducing emissions .
But , apart from nuclear power , sources of energy other than fossil fuels are still far from viable .
This is true of renewables in particular .
We now have a binding target of 20 % for renewable energy with no proper assessment of the methods of achieving this ambitious goal or its cost .
Permit me to mention a lesson from the kindergarten school of economics .
If you raise the cost of a resource , you make goods more expensive and you reduce competitiveness .
We are told that this initiative will stimulate innovation in renewable technology and improve exports .
Instead , it will make us all poorer .
I suggest this sudden obsession with carbon emissions is a distraction , an attempt to take our minds off all those other projects that have had disappointing results , such as the Lisbon Strategy , immigration and asylum policy , reform of the common agricultural policy , the euro and several more .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , in actual fact , the way in which the Eurocracy , as a kind of enlightened despotism - always for the benefit of the people , of course - imposes its own will on the European peoples never ceases to amaze me .
Only a few weeks ago , Mr Barroso , the President of the Commission - and even though a President of the Commission may be a high official , he is , in the final analysis , only a purely politically elected official - told the Dutch people in their own country that they should now move on and accept this European Constitution , which , despite the rejection and democratic referendum in two Member States and despite the fact that quite a few other Member States do not even dare organise a referendum on this topic , is gradually being implemented anyway .
This is not entirely dissimilar from the accession negotiations with Turkey , which have no democratic basis whatsoever and which were also decided on by European institutions that are far removed from the citizens , by excessively privileged officials and Heads of Government who very deliberately refuse to ask the public its opinion even on an issue as fundamental as this one .
Today is no different .
In its policy strategy for 2008 , the Commission has announced measures that should bring about a fresh immigration wave to Europe , even while its citizens are demanding the exact opposite .
They are finally asking us for effective measures to limit , or ideally put a stop altogether to , the immigration from non-European countries by adequately protecting our borders and by phasing out the semi-legal immigration channels , such as that of family reunification , which is far too lenient .
In the Commission proposal , the impression is given that this is a temporary phenomenon and that non-European temporary workers are expected to return to their countries of origin in a relatively short period of time .
This is deception .
Reality has taught us that these temporary workers do not return home , that their relatives join them sooner rather than later , and that subsequently , no measures of any kind will force these people out of the country .
As a result , the Community is once again lumbered with the consequences of this short-sightedness , the clash of cultures , the forming of ghettos , crime as a result of people being uprooted and eventually , the breakdown of a whole community .
I repeat , then , that a fresh immigration wave is absolutely pernicious . Instead , we should start by protecting our European borders , develop a European policy for returning illegal immigrants and aliens who have become involved in criminal activity , and should demand that those non-Europeans who are on European soil legally should become thoroughly integrated .
In Brussels , Europe 's capital , 40 % of the residents of non-European origin , including third-generation , are currently unemployed .
So do not try to tell me that we should import even more unemployment .
Finally , I come to the essential thing , which is that the European project is once again being met with much distrust among the European citizens .
Europe will not generate renewed enthusiasm until such time as it becomes truly democratic and listens to the wishes and needs of its peoples and citizens .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are many interesting aspects to this proposal ; for reasons of time , however , I will focus on three points .
Firstly : energy .
The European Council has made a significant contribution in this area , and I hope that the Commission will succeed in converting these directives into practical and effective proposals .
This commitment affects us all , and I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate that the EU , which asks the Member States to make great efforts to reach the targets , should set a good example : with a single action - rationalising the Strasbourg seat - it would achieve not only a significant reduction in waste in terms of energy , paper , heating , lighting and moving thousands of people in cars , trains and aeroplanes every month , it would also send out a strong political message that would undoubtedly have a positive impact on our citizens .
Secondly : Lisbon .
The lifelong learning programmes launched this year are certainly valid instruments ; however , there is a need to strengthen the measures to close the gap between education and entry into the world of work , particularly for young people and researchers who are otherwise forced to leave our borders .
It is also important to encourage mobility among young people , including with regard to informal learning , to stimulate family policies in order to meet the demographic challenge , and to improve access for small and medium-sized enterprises to credit , including through microcredit programmes , and to EU funding , particularly with regard to research and innovation .
Thirdly : multilingualism .
I hope that the Commission will honour the commitments made in its communication in November 2005 with regard to , and I quote , ' promoting multilingualism in European society , in the economy and in the Commission itself ' .
It is unacceptable that documents intended for all EU citizens , such as websites and , in particular , information documents relating to European programmes , apart from notices , should be available in two or three languages only , effectively restricting access for many small communities to European Union funding .
A perfect example of this is that the documents for accessing the LINGUA programme for the promotion of multilingualism are in English , French and German .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have spoken beautifully , expressing plenty of enthusiasm and good intentions , but , as usual , we must get down to realities , particularly when it comes to talking about budgets .
Commissioner , the last document that Parliament had in relation to budgetary priorities was presented in December last year . I am talking about the resolutions that accompanied the current budget , the 2007 budget .
Our question would be whether you believe that those resolutions , which we approved by an overwhelming majority in this House and which you received very warmly , have been incorporated into the annual political strategy document .
It seems to us that they have not been incorporated and that is a problem , Commissioner , because we always find ourselves in the same situation : Parliament draws up a series of guidelines that should be taken into account in the next budgetary procedure , you lay out your political priorities in this annual political strategy document , you add a budgetary component , but you do not take any notice , or at least you do not take sufficient notice , of everything Parliament asked for the year before .
That happens year after year .
We have yet to find a perfect balance between the budgetary procedures and the European Commission 's legislative programme and therefore our two institutions often work in parallel , but we have not yet managed to bring our systems into line .
You are playing a game with the timetable .
You draw up political priorities but , as the rapporteur for this year 's budget , Mr Virrankoski , has said , Parliament has not so far had any indication of what the European Commission 's political priorities for this year will be , and that means that , when it comes to drawing up the budget , we will find yet again that this Parliament 's budgetary priorities do not coincide with the political priorities laid out by the European Commission .
We find this , for example , within the framework of the financial implications .
You intend to fund these political priorities by means of certain headings that are increasing and other headings that are being reduced ; you are asking us for 890 new posts in the Commission , although you hope to create most of them by means of internal readjustments ; furthermore , you expect to make adjustments in the executive agencies .
Commissioner , like every year , we feel a degree of confusion and during this year 's budgetary procedure we hope that we will be able to reach agreements that do not involve great budgetary tensions with the Council , nor , in particular , with you .
( HU ) The foreign policy ambitions of the European Union are impressive .
Unfortunately , the amounts of money available are not in harmony with these ambitions .
What is even worse , the distribution of the limited resources does not follow or reflect our priorities .
We expect that the 2008 budget will support the process of enlargement and the successful preparation of candidate countries and potential candidate countries more effectively than did those of the past .
The accession negotiations that have already begun must be continued , and done on the basis of their own merits .
We consider it a welcome development that the document considers it a priority to find a solution for Kosovo .
The time has come to take decisive steps in creating equilibrium between the eastern and southern dimensions of our neighbourhood policy .
From this perspective , it is a good sign that the strategy contains several new initiatives with regard to the southern , eastern and Caucasian countries as well .
We recognise that this is a step forward .
It is desirable that the promotion of democracy and human rights should be the guiding principle of the European Union 's policy of support , which should be implemented not only in words but also systematically in practice .
Unfortunately , this has not yet happened .
Much is said in the document about the importance of energy policy , and with this we are unreservedly in agreement .
However , we regret that the substantive and institutional requirements of the foreign policy component of energy policy are not in the document .
We must absolutely devote attention to this matter , since this is one of the major challenges of this new era .
We have little money , and so we must use what we have in an effective and visible manner that focuses on priorities .
( PL ) Mr President , paper is a very tolerant medium .
You can happily write anything you like on it , but implementing what is written can be much more difficult .
Essentially , that is how I would describe the latest Commission statements .
They are noble declarations , but they sometimes create virtual reality .
For example , in the very introduction to the document on the Union 's Annual Political Strategy 2008 there is mention of the initiative to create a European Institute for Technology .
A couple of pages further on , however , it is stated that the aforementioned institute will indeed be created , but only in 2009 at the earliest .
I have actually read carefully through as many as several dozen priority Commission actions for the coming year .
We need to be sensible .
If everything is prioritised , the term priority loses its meaning .
In the area of external policy , there is reference to progress made by the Western Balkans towards future membership of the Union .
In fact , the accession of those Balkan countries depends on institutional reform of the Union , which means the countries concerned have become pawns in our own disputes within the Union .
This is a further instance of the gap between the statements made and reality .
I agree with the previous speaker who stated that the issue of the South Caucasus countries and their progress towards possible future membership of the European Union should be given greater prominence in this document .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the Europe of 27 , there are few political organisations that claim to work in such a transparent and structured way as the EU itself .
Yet a look at these work programmes , including the one for 2008 , just leaves us with long faces .
For 2008 , too , we find the habitual proclamation of better regulation , but programmes stand or fall on their implementation rather than their proclamation .
From the point of view of budgetary control , 2008 will be another disappointing year .
We note the lack of management measures and proposed approaches to implementing the promise Commissioner Kallas made in 2005 to obtain an unqualified Statement of Assurance on the EU budget from the European Court of Auditors by 2009 .
I should like to remind the House of the 44 % error rate for the Structural Funds that has been detected once again for the 2005 budget .
After all , the Commission President has confirmed this promise : we would have expected the Commission to remember its promise and take the necessary steps in its own field of direct management , at least .
2008 is the last year in which the Commission will be able to change anything .
Incidentally , it is the first year in which the recipients of EU subsidies have to be disclosed .
We would have logically expected to see a mention of this milestone of EU support policy , too .
Perhaps the silence means this disclosure is not taking place ?
After all , up to now , there has not been a single document - even a single line - about how the Member States and the individual EU funds are to implement the publication requirement .
Nor have there been any suggestions whatsoever as to what is to be done with this information .
We need , or rather the Commission needs , to think about the way this information is to be used and the consequences of this information for the individual policy areas .
The bottom line is that , in our view , the 2008 work programme is a disappointing document in which the Commission falls far short of its own proclamations .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the Commission for this document , which is timely , coming as it does at the start of our budget procedure .
It is consistent with our priorities , which are the Lisbon Strategy , the fight against climate change and its effects , judicial cooperation and so on , but it overlooks the importance of the social dimension and of social cohesion in the future of the Union .
Your priorities are needed to enable the Union to rise to the challenges of globalisation .
Nevertheless , I question the fact that neither the financial perspective nor the programmes as they have been codecided leave us with much room for manoeuvre .
To be more precise , with regard to competitiveness , growth and employment , if the margin is left unchanged - at EUR 70 million - if new priorities are announced regarding Frontex and Eurojust and if three new transport agencies are created , then certain policies are liable to suffer : I am thinking of the seventh FRDP , which could have difficulties in getting off the ground ; I am thinking of the trans-European transport network , funding for which is absolutely crucial ; I am thinking of all those social policies that are not yet sufficiently developed ; and I am thinking of the CIP , which is a vital tool of the Lisbon Strategy .
We ought not to reduce the commitments of these already badly-managed policies .
It is not only European growth that is at stake here , but also our objectives regarding competitiveness , employment and solidarity .
As regards the freedom , security and justice policies , the margin of EUR 32 million is very small .
Increasing the funding for policies arising out of Frontex and Eurojust will inevitably reduce the resources originally allocated to other vital programmes , such as the integration of third-country nationals and such as a truly ambitious policy aimed at refugees , the protection of fundamental rights .
The European Commission is implying that these programmes are not yet up to speed .
Why , though , were they not implemented quicker ?
With regard to agricultural issues , I join my colleagues from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in expressing serious doubts about the proposal for a single CMO covering all agricultural sectors .
This could result in a lack of consideration being given to the specific characteristics of some agricultural produce .
Given that the scope of the ' health check ' exercise is not yet known or detailed in the Commission proposals , I would ask you to provide some clarification on this matter .
The recent statements made by the Commissioner for Agriculture contradict what you wrote .
As for the Union 's actions , we are anxious to see all of the declared priorities upheld .
We cannot accept our priorities regarding health , education and promotion being neglected in favour of energy .
Finally , I am surprised at how brief were the allusions made to the revision exercise scheduled to begin in 2008 . This leads me to address the Commission directly : is the revision of the financial perspective a taboo subject ?
I have already expressed my curiosity to know the estimated additional cost of the better regulation initiative .
Could you provide us with the estimates for which we have been waiting for so long ?
Finally , I should like to see the spotlight put on communication this year .
It is mentioned in this text , but the Commission 's actions need to be refocused on this matter .
The Europe of democracy is at a standstill , the citizens are turning their backs on it and our texts are more and more ambitious .
We are far from achieving our dreams .
Mr President , the Barroso Commission has now achieved its cruising speed , and the more assertive strategy that we have here should be fully examined and debated inside national parliaments and parties .
It is a splendid tool to both inform and stimulate a national discourse about the EU dimension , and Commissioners should be sent forth to sell it .
The strategy is sensibly reticent about saving the Constitution , but its work foreseen on reviewing the workings of economic and monetary union and on the social dimension of the single market should prepare the Commission for the IGC that we confidently expect for the second part of 2007 .
So , also , the review of the financial system should be brought forward to assist the search for a solution to the constitutional crisis .
Money on the table can assist the IGC , and no reform of the expenditure side of the finances can be sensibly approached without a systematic review of the common policies .
Mr President , first of all my apologies for not being here earlier on .
I got a puncture and unfortunately there is not enough hot air in Strasbourg to keep things going !
A Uachtaráin , a Leas-Uachtaráin , ní mór don Choimisiún Eorpach cur chuige straitéiseach a chleachtadh agus é i mbun polasaí polaitiúil a chruthú .
Beidh aire ardaithe ar bharr an chláir oibre feasta .
Glacann rialtaisí an Aontais Eorpaigh le moltaí an Choimisiúin ar an ábhar seo .
Is faoin gCoimisiún é anois , áfach , moltaí reachtúla a chruthú , a chinnfidh go dtiocfaidh laghdú 20 % ar sceitheadh C02 faoin mbliain 2020 .
Táim lánchinnte go dtabharfaidh Parlaimint na hEorpa tacaíocht iomlán don phlean polaitiúil seo .
Outside of the issues in relation to climate change which I have just mentioned , three other key areas that the Commission must face and deal with in the coming year are the issues of ensuring the delivery of the Lisbon Agenda and , in particular , investment in research and development - 3 % of GDP - looking at areas of innovation and encouraging the new technologies , which will become the major employment opportunities for Europe in the future .
Secondly , there is the issue of reconnecting with our young people within Europe .
For too long , we have spoken about the wonderful wealth and resource that is our young population within Europe .
However , outside of the Erasmus programme and one or two other , smaller , educational programmes , the actual original idea of Youth for Europe action plans seems to have been forgotten and put to one side .
And , as I said , this is a huge resource , not just in economic terms but in development terms - in ensuring we can deliver a proper and wonderful future Europe to future generations .
Thirdly , the common foreign and security policy is a key element , one where Europe must be seen to deliver on the world stage , and yet there seem to be difficulties with regard to the budget and forward planning with regard to what can be done there .
Madam Commissioner , I know you have much on your plate at the moment and there are other difficulties interinstitutionally , but unless we are seen to act on behalf of our citizens and deliver to our citizens , then all of the bureaucracy is not going to help .
My final point is that we should cut red tape and make it easier for businesses to operate .
Better regulation and less regulation could be a way forward to achieving some of those goals .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think I participated in all the recent debates about the policy strategy and I have had cause to criticise it .
This morning I want to welcome the early start that you are giving us on the development of the policy strategy .
I agree with you that this is important in stepping up our political dialogue .
I think you said that you were looking for frank and productive dialogue , so I hope that you will accept my remarks in that spirit .
Commissioner , one of the major concerns I have with this document , as with the previous ones - and I hope that discussing this now may prompt you to do something about it - is that I want to see the focus and resources underlying your work devoted also to consolidating and implementing the existing legislation .
Policy strategy is not just about new initiatives .
We want you to have the maturity to tell us about what you are doing to implement the existing rules and regulations .
In my particular area of interest , the single market , you rightly talk about allowing citizens and SMEs in particular to benefit from that market .
I suggest to you that in 2008 by far the single most important thing you can do is to make sure that the Single Market for Services Directive is properly implemented in all Member States .
That would be more important than any other initiative you may want to take .
I want to see it in your strategy when the proposal comes out .
And just two other things : I am surprised that there appear to be no policy initiatives at all in the area of the knowledge society and information technology , despite the fact that there is a large and important work programme in progress .
So maybe you should look at that .
I do not think that initiatives have dried up in that area .
Finally , on the issue of better regulation raised by a number of my colleagues , it is no use whatsoever for the Commission to continue these excellent initiatives , if nobody knows about them .
Why is that not on your list of communications ?
Because our citizens need to know what is going on and need to be engaged with the process if we are to assess its impact .
So please put that as one of your communication priorities .
( NL ) Mr Swoboda , Mr Andersson and Mrs Guy-Quint have all argued in favour of more initiatives in the area of a social Europe .
This is what they miss in these proposals .
I should like to take this one step further and say that Europe should be more social not only within Europe , but also outside it .
It is when Europe is a world partner that it becomes obvious how much the aspect of development and the relationship with development cooperation are lacking from a number of topics in the work programme for 2008 .
I would , in this respect , mention the areas of agriculture , the review of the European framework legislation for pharmaceutical companies and maritime policy .
This year 's general objective in the European consensus on development is once again to reduce poverty in Africa and to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , but the fact is that , as regards the Millennium Development Goals for Africa , things are heading the wrong way .
Where does the Commission intend to go from here ?
In the tenth European Development Fund , which is currently being prepared and which accounts for half of all the development funds , only 2 % is being set aside for education and 2.5 % for health care .
This is , of course , in stark contrast with what this working programme is hoping to achieve .
Secondly , today , Commissioner Mandelson and others are discussing economic partnership agreements with ministers from developing countries and the Union 's ministers for development cooperation , a wide-ranging issue indeed .
In actual fact , our counterparts from developing countries have the feeling that we are prizing open their markets rather than placing their development at the heart of our policy .
Another inconsistency .
Turning to agricultural policy , I should like to give you an example from the fishing industry .
For the Seychelles , fish , and mainly swordfish , is an essential product to be brought to our markets .
We , however , reciprocate by imposing a non-tariff trade barrier in the form of the requirement of very low cadmium levels .
While we allow much higher cadmium levels in our chickens and pigs , we ban swordfish from the Seychelles with low cadmium levels .
This inconsistency in many areas of policy must be addressed in this programme for 2008 .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , President Barroso always speaks of a Europe of results .
I like that phrase but I have to conclude unfortunately that , in the area of fundamental rights , the European Commission is falling short of its promises .
I remind you once again that , in 2004 , Mr Barroso got the green light for his Commission only after a solemn pledge to become the champion of fundamental rights .
Unfortunately that is not reflected in this document and it is not reflected in the actions of the Commission over the last two-and-a-half years .
In this area , the Commission is timid and reluctant .
You should not only defend , but also promote fundamental rights .
There are two things in this document which strike me .
First , there is an imbalance between your proposals to fight terrorism and your proposals to defend privacy and civil liberties .
There is a distinct imbalance there .
We urgently need data protection in the third pillar and I wish the Commission would push harder for that .
Even if there is no consensus within the Council , then it is still for the Commission to show political leadership .
Do not wait for the Council !
Let the Council explain why it cannot agree on data protection in the third pillar .
You should make it very clear where you stand .
That also goes for the ' horizontal directive ' that this Parliament has called for repeatedly , banning discrimination on all grounds , everywhere and not only in the workplace .
We therefore welcome the initiative to combat discrimination outside the labour market .
However , I think that , in reality , what we are talking about here is only a consultation .
Commissioner , show more courage !
Show more sincere and personal commitment to pushing anti-discrimination legislation .
Show more leadership , and do not wait for the Council .
I also have a very practical proposal , which you do not even have to include in your strategic programme .
In the context of 2007 , the year of equal opportunities , I would like to ask Commissioner Barroso to do a personal chat session with European citizens on the issue of discrimination and fundamental rights .
I would like the Commissioner to say whether she will pass on this request , or proposal , to Mr Barroso and see if he is willing to comply , because that would show his personal commitment to fundamental rights .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for presenting the Annual Political Strategy 2008 .
With regard to the priorities mentioned by the Commissioner , I should like to highlight our commitment to environmental protection , and in particular to combating climate change , the need for a common energy policy , the implementation of the social agenda and the issue of enlargement .
There are many challenges before us .
We need to rise to tackle them in a way that will bring about greater cohesion between Member States and increase the citizens ' trust in the Union .
Last year , in the context of our relations with Russia , the Union showed that it is capable of demonstrating solidarity with its Member States .
This political trend should be fostered .
If we promote high standards of environmental protection we shall gain respect and strengthen our position on the world stage .
Following the latest enlargements and the results of the referendums in France and the Netherlands , it appears that we should devote more effort to cementing the Union than to further enlargement .
The accession of Croatia seems to be the only priority in that regard at present .
We must achieve something tangible for our citizens , so many of whom are still out of work and deprived of their rightful opportunities for development .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is said regularly - in the Commissioner 's speeches , for example - that Europe should concentrate on the essentials and that our aim is to bring Europe closer to its citizens .
After all , Europe - particularly the Commission , of course - is judged on the extent to which it backs up its words with action .
Take bureaucracy reduction , for example - the Commission 's flagship .
Looking back over recent weeks , I note that the Commission has presented a new strategy on health at work for the next five years , with particular regard to small and medium-sized enterprises , which identifies SMEs as the scene of most incidents . These will undoubtedly have to reckon with requirements to match in the near future .
Take consumer protection : there is now a Green Paper on this that makes the relevant stipulations .
I think it is good that the Commission is giving thought to where unnecessary bureaucracy can be eliminated .
Commissioner , the best kind of bureaucracy reduction starts with the absence of bureaucracy creation .
The Commission has simply failed in this regard in recent years , in that it has continuously presented new legislative proposals .
On the other hand - and the Commission 's stubbornness in ignoring Parliament 's words is astonishing - we are stipulating all the records insurance intermediaries will have to keep in future when negotiating with consumers about the relevant products .
In terms of the suggestion that we examine the issue of hedge funds without calling for regulation - the risks concerned have been regularly mentioned by Jean-Claude Trichet of the European Central Bank in this House and by the central banks around the world - there is no mention of this in the Commission 's plan for 2008 .
The Commissioner 's colleague Mr McCreevy is not doing anything in the areas that present real risks - which smacks of neglect of duty .
We are not calling for regulation , but simply for an analysis of the status quo .
The strategy paper says nothing about this ; nothing is being done in this field - which is indeed astonishing .
This is strongly reminiscent of clientele politics for the benefit of certain regions of the world .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I was pleased to hear the Commissioner expressing a desire for cooperation between the European Commission and the European Parliament .
Clearly , the Strategy and the Commission 's work cannot be divorced from the needs and expectations of the citizens of the European Union .
That is why I wish to refer to one of the Commission 's priorities that the Commissioner emphasised strongly in her presentation , namely solidarity .
I do not wish to speak about economic solidarity , but instead about social solidarity .
I welcome the Commission 's statements that take account of such solidarity .
These include the equal opportunities policy , the prevention of discrimination outside the labour market and combating all its manifestations , reconciling family and working life , and also eliminating youth unemployment .
All this is in the plan for the current year 2007 , which has been designated the European Year of Equal Opportunities .
I understand that this must be taken forward .
I am especially interested , however , in the Commission 's statements and actions aimed at supporting and protecting fundamental rights , with particular reference to the rights of children , including a forum on the rights of children .
I am glad the Commission wishes to protect children using the Internet and other new media , but above all else I welcome the fact that the Commission wishes to combat child poverty .
It is our duty to ensure that every child enjoys a decent standard of living .
In this connection , I should like to ask the Commissioner about the state of progress on existing projects prepared by the Commission .
There are some Parliament ones too .
In particular , I have in mind the regulation on implementation of maintenance payments , for which I am the rapporteur .
This aims to ensure that maintenance payments can be obtained swiftly and directly when those responsible are working in other Member States and have defaulted on their payments , thus condemning their children to a life of poverty because they are deprived of an appropriate standard of living .
That is why I am asking if the Commission does want to see progress on this issue , because thousands of European children are longing for this regulation .
They need our help .
( FI ) Mr President , the Commission 's communication on the annual political strategy contains some fairly new moves , especially in the areas of energy policy , immigration and the simplification of administration .
The Commission 's communication is rather incoherent .
It is divided into four parts : prosperity , solidarity , security and freedom , and Europe as a strong international player .
This structure is poorly suited to administrative structure and multi-annual financial frameworks .
The goal of activity-based budgeting and administration is to make administration transparent and clear , which is what a communication of this type fails to promote .
It is hard for the reader to follow what the Commission intends to do in the current sectors .
It is difficult to see how both human and financial resources are to be channelled .
The Commission appears to have faith in administration .
It is going to create another two separate agencies in addition to the previous ones and the European Institute of Technology besides .
In my opinion , more bureaucracy should be viewed extremely warily .
No new administrative bodies can be set up unless they are absolutely necessary .
One surprise is that the Commission is to establish two new policy programmes under Heading 4 , which would relate to climate change and energy efficiency .
The costs of these next year would be in excess of EUR 20 million .
It is astounding that , just two months after the new financial perspectives began , new expenditure is being proposed for them .
In terms of budget policy , it is regrettable that the Commission intends to find the money for the new expenditure by postponing the financing of existing programmes .
Parliament should make a careful appraisal of this move , which could lead to its own priorities being undervalued .
With all this in mind , we can look forward with interest to concrete legislative and budgetary proposals by the Commission .
Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , the Lisbon Agenda of course is the right road .
But on that road , nothing is more important than the health of our people and the health of our environment .
That has been the flavour of the week .
Now , on climate change , of course , if we do not keep below that 2o target , we know the devastation that will result in terms of flooding and drought and population movement and so on .
The other day I went up the Thames with the Environment Agency , saw the need for a new barrage at the estuary of that river , saw the flood plains which are going to be affected by flooding , and saw the building that is going on on the flood plains without taking account of the need to put people higher on those flood plains if they are going to live there .
We are not designing yet .
We are not preventing yet and that must be our agenda in 2008 and beyond .
We need a policy of prevention .
We also need a policy of managing existing threats .
We need a combination of law and individual effort .
Hence , we need the 20 % reduction targeting greenhouse gasses by 2020 .
Hence , we need the 20 % target for renewables .
Hence , we need the biofuels targets , particularly with the second generation .
But , hence , we also need the eco-labelling revision to help consumers understand the options , and we need action on light bulbs and stand-by switches and so forth .
Hence , we need effective implementation and monitoring by the Commission and particularly , may I say , of emissions trading and the national action plans .
And I ask the Commission to be tough on Member States on these .
There is no second chance .
We have to keep the price of carbon high to encourage research , innovation and substitution .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for your clear explanation , which seemed to me to be rather short .
The truth is that 2008 is going to be a key year in terms of moving forward the debate on the new budget for the European Union , which should accompany the constitutional advances that we trust will be consolidated during this year .
We need a European budget that is a match for our ambitions and the demands of the European citizens in particular .
The current situation appears to be clear and favourable .
Ecofin has just said that we are in a solid economic situation , to the extent that the economic indicators are clear , and the extremely weak situation of the part of European GDP made up of wages and employment is therefore notable .
Mr Juncker has said this and all of the ministers have agreed .
It is therefore now time to talk about the distribution of the fruits of that growth and this is not just a concern of the governments and social partners . It is a demand from the European citizens .
It has been clearly stated that the current situation is unsustainable and furthermore carries with it considerable risks of regression : the poverty faced by young people , women , the elderly and children ; the lack of prospects , which discourages birth rates , and over-indebtedness , which is of increasing concern .
In its programme for 2008 , however , the Commission offers us , as a principal social solidarity measure , the management or execution of the Solidarity Fund , which alleviates the situation of people losing their jobs following restructurings resulting from globalisation .
We believe that it is not sufficient , that we need initiatives to incentivise investment : public investment that attracts private investment .
With a view to 2008 and the next three-year stage of the Lisbon Strategy , therefore , I propose to you returning to investments .
Investments in transport and energy networks , investments in environmental issues and the whole issue of the management and distribution of water , and the great European projects such as GALILEO or SESAR .
Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , there is much to be welcomed in the strategic approach you presented to us this morning , but I still find something lacking with regard to the cross-cutting priorities and the strategic focus of bringing issues together in a more coherent and holistic manner .
I want to refer to two areas that I know well .
One is to do with the High North and you , Vice-President , were kind enough to join us at a conference that Parliament hosted in Brussels a couple of weeks ago .
This brings together the issues of climate change and energy that you mentioned , but also maritime policy .
It also brings together both the internal and external policies of the Union and somehow we have to get these all together in the same box and give them focus .
It means the Northern Dimension .
It means participation in the Arctic Council .
It also means International Polar Year - which is 2008-2009 .
Is the European Union even at the table ?
Can we have a more holistic approach to these issues ?
My second area is that of civil justice .
If you look for civil justice in this , you find a bit of contract law dressed up as consumer law .
You find wills and succession hidden under security and justice policy , where you also find something to do with bank account attachments .
Please can we look at civil justice , which is the other side of the internal market , making it function for our companies and our citizens ?
Please can we call it civil justice , and can we have a pattern of civil justice that gives access to justice so that our citizens can see what is there ?
Mr President , I should like to thank the Vice-President of the Commission for attending .
Today I am touching on world trade in particular , because that is my mandate .
It goes without saying that I should like to see the Commission move forward on the Doha round , and Mr Mandelson , the Commissioner responsible , is doing an excellent job in pushing that forward .
I want to see bilateral agreements used to get into multilateral agreements , because the Commission must look at multilateral rather than bilateral trading agreements , but using bilateral agreements to move towards them .
However , perhaps most importantly , I want to see a transatlantic dialogue .
That has been missing and it is something that is so important to the future of the WTO .
I believe that the US has failed to come to the table , and we must look at supporting President Bush in his fast-track system in order to bring Susan Schwab , the new negotiator , to the table so that she and Mr Mandelson can form a real partnership and discuss the way forward .
I feel strongly that the US has failed dramatically in the reform of the farm bill , while we in the European Union have been reforming and continue to reform our agricultural policy .
This is very important and I hope the Commission will stress that fact .
Finally , on your role , Vice-President of the Commission , we should not forget economic partnership agreements .
This is part of an ACP agreement .
I have been drawing up the report in Parliament and it is vitally important that we finish these by the end of this year so that the Commission can stick to its programme and Africa and the countries involved know exactly what is going on .
Let me finish on a personal note , Commissioner .
This is quite important for the UK .
You have just spent EUR 1.2 million on a building in the UK .
I am very concerned , firstly , about the cost and , secondly , about the diplomatic status of the staff .
It is not a diplomatic mission , it is there to represent the Commission , and there should be no diplomatic posts .

( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , there are three points I want to emphasise , and it is very much the budget aspect in which I am interested in this report that you have presented .
The programme for better legislation is of course important , and it is not to be seen as an unambitious agenda , as some people make it out to be .
On the contrary . Like other speakers , however , I think that the Commission could do a much better job of explaining the efforts now being made to simplify legislation , to assess the effects of new legislation and to involve the general public more effectively when we legislate .
Many still see the EU as an ever more tentacular bureaucracy .
That is an incorrect view , and I think it important to say so .
I make these remarks now , in particular , while Commissioner Wallström is here , because it is of course you , Commissioner , who must convey this message .
My second point concerns the mid-term review of the budget , which must be prepared in 2008 .
On this subject , I really do hope that the Commission will be ambitious , as there is in truth good reason to doubt the Council 's desire to have a genuine and open debate on shifting the priorities around over the next few years .
The mid-term reform of agriculture is an important point of departure .
We need a debate on the kind of agriculture we want to see , on how much or how little aid it should receive and on whether it is possible to shift resources from agricultural policy to more forward-looking areas such as research and investment in transport .
My last point is very important .
It is said that new political priorities will require just under 1 500 more staff by 2008 , just under 900 of whom will be new employees - some of them employed as a result of enlargement - while the remainder are to be obtained from re-prioritising .
I do not know whether I am too impressed about it being possible to move 2 % of staff around .
I believe that we must set new guidelines for the EU 's and , specifically , the Commission 's personnel policy .
Is there sufficient adaptability to ensure that the political priorities are met , and does personnel policy provide sufficient scope for employing the right experts , for example in the agencies ?
I think that we must include issues such as those too in any mid-term review .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , I should like to discuss transport policy , the poor relation in this House .
Even though , together with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the Committee on Transport and Tourism is the committee responsible for the most legislative acts , transport always comes last .
Yet transport is important .
Without transport infrastructures geared towards people 's needs , there will be no growth and no employment . It is possible to order everything over the Internet , but not have it delivered via the Internet .
Transport infrastructures geared towards people 's needs are a prerequisite for growth in trade , particularly between old and new Member States , and so the Commission 's approach in its strategy paper is the right one .
I should like to point out that the most important thing is not to demonise transport .
Recently , it has been postulated that , for example , no one should fly any more .
The Vice-President of the Commission knows that if she wishes to travel from northern to southern Sweden , the choice is between spending hours on a train and having to fly .
It is all right for people to fly , as the exhaust-gas pollution caused by air transport can be reduced considerably by means of sound policies .
If we succeeded in ensuring that Member States introduced sound airspace control systems at long last , we could reduce the CO2 emissions from air transport by 8-12 % .
The Member States must do something about this : we should remind them to do so .
Indeed , Vice-President Barrot plans to present a White Paper on urban transport .
I am always somewhat doubtful as to whether urban transport is within our remit , but the Vice-President is absolutely right about one thing : urban transport accounts for a large proportion of pollution .
Parliament should agree guidelines with the Member States and the regions : that transport is needed for growth and employment , but that this transport should be as efficient and environmentally friendly as possible .
This will have to be discussed in greater detail .
We are following the same course , therefore , Madam Vice-President - but , without transport , there will be no growth or employment in the Community .
Mr President , I should like to start by welcoming the Commissioner and congratulating her on her choice of Christian Leffler as the new head of her Private Office .
He is a good , old friend and was a colleague of mine when I used to have a real job .
Thank you for the annual policy paper , Commissioner .
I think it is an excellent document .
I think we should basically have four priorities .
Because you are in charge of communication , I could perhaps say that there are four things that the Commission should communicate and sell .
The first one is , of course , climate change and energy .
The European Union has lacked a true project ever since the end of the Cold War .
I think that we are starting to find one , and this Commission has done an excellent job on that .
Congratulations on what you did in the European Council .
The second thing you have to sell - and here I would like you to be a little firmer , so I underline what Mr Duff said earlier - is the Constitution .
Stick firm on that , because it is your job to defend the Treaties and to defend the interests of the European Union as a whole .
Everyone knows that it is in our interests to get that Constitution through in one form or another , most certainly not in the form of a ' mini-treaty ' .
Thirdly , as regards defending and selling , there is a lot of talk about protectionism nowadays in the European Union .
You need to sell the single market better .
The whole system is based on four freedoms : the free movement of goods , services , people and money .
When you combine that with a sound consumer policy , as Mrs Kuneva is doing right now , I think you can prove that the single market has been a success story .
The fourth and final element that I personally think you are doing a good job on , but in respect of which the Member States are found to be a little lacking , is enlargement .
It is , after all , the most successful policy the European Union has ever had .
I know we have to administer it .
I know we have to go a little slower .
But keep at it and keep on selling it better .
So my four priorities , which I find in your paper as well , are climate change , the Constitution , the single market and enlargement .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , I think that this debate has illustrated excellently the role of a directly-elected European Parliament .
Parliamentarians should criticise the Commission , ask for more detailed proposals , point to what is missing or ask about the synergies between different policy proposals .
You have also taken the opportunity to congratulate the Commission where appropriate and to call for the introduction of an ambitious climate policy or energy policy , for example , hopefully helping us and the European institutions to work together in implementing these policies .
Listening to the debate , it seems that some of you want the Commission to do more , while others want it perhaps to do a little less .
The Commission will always work with the aim of making things better - better quality legislation , better coordination between the institutions and better implementation .
This must be the overall goal .
I would like to start by commenting on the procedure and the dialogue that we have started between Parliament and the Commission on the annual policy strategy .
I think that it is very important that we improve the quality of this regular dialogue .
I think we have already realised that the way to improve it , to make it more effective , is to make it more political .
We hope that Parliament can plan in such a way as to ensure that the political groups are involved more consistently , and maybe at an earlier stage in the procedure , because this also allows us to identify in advance some of the questions mentioned here , such as what is missing entirely from our proposals or what you think is wrong with their overall structure .
I think that the political groups should discuss the annual policy strategy in exactly the same way as the different committees do .
I hope that the groups will feel the same commitment to this regular dialogue .
The points of view expressed in the summary report and which will be endorsed by the Conference of Presidents in September have to reflect the position of both the committees and the political groups .
I think that this will help us a lot .
We have to realise that we are at an early stage and that , when we come to the legislative and work programme , we will be able to see more of the details and a clearer outline of the specific characteristics of each and every proposal .
I would also like to comment on the issue of migration , because we in the Barroso Commission firmly believe that properly managed labour migration can make a very positive contribution to our economies and to our societies .
As regards asylum , a question several of you also raised , we shall make proposals to approximate the criteria on the basis of which Member States can examine applications for asylum , but this will be done within the limits of the current Treaty and with full respect for the subsidiarity principle .
In the area of visas , which was also mentioned , we shall launch the visa information system , whereby Member States , while retaining responsibility for issuing visas , can exchange information and pertinent data .
This is an important step in the right direction and in coordinating between Member States what has to be done .
I should also like to comment on simplification and better regulation .
Let me start by saying that I have often heard the criticism that the Commission is legislating too little or that it is not ambitious enough in legislating .
We have compiled and checked all the statistics and , if you look at the amount of legislation adopted by the Commission , it has remained remarkably stable .
If we look at the number of regulations , directives , decisions and recommendations adopted over the past 10 years , it has only once topped 550 and has only once dropped below 430 .
The average has been some 489 proposals a year , and last year , at 474 , we were very close to that average .
So , whatever may be said , those are the facts .
Nevertheless , with the careful consultation and impact assessments we are now carrying out on every proposal included in the work programme , I think that we are making particular efforts to ensure that our proposals are well prepared and of high quality .
It is therefore important to bear these figures and statistics in mind .
We take the whole issue of simplification seriously and , as you know , we have set out a very ambitious simplification programme of 100 proposals , covering about 220 legislative instruments to be repealed , codified , recast or reviewed over the next three years .
On average , there have been about 40 or 43 proposals to simplify legislation or identify legislation which is outdated .
We will continue along the same path and at the same pace in order to constantly review legislation .
In some cases , it means that we can introduce new legislation and , at the same time , abandon or scrap directives , as we did with REACH , where the 40 existing directives were replaced by a single one .
We also have to be careful to ensure that our legislation is up to date and modern and that we get rid of legislation that is outdated .
Therefore , we will continue along the same path and will inform and involve the European Parliament so that we can work hand-in-hand to ensure that the overall political objectives of the Lisbon Strategy are implemented - the four overall priorities that we set out in our annual policy strategy .
Some Members raised the issue of the link between our debate on the annual policy strategy and the budgetary process .
I have noted Parliament 's desire to improve this link , and it is important that we continue our dialogue on how to do so .
We see the budget and the policy as complementary and the purpose of the annual policy strategy is precisely to set the political framework in which the annual budget is to be established .
But the institutional framework is such that there is seldom a direct link between the policy initiatives undertaken in a given year and related expenditure in the same year .
There is a kind of mismatch between those processes .
As you know , the 2008 budget will finance actions deriving from legislative proposals presented in previous years .
These were proposals that the co-legislators approved in 2007 or earlier .
That means that the legislative proposals put forward in 2008 will have almost no budgetary implications for 2008 , but will come on stream at the earliest in 2009 .
Also , many initiatives from the Commission have little or no costs for the EU budget at all .
The Commission strongly believes that the new framework agreement put in place in 2005 actually provides a solid basis for relations .
It has already improved the flow of information and enhanced the coordination of planning and programming .
Now , let me say something more about the political issues raised here .
Some of you referred to the question of fundamental rights .
I am surprised at the criticism of the Commission 's actions on fundamental rights .
I do not think that we should doubt President Barroso 's commitment , given both his personal history and the challenges that he has faced to assert his rights and to realise his ambitions .
As you know , we have just set up the European agency for fundamental rights and we are in the European Year of Equal Opportunities .
I have already mentioned planned action to reinforce the protection of children and to fight discrimination outside the workplace .
I could give a much longer list of the things that we are doing .
Right now we are fighting , together with the Member States , to keep the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the new Treaty .
I think this is also a very basic provision and making sure that we can defend it will be an important part of the work ahead .
I will pass on to President Barroso and the Commission the idea of holding a chat forum on fundamental rights .
My experience is that we are never afraid of entering into debate .
I think that if we can engage in different ways , we will most certainly do so .
I would have liked Mr Whittaker to stay , because he actually questioned the whole climate change issue .
Maybe he has gone back to where he came from , to the kindergarten school of economics at which he said he studied .
If he had looked at reality instead , he would have realised that we have already become poorer because of climate change .
Climate change is already costing today 's society and this is a way to improve our competitiveness , to be in the lead , to say that we can show the rest of the world how we combine the best of environmental technology and the best of our knowledge society in Europe with being ambitious in aiming to use a sustainable source of energy for the future .
By so doing , we can lead the way and be an example to the rest of the world .
We have already shown that this is possible .
That is the path we should also follow in the future .
Let me thank all of you who have given practical examples of what needs to be implemented , because , before we know it , we will also see environmental refugees as a result of climate change and these problems .
Of course , other countries have already experienced that , but , unless we take action , we too will be affected , in ways we can scarcely imagine at present .
So , finally , on communication , let me say that the Barroso Commission is the first to have started sending proposals directly to the national parliaments .
Furthermore , we now send the same documents that we send to the European Parliament and to the Council directly to the national parliaments .
The dialogue that we have engaged in - including more than 350 visits by Commissioners to national parliaments , engaging with their different committees , responding to questions , being heard by the national parliaments - is , I think , absolutely crucial in making sure that the European agenda is also anchored in national parties , in the democratic traditions of each and every Member State .
From a communication point of view , this is very important and we have also now set out communication priorities , including better consultation , better listening and explaining , and being present locally in Member States .
Without the engagement of Member States and politicians at all levels , it will be very difficult , as has already been pointed out .
We also need political leaders in all the Member States to be able to defend what they have been doing at European level and to say why they have come to certain decisions .
We have to engage at all levels and this is of course the intention of our communication policy as well .
We want the European Union to deliver and we want results that respond to the needs and expectations of citizens all over Europe .
This means better regulation .
Not more or less regulation , but better regulation .
It means simplification , more focused action ; it means clearer communication , informing citizens and listening more attentively to them ; and it also means strengthening the European Union 's institutions by completing the Treaty revision .
We need stronger institutions and closer dialogue to address the challenges and the opportunities ahead of us and we will definitely play our role in these matters , making sure we can come to an institutional settlement .
In response to the question about renting premises , let me say that we are working together with Parliament , renting a house in London together .
This is exactly how I think we should operate in future , working hand-in-hand to project a single image of the European Union .
Thank you very much for this debate .
I will of course ensure that the whole Commission is made familiar with your ideas and your positions .
( Applause )
Mr President , I should like to draw your attention to the fact that we need the legislative proposal you spoke about very soon , in order to finalise things with the Council before the next election .
There is real urgency in obtaining this proposal , especially as far as energy is concerned .
Thank you , Mr Swoboda , for that comment .
The debate is closed .
EU-USA Air Services Agreement ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the EU-USA Air Services Agreement .

Mr President , honourable Members , thanks to the work of your rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui , and to the members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , the European Parliament has the opportunity today to make its voice heard regarding what I consider to be a major draft agreement between the European Union and the United States .
I am talking about the aviation agreement reached ten days ago between the US and European negotiators , in Brussels .
In less than ten days ' time , I will be submitting this draft agreement for a political decision to the EU transport ministers .
Your involvement has come at a crucial moment , and you can thus make the voice of Europeans heard , not only at the Council , but also within the US institutions themselves .
These negotiations have been long and complex .
There have been four years of negotiations since the Court judgments in the so-called open skies affair .
There have been 11 negotiating sessions , which have caused disruption and turbulence .
However , this long negotiation can enable us to strengthen the transatlantic relationship and to make a positive contribution to the Lisbon Strategy .
Within our reach is the possibility for a European airline to fly from any European location to any US destination , without any restrictions , and the nationality of the European airline does not matter .
Today , if you wish to fly between Brussels and Washington , you can only travel with a US or Belgian airline .
Since Sabena went into liquidation , the absence of a Belgian carrier on that route has meant that you can only fly to Washington with a US airline .
That is why the Court of Justice ruled that these bilateral agreements were illegal .
These agreements discriminate against our European airlines on the grounds of nationality .
With this agreement , we are changing the way in which things are done .
The United States recognises the European nature of our airlines .
All too often we forget that not just anyone can fly to the United States .
Sixteen countries have open skies agreements , but eleven do not .
You cannot fly directly from the Baltic countries to the United States , and the number of routes to the United States from Spain , Ireland and Greece , in particular , is strictly limited .
We are therefore going to open up new possibilities to these countries .
However , from the beginning , the problem has been the balance of the agreement between Europe and the United States .
In November 2005 , the Council paid tribute to the progress made , progress regarding the approximation of the European and US rules on State aid , competition and security , and progress in terms of market access , but the Council also requested greater access to the US market .
I should like to explain to you why , at the end of the final round of negotiations , this agreement is more favourable to Europe .
I shall not go into detail about the freedoms of air transport - the fifth freedom , the seventh freedom - as derived from the 1944 Chicago Convention .
They are important , but they are technical .
Any technician will see that , where these famous freedoms are concerned , the European Union has gained more than it has conceded .
My speech is going to focus on the airlines ' problems regarding ownership , investment and capital .
Firstly , investment in the United States .
US law , which Congress will not be reviewing in the short term due to intense political controversy , stipulates that foreigners cannot hold more than 25 % of the voting shares in a US airline and that they cannot control it .
Against the backdrop of these two constraints , we have secured the right for European investors to hold more than 50 % of the total capital , without , however , that being presumed to mean their having control of the airline .
We have succeeded in having the US authorities process investments in a fair and expeditious manner .
We have also secured the right for European investors to enter into franchise agreements .
Lufthansa will be able to add its name , its brand , its colours and sell its know-how to a US airline for US domestic transport .
This is not a theoretical arrangement .
The Virgin group , which freely sells its books and CDs in New York , is currently trying to sell its brand in order to create Virgin America in San Francisco .
The operation has come up against some serious obstacles .
The commitments entered into by the United States specify what action is possible precisely for this type of investment .
With regard to the provisions of the US reform , which failed in 2006 in the wake of some very strong opposition , and which some of you followed closely , it will not be possible to undermine the rights that we have negotiated .
These new rights are set in stone in the agreement and will not be subject to unilateral changes in the United States .
That is all I have to say about investments in the United States .
Secondly , US investment in Europe .
Since the United States cannot change its 25 % rule , we have retained the option to limit US investment in European airlines to the same level .
This is about restoring the balance .
Thirdly , European investment in third countries .
Under the current rules , we cannot invest and control a third-country airline without running the risk of undermining its traffic rights for flights to the United States .
For example , Virgin has invested in Nigeria .
The United States disapproves of Virgin Nigeria 's operations to the United States because the airline no longer has the right nationality .
With our agreement , the United States will no longer be able to oppose Community investment in European countries outside the European Union - such as Switzerland - and in 18 African countries .
There will be no comeback from the Americans on this point .
They will accept the fact that these third-country airlines may receive substantial investment from European airlines .
Fourthly , third-country investment in European airlines .
In line with what I just said , the United States will not challenge European-operated flights to the United States if European countries such as Iceland invest in their capital .
That will enable us to attract European investment in our airlines and to standardise the air transport industry .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , this agreement is more balanced , and it is more balanced in the interests of Europe .
We must not overlook this first stage , because we need to complete a first stage before embarking on a second one , in order to lead us to the ultimate objective of an open aviation area .
Admittedly , some of the agreement 's detractors fear that there will never be a second stage because the United States will have gained in all areas during the first stage , which is inaccurate .
You are right to request a mechanism that guarantees a shift to the second stage : well , I have obtained it !
The negotiations will start in January 2008 at the latest .
If we do not reach a second-stage agreement by the middle of 2010 , we will be able to suspend the elements of the agreement .
Above and beyond reprisals , I personally am convinced that the momentum that we have created will break down the last remaining resistance with regard to ownership and control .
We did not build the internal market in one go .
We built it in three stages , but in less than 10 years .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , these 11 negotiating sessions have really made progress possible .
What is at stake behind this agreement ?
In five years ' time , between EUR 6 billion and EUR 12 billion profit .
One might also say , over the next five years , 80 000 jobs on both sides of the Atlantic , and , finally , 26 million passengers who will have the opportunity to travel between Europe and the United States , in addition to the 50 million passengers who already take advantage of transatlantic flights .
Thus , in five years , the number of passengers is likely to increase from 50 million to 75 million .
These estimates are the outcome of serious studies .
I shall conclude , therefore , by saying , ladies and gentlemen , that this agreement is clearly important and that it may be very valuable where Europe is concerned .
I should like to add that this morning 's sitting will also help me to better perceive your expectations , to perhaps answer your questions and , once again , I would say that I am confident that we will be able to overcome this first stage and be secure in the knowledge that the second stage is now also in sight .
There you have , ladies and gentlemen , the information that I wished to communicate to you .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats congratulates Vice-President Barrot , his negotiating team and Mr Calleja Crespo most sincerely on the successful conclusion of this , the first part of the important EU-US air-transport agreement .
Let us also join together to thank the US negotiating team and Mr Byerly , however , as it was no easy task for him , either , to bring these negotiations to a successful conclusion .
There is no doubt that this agreement brings about a large transatlantic air-transport market at long last , to the benefit of air carriers and passengers .
From now on , European air carriers will be able to access the US market from all parts of the EU without national restrictions .
At the same time , we are implementing the 2002 judgment of the European Court of Justice .
The restrictions at London Heathrow Airport contravening Community law will also have to be lifted .
I am sure that the opening of the skies over the Atlantic will also give rise to attractive offers for air passengers .
The reason this agreement is balanced is that the Commission has succeeded in opening up access to US markets for European air carriers a little for the first time .
We could have seen more than market opening , but all the same .
New regulations on ownership and control rights , licensing and branding have been put in place .
I believe that these benefits are such as to justify our calling this a balanced agreement .
It is even more important , from my point of view , that we have set up a joint committee with the involvement of the business community , as this will be able to prevent , for example , the US or Europe taking unilateral security measures to the detriment of air carriers and passengers in future .
The PPE-DE Group urges the German Presidency to lose no time in ensuring support for this compromise in the Council - something that would also have great symbolic value .
I am very much obliged to our friend Mr El Khadraoui for his excellent resolution , which - I believe - will be adopted tomorrow by a large majority in the spirit of our discussions .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is indeed very timely , for the negotiations have just been completed , and the Transport Council will be delivering its verdict next week .

In actual fact , it is only after that that this House will be able to speak out formally about the agreement , by means of a report , which I will then be drafting as soon as possible .
With the resolution , though , which has been compiled on my initiative with the support of the various groups , we want to send a clear message to the Council and the Commission .
In a nutshell , Commissioner , you can count on our support , and we are asking the Council to approve the negotiated agreement .
This agreement constitutes a major breakthrough on the road towards a fully integrated transatlantic aviation market and offers a way of escaping the legal sword of Damocles that has for some time been hanging over the aviation sector .
Opponents of the agreement are right when they say that there is still an imbalance between the rights which US companies can assert in Europe and the rights which we can assert in the USA .
There are historical reasons for this , because the US , thanks to a combination of bilateral agreements , is capable of a great deal more than us .
We should not overlook the fact , though , that the European aviation market was not liberalised in one step or overnight .
We were clearly in favour of one big agreement , but we think that this is not feasible politically speaking .
For European consumers , this agreement is good news .
As you stated before , European companies will be able to fly from anywhere in Europe to anywhere in the United States , which will lead to a greater supply and probably a reduction in prices .
Moreover , the US has made a number of concessions to grant European companies a little more access to the domestic US market .
You gave a few examples a moment ago .
What matters to us , though , is that this should be followed up by a second step .
We also think that if we set up a joint committee , this will allow a permanent dialogue , in which a host of aspects with regard to the social dimension , the environment , safety and security , can be addressed .
We placed quite a bit of emphasis on this aspect in the resolution , because to us , the liberalisation of the aviation sector , with all its implications , both positive and negative , must coincide with the laying down of high standards in the areas I have just listed .
We have noted , for example , that technical cooperation is provided for in the area of the environment so that the most efficient flight routes can be used in future .
This is a good thing .
To the doubting Thomases , particularly our British fellow Members , who are under pressure , I should like to say that in my view , they too stand to benefit a great deal from the agreement .
More than ever , Heathrow airport will be able to develop into the gateway to America , with more direct connections near British consumers .
Finally , Commissioner , we , for our part , will do our best to bring the subsequent stages to a successful end , by , for example , establishing contact with our counterparts from the Congress .
We hope we can count on your continued involvement in future negotiations .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , for the moment , air traffic between the US and the EU , the world 's two largest markets and together accounting for 60 % of all global flight movements , is being regulated in bilateral open skies treaties .
Most Member States have concluded a separate regulation of this type with the US .
With the agreement that was concluded on 2 March last , these bilateral treaties will cease to exist indefinitely .
This represents an enormous step forward , which I very much welcome .
After all , these bilateral agreements form a barrier to free competition if take-off and landing rights are reserved for national airline companies , something which does not benefit industry , let alone the consumer .
This is also how the Court judged back in 2002 .
And now , following years of negotiations , a reasonably balanced agreement is finally in place - not a perfect one , but a reasonable one nevertheless .
I should hope , then , that the Council will lend its approval to this agreement as soon as possible , that is to say during the meeting of 22 March next .
I consider the objections , lodged mainly by the United Kingdom , as not very constructive .
Protecting your own market in 2007 is an impertinence and is far removed from the European idea .
What is clear is that the new legal framework for transatlantic air transport will benefit the aviation industry , the consumer and employment too .
Moreover , it offers our European airline companies the all-important legal certainty that they so desperately need .
As I said a moment ago , the proposal is not perfect .
To this day , the US is using arguments such as safety and security to thwart the negotiations with regard to cabotage , as a result of which no progress has been made in that area .
Moreover , the possibility for airline companies from the EU to monitor US airline companies effectively is still restricted , despite extensive provisions of ownership .
Protecting our own market under the guise of safety and security makes no sense and is , as far as I am concerned , an admission of weakness .
At the same time , Commissioner , I am optimistic about the future , for the new framework does , after all , provide for a binding time schedule for a second agreement in which these restrictions will be retabled .
If the US continues to refuse future concessions , the EU must stand firm .
This is what , above all else , must be made clear to the Americans .
I am indebted to the Commissioner and his team for their resolve , and I hope that we will see more of it in future .
I should also like to thank our rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui , for his drive and current input with regard to the resolution on which we will be voting tomorrow .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , in 10 days ' time the Commissioner will officially present the draft EU-USA open skies agreement to the Union 's transport ministers .
There has been a successful outcome to the negotiations , though the latter will actually continue , as some issues have yet to be settled .
The agreement will create an open transatlantic flight area , which means there will be no more arduous bilateral negotiations between the United States and individual Union Member States .
As to the practical implications for consumers , increased competition will obviously mean a wider choice of connections and lower ticket prices for passengers .
The Union has not singled out the United States for special treatment , as 16 similar earlier agreements exist between the European Union and countries in Europe , Asia , Africa and Australia .
The countries concerned include Croatia , Ukraine , Morocco , Lebanon , Singapore and Australia .
The European Union recently concluded an agreement of this nature with Chile too .
The previous speaker was right , of course , when she stated that in a sense this is an exceptional agreement because of the scale and importance of the flights concerned .
Not everything has yet been done to remove barriers and liberalise services .
The next stage , which must be borne very much in mind , is potential consent by the American side to facilitate investment by European companies in the US carrier market .
It is a rare event for an agreement entered into by the European Commission to prove so uncontroversial and so clearly beneficial to European consumers .
Congratulations are therefore due to the Commissioner .
The open skies policy presents an opportunity for better , more frequent and cheaper links between Europeans and Americans .
It will be possible to cross the Atlantic more cheaply and in greater comfort than previously .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to start by thanking Mr El Khadraoui .
Whilst the agreement currently under discussion does reduce - at long last - some of the economic injustices suffered by Europe in the past , in a way it ignores the challenges of the future .
Unfortunately , the issue of air-transport emissions has been largely omitted , even though we must be aware in view of climate change that air transport , too , has to make a contribution to reducing atmospheric pollution .
I still see the unfortunate fact that complete reciprocity is yet to be achieved as a great problem .
We have to trust in a step-by-step plan for this .
If the United States should fail to adhere to this plan , Parliament must ensure that Europe shows backbone .
This goes for investment , and it should and must also go for the issue of the security of data transmission and , in particular , the issue of emission limits .
We must ensure that European interests are not sacrificed to certain sentimentalities , or individual economic interests put above the common interest .
Finally , I wanted to thank the Commissioner , too , for declaring that he supports opening the skies for all - which will please theologians : a very democratic approach that includes sinners .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , air transport between the EU and the USA accounts for around 60 % of the world 's air transport .
These two partners must therefore reach agreement if we want to make any progress on international air transport .
Such an agreement must primarily be evenly-balanced , acceptable to both sides and clearly specified from a technical point of view .
A further prerequisite is that it must be interpreted in the same way by both parties .
Ongoing negotiations have demonstrated that , just as in other areas , the United States ' approach will be discriminatory and lacking in transparency , and , moreover , that the interpretation of the agreement will , over time , alter appreciably .
It is therefore vital to support further talks aimed at reaching the most balanced agreements on behalf of the EU as a whole .
Despite the progress that has been made , it is still too early to talk about an integrated transatlantic market in air transport .
These considerations will also be the basis for our approach to the proposed amendments .
Let us take a closer look at some specific issues in relations between the United States and the EU .
As things currently stand , there is a series of bilateral agreements between individual EU Member States and the United States .
The situation is confused , and if we think we can achieve complete compliance with EU law we are deluding ourselves .
The key problem at this stage is the negotiating power of the two partners .
The US position in this regard is , of course , substantially stronger , leading to unfair advantages for our transatlantic partners .
The first such prerequisite is naturally what is referred to as cabotage .
In the United States , inter-state air transport is classified as cabotage , whereas transport within the Union has yet to be incorporated as such into the Treaties .
This area should be harmonised .
It is likewise necessary to debate the typical protective measures that in the United States prohibit entities from other countries from controlling US aviation companies .
Mr Barrot made some very good points on this matter .
Similarly problematic is the requirement for control of infrastructure , that is , airports .
The discrepancy between the stated aims concerning liberalisation and the reality is even greater in this area .
As regards air transport in the Union , the discussion on the environmental impact of transport is a very topical one .
Among the issues covered are the taxing of fuel , the share of emissions , in particular carbon dioxide , noise and other controversial areas .
If carriers in the Union are to be committed under the Kyoto Protocol to emissions trading , it is essential that the same should apply to the competition , especially from the United States , which is our biggest competitor .
We should be aware that we are setting a precedent in creating new international rules which will establish a standard for the entire sector .
As regards social conditions , I feel that the problems come mainly in three forms .
The first is the obligation to have qualified crew ; the second is the harmonisation of working hours , in terms of rotas for flight crew ; and the third is requirements on qualifications for the ground staff who perform the pre-flight preparation of aircraft and the checks associated with stopover landings .
We have , in recent times , had to deal with security risks , biometric data obligations , forwarded passenger lists and various kinds of instructions and prohibitions .
Accordingly , we should also remain constantly aware of the recently adopted directive on improving the situation for people of reduced mobility in air transport .
Some measures introduced into airports almost come into conflict with passengers ' human rights .
A typical example is the processing of passengers ' personal data .
Commissioner , I would be interested to know how this relates to data protection under the Schengen System , which will be extended this year .
Other measures are verging on harassment , including the repeated baggage checks on transferring inside airports .
I believe that these problems will be resolved and I looking forward to working with the Commission on this .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , last week there was jubilation in some quarters over the major breakthrough in the long sought-after ' open skies ' agreement .
I have very mixed feelings about the whole issue .
On the one hand , I think it is good that flying becomes more affordable and that there will be more flights available .
Of course , we will have to match the increase with greater fuel efficiency in order to avoid major increases in emissions .
However , if the cheaper flights wind up funnelling travel into the three major European hub airports , travelling will become more of a nightmare than it is even today .
We have many regional airports with the potential to open up areas of Europe to visitors and business , but I fear that they will be sidelined in the deregulated , competitive environment of open skies , if we are not careful about how it is set up .
The effect on regional airports and their surrounding areas needs to be assessed .
In my constituency , we have for a long time been asking for an impact assessment , particularly in the Shannon area .
Even at this late stage , it is important that we carry out such assessments .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , over recent years , we have heard it said ever more frequently , by the people of Europe , and also by many European governments , that Europe is interfering in everything ; this criticism is not entirely accidental , and it is , in a number of cases , justified .
The example we have before us today shows , though , that there is a whole range of issues in which we need more of Europe and more of a Community approach in it , too .
Looked at from that angle , then , we can do no other than welcome the conclusion of this prospective Open Sky agreement between Europe and the United States , which will replace a very large number of individual agreements and also serve as an example for many other agreements between the European Union and other parts of the world .
Getting a good result out of the Americans is no easy thing to do , as you , Mr Vice-President , said , and you gave a number of examples .
We are aware that it may , under certain circumstances , be even more difficult to reach agreement with the present Congress , but that must not be allowed to result in the USA unilaterally securing itself particular advantages out of its negotiating position .
I might well turn that around and say that it would be a good thing if the Commission and the Council were to take greater account than they have to date of the desire of the European Parliament , as the representatives of the people , to add its voice here .
One very practical argument in this context - something not directly the subject of the agreement , but having much to do with it - is that safety regulations in international air travel have hitherto been largely , and unilaterally , dictated by the Americans ' interests and actions , and this needs to be reviewed , and , if necessary , changed .
Madam President , with over 40 % of the EU-US market , this particular agreement is of great interest , of course , to the United Kingdom .
While I accept that the agreement could deliver some benefits to consumers , it has still to my mind failed to address some fundamental issues and has a number of question markets over it .
In particular , the deal falls well short of providing the kind of access to the US market that a number of EU carriers would like .
It does little with regard to ownership of US airlines and appears little different from previous deals rejected by the European Union .
So , in my opinion , those who enthusiastically welcomed this agreement may need to pause a little and examine it in more detail to see what it delivers for the EU .
I know the ultimate goal is to create an open aviation area with the US and I indeed support any agreement that would unlock the transatlantic aviation market .
But the question is : does this deal help deliver that ?
To me it is a deal that promises the EU jam tomorrow and gives the US the jam today .
However , if this agreement does go ahead , then we must ensure that a clear timetable is quickly put in place with real and serious incentives on both sides to move forward to a second stage deal that delivers a fully open aviation market .
In short , I do not think this deal is a disaster , but it is not as great as the Commission would have you believe .
It is merely a first step and one that would appear to benefit the US .
I look forward in future agreements to the United States giving something a bit more substantial back and for that country to stop over-protecting its aviation industry .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I can express neither enthusiasm nor disappointment , but I feel it is appropriate to acknowledge the pragmatism with which the Commissioner and the Commission concluded this negotiation phase .
Certainly , we would all have preferred a general agreement also covering the ownership , control and opening-up of the US domestic market .
It is clear , however , that this preference conflicts with the highly important fact that we approached the negotiations in question with two aims in mind : an internal aim and an external aim .
These aims reflect a need and an interest : a need to put an end to the discrimination inside the European Union caused by having accepted the existence of such distinct markets and the possibility of bilateral agreements , which create unjust situations within the Community - something that the European Court of Justice has prohibited .
Evidently , this need , which concerns Europe only , to put an end to the discrimination has weakened our ability to negotiate with the United States .
From this we can realistically conclude that this first stage is undoubtedly ' internal ' , and in this light it is simple to predict the result of any impact assessment : there will be some countries , companies and airports that will be adversely affected by this agreement , and others that will benefit from it .
The fact remains , however , that we are reducing monopolistic powers in favour of an equitable opening to all , in all countries and throughout Europe .
I believe that this must be considered a positive aim .
Secondly , I would like to draw attention to the issue of security and safety , with reference both to ownership and to the opening-up of the internal market .
It is clear that , for the United States , this may represent a valid reason or an excuse .
We must remove any element of excuse .
Agreement on security and safety rules must be paramount , to enable this issue to be resolved , since a solution to this problem would invalidate every other argument on insecurity attributable to the foreign ownership of companies within the United States , or on insecurity attributable to the opening-up of the internal market .
I would also point out that , in the United States , security as a whole comes under the federal budget , and from this point of view it would be useful for Europe to reflect on the way in which we approach the subject .
Madam President , firstly I would like to thank the Commissioner for his statement and , indeed , to give him some credit , which he deserves for moving matters forward .
I am afraid , though , that I am going to have to disagree with some of my friends here , because , although I applaud efforts to open markets , the markets must be opened fairly and I fear that this agreement does not go far enough .
Not only would the current proposals cause harm to British business , but they could also have a detrimental effect on some of our EU businesses generally as well .
What is now on the table will undoubtedly give US companies a substantial share of our unregulated market , while EU companies will be left to fight for the scraps of the US regulated market .
I think we should be fighting harder for reciprocal agreements on ownership rights .
In the current deal as I understand it , US interests can own up to 49 % of the voting stock of an EU airline , whereas EU interests can only own up to 25 % voting stock of a US airline , and I am not sure that is fair or open .
According to the Court of Justice , any transatlantic negotiation should fully honour Member State bilateral agreements , such as Bermuda II , and I think this agreement does not adequately deal with that .
The Commission is seeking to harmonise its policy and has not taken into account the full differences between states .
What we are calling for on this matter is continuing action rather than just dialogue .
I think the Commission has certainly moved things forward , but it is also important that , when we go back to the negotiating table in three months ' time - which , again , I welcome - there must be some firm commitments from the United States to take more action in response to our needs in this field .
( ES ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , I am particularly delighted to be able to congratulate you on the Commission 's success , supported by the German Presidency and assisted by its efficient services , with something of a Spanish stamp , I think it is fair to say .
Furthermore , this success follows the pressure exerted by , amongst others , this Parliament , which supported the Commission 's open skies strategy from the outset , and encouraged it in the face of increasing difficulties , as in the case of these complicated transatlantic relations .
This agreement has the great virtue of strengthening those transatlantic relations at a crucial time for everybody : on the eve of elections in the United States and at a time when we need to make progress with environmental requirements for Europe 's aviation sector .
It also helps to strengthen European identity and the European Union 's identity as a global partner .
In that regard , I believe that this agreement sends a good message to the citizens .
It is also an agreement that makes a decisive contribution to the Lisbon Strategy and specifically , in the case of anti-trust immunity , to facilitating commercial agreements and the development of alliances amongst airlines , which undoubtedly promote the growth and democratisation of air travel amongst the citizens .
It also contains provisions on technical cooperation with regard to climate change , which I hope will be useful in terms of tackling the impact of the aviation sector .
I am also pleased with the provisions on the control of airlines and , with regard to the security mentioned by Mr Costa , the truth is that I would prefer us firstly to analyse the results of the United States system in depth , since its reliability has very much been called into question on occasions .
We must now finally overcome the remaining resistance in the Council and I hope that the work of Mr El Khadraoui will be of use to you in that regard .
Madam President , the recent agreement of principle between the United States and the EU on open skies is extremely welcome because , from a situation that seemed totally deadlocked a number of months ago , we are now on the brink of an open aviation market .
This will benefit the travelling public .
Competition within the aviation sector has revolutionised air travel .
Air passengers now have choice , and low-fare , no-frills air travel has become the order of the day .
Passengers will benefit even more under the new arrangement .
The ownership issue , which was a problem for the United States , has hopefully been resolved by way of an honourable compromise .
But I would agree with my colleagues Mr Simpson and Mr Kirkhope and I would encourage the Commission to be very tough in future negotiations with the United States .
I commend the Commission for the strong stand it has taken in refusing to allow individual bilaterals between Member States within the EU and the United States .
Such bilaterals would undermine and delay the agreement just reached .
The new arrangement will hopefully offer some protection to Shannon Airport on the west coast of Ireland .
For over 70 years , Shannon airport has been the gateway airport between the United States and Ireland .
All planes travelling to and from the US stopped off at Shannon .
In recent years , this compulsory stopover has been diluted .
But , crucially , the new agreement would incorporate a transition period for airports such as Shannon to enable them to adapt to the new situation .
It is equally important that the open skies agreement be reviewed every few years in order to monitor the impact of the agreement on Shannon and other similar airports .
The agreement is a very historic one .
Indeed , it is the most historic since the 1944 Chicago Convention .
I would commend both sides , and the Commission in particular , for rescuing an agreement that a few short months ago seemed doomed to failure .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , taken together , the EU and US aviation markets account for 60 % of aviation movements in the world .
The EU-USA air services agreement will therefore be beneficial to consumers on both sides of the Atlantic .
It will help deepen transatlantic relations and serve as a model for further liberalisation and approximation of legal provisions the world over .
The Court of Justice ruling states that several bilateral air services agreements between Member States and the United States do not comply with the European Union 's legal principles , and that the EU-USA air services agreement is the best way of ensuring full compliance with Union legislation .
The harmonisation of legal provisions , notably in the area of safety , environmental protection and workers ' social rights is especially important in this type of air services agreement .
The fundamental issue is close cooperation between the appropriate EU and US authorities concerned with aviation safety , both at EU and US federal level and also at Member State level .
The aim should be to create a single aviation protection area , which implies a single passenger and baggage check at the start of the journey , not at each transfer as well .
I also wish to emphasise that exchange of passengers ' personal data between the EU and the US must be undertaken respecting the privacy of European and American citizens .
This has already been made clear in European Parliament resolutions .
The transatlantic air services agreement must be founded on the Convention on Human Rights and on other international acts guaranteeing citizens ' rights and freedoms .
Thanks are due to Mr El Khadraoui for his conscientious work on the development of the European Parliament 's stance on this matter .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr Barrot , well done !
The debates and negotiations have been going on for years now .
Your task was difficult but you have managed to be persuasive and effective .
I should like to pay tribute to the agreement reached because it is a good agreement for European interests .
The liberalisation of transatlantic air traffic is in fact going to boost the growth of our airlines at a time when they are facing an increase in the price of kerosene , increasingly strict security constraints and a forthcoming tax introduced as part of the fight against global warming .
By allowing them from now on to operate flights to the United States from any European city and no longer just from their country of origin , you are generating more activities for our airlines and thus more jobs to offer to our fellow citizens .
More routes and also more freedom regarding the frequency and times of flights will also mean more choice for consumers : European and US passengers will therefore be the second big winners as a result of this agreement .
A third source of satisfaction is the opportunity now provided to European airlines to acquire more than 50 % of the capital of US airlines .
One might certainly regret the fact that our US friends are preventing the market from operating freely by refusing to grant more than 25 % of voting rights to European airlines , but let us not turn our noses up because things are sometimes best left as they are .
Furthermore , you said , Commissioner , that the agreement stipulated in return the option for the Union to limit US equity investment in our airlines .
Like Mr Jarzembowski , I should like to conclude by urging the European transport ministers to give their full support in a few days ' time to the Commission , because it is the interests of one of our largest economic sectors that are at stake , and we need to protect them .
Faced with the United States , this kind of result would not have been possible without the pooling of our resources .
On our own , we cannot achieve much ; together , Commissioner , anything is possible .
( ES ) Madam President , good relations between the United States and the European Union are crucial to both sides of the Atlantic , although some people would prefer that not to be the case .
Fortunately , it is a long time since Columbus reached the new world in an ecologically acceptable way .
And it is a long time since the monopolistic extremism that brought so much backwardness to Europe .
The European Commission has just reached an air transport agreement with the United States which opens up new prospects for European air companies .
Mr Vice-President of the Commission , allow me to congratulate you most warmly on all of the work you have done .
I would also like to congratulate your director , Mr Daniel Calleja , and , if you will allow me , Mr Vice-President , to mention the spirit that I am sure is contained in this agreement , also your predecessor , Mrs Loyola de Palacio .
I truly believe that this is a significant achievement on the part of the Commission .
I hope that the Council will unequivocally approve this agreement as soon as possible .
Bilateral agreements between the United States and the Member States need to be replaced by broader agreements .
And if the agreement can be applied from October , as the Commission intends , then all the better .
When that is the case , when the single sky is a reality , the European citizens and companies will enjoy many advantages : common rules on both sides of the Atlantic , the possibility of opening up new passenger and goods transport routes , as well as lower costs , which will make our companies and our air transport more competitive .
All of this should benefit consumers in terms of the final price of their tickets .
The ultimate objective of these agreements is the creation of a future area of free provision of air services between the United States and the European Union , which will conform to the Lisbon Strategy and enhance transatlantic relations , which are so necessary .
Madam President , I should like to apologise for being a little late and I appreciate your tolerance .
I was having difficulty with the lifts .
Transatlantic tourism is of vital importance to Ireland , and there is much room for expansion .
Of the nearly seven million people who visited Ireland in 2005 , over half a million of them came from across the Atlantic , contributing over EUR 500 million to the Irish economy .
It has been estimated that these numbers could triple if the open skies agreement is ratified , and generate an extra EUR 1 billion for the Irish economy .
With the advent of open skies , we can continue to benefit from the goodwill we have received from hosting events such as the Tour de France , the Special Olympics and the Ryder Cup .
If a small country like Ireland can benefit in that way , what potential is there for the continent of Europe ?
Of course we should be concerned about climate change , but the answer is to find new fuels for air transport and make more efficient use of existing fuels .
Protectionism does not benefit the consumer or our economies .
A clear open skies policy not only encourages individuals to travel to Europe but also helps to promote European goods in North America .
Open skies opens up more of the American market to European consumers and business people .
Our ability to travel and trade with more cities can only help to boost our economies and allow us additional access to the strong US economy , especially now , given the current strength of the euro against the dollar .
This bodes well for European business .
In conclusion , the economic and cultural exchanges that will be made possible by this agreement will ensure that the United States and Europe maintain a healthy relationship for years to come , and I urge the Commission and the Council to resist protectionism and self-interest in this matter .
Madam President , I should like sincerely to thank the MEPs and all the speakers for their support and their extremely valuable contribution to this important debate .
There is no doubt that we are on the verge of concluding an historic agreement where transatlantic relations are concerned , historic , too , in terms of moving aviation forward in the world and - as has been pointed out - of making air transport democratic and putting it within the reach of as many people as possible .
I shall not go back over the benefits of the agreement , which have been emphasised by , among others , Mr Jarzembowski and Mr El Khadraoui , to whom I am particularly grateful for his initiative .
Access for airlines from any European country to any location in the United States , without discrimination on nationality grounds , is one of the very important benefits .
That , above all , will enable us , Mr Costa , to resolve certain legal problems that emerged in the wake of the open skies judgments .
Another huge benefit for consumers is the fact that they have more choice at better prices .
Furthermore , we are opening up to 60 % of the world 's traffic .
We ought not to forget that a joint committee exists that will play a key role with regard to applying the agreement , to debating social issues , to addressing the issues of ownership and control , to competition , to aid and to environmental issues .
Some of you raised the problem of security , not least Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert .
This agreement contains provisions that are crucial in terms of facilitating the controls on both sides of the Atlantic and of eventually having equivalent systems that will allow us to move in the direction of a single form of security control , or ' one stop security ' .
With regard to environmental aspects , I should like specifically to address Mrs Lichtenberger in order to tell her that she is right .
We intend precisely to cooperate far more effectively with the Federal Aviation Administration .
On this subject , we are going to review the way in which we operate flights over the Atlantic with the aim of reducing their flight paths .
We are also going to research solutions enabling us to use fuel efficiently and to reduce emissions .
There is therefore an entire environmental section there .
A number of you raised the problem of cabotage , not least Mr Kohlíček .
The option of operating cabotage services in the United States is much debated ; we will not have that option to start with .
Nor will cabotage be permitted for US airlines : thus , a US airline is not permitted to transport passengers or cargo between Frankfurt and Berlin .
Mrs Sinnott , the agreement will also benefit regional airports by opening up new opportunities with the elimination of the existing restrictions .
Mr Rack and several of you emphasised security problems .
The United States has acknowledged the importance of working on common practices and standards in order to reduce as far as possible the differences between the European Union and the United States on these issues , and it will take account of the measures that have already been applied within the European Union .
Mr Simpson , the transatlantic area will clearly not be built in one go .
We are , in fact , talking here about a first stage , but one that has already established a very strong link with the second stage : Europe will be able to suspend Americans ' access rights if they drag their feet and if no progress is made .
We therefore have the means to act in order to guarantee that there really will be a second stage towards our ultimate aim .

I should like to say to Mr Kirkhope that , since the United States has not yet agreed to change its 25 % rule , we have retained the option of limiting its investment in European airlines at the same level . This is one way of restoring the balance .
Madam President , you asked me to be brief .
I should therefore like to apologise to the speakers to whom I have not had time to respond clearly .
I should like to thank all of the speakers and also to say to those MEPs who belong to Member States that are not covered by the ' open skies ' agreements , and particularly to the Irish Members who spoke , that the will exists on our side to extend the benefits of this liberalisation of transatlantic air transport to all of the Member States .
Mrs De Veyrac and other speakers stressed that all of this is the fruit of extensive efforts .
I should like to take this opportunity to remember Mrs Loyola de Palacio , who also did a great deal of work on this first stage , which I feel is important for the future of Europe and of transatlantic relations , for the economy and for employment .
( Applause )
I have received a motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
1 .
Financing of interventions by the EAGGF , Guarantee Section ( vote )
2 .
Drinking milk produced in Estonia ( vote )
3 .
Repeal of Regulation ( EC ) No 2040 / 2000 on budgetary discipline ( vote )
4 .
Prudential assessment of acquisitions and increase of shareholdings ( vote )
5 .
Corporate social responsibility ( vote )
6 .
Equality road-map ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 1
( ES ) I am speaking simply to propose a minor modification to the amendment , in the name of legal rigour .
The amendment would be worded as follows :
' trafficking and to take an initiative towards the Council for a Communitarisation of European policy ; '
( ES ) Essentially , the Commission is being asked , within the context of its right to legislative initiative , shall we say , to communitise the law from the point of view of gender violence .
Are there any objections to the inclusion of this oral amendment ?
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 30
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , I should like to propose an oral amendment : where the text reads ' calls on the Commission to draw up measures , under the Media 2007 programme ' , to replace the words ' draw up ' with the word ' encourage ' , given that the Commission cannot draw up programmes but can only encourage them .
Are there any objections to the inclusion of this oral amendment ?
( The oral amendment was accepted )
7 .
Cross-border collective copyright management ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is Voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Interest subsidies designed to offset the Member States ' interest charges in connection with the purchase of EU agricultural products are one of many drawbacks to EU agricultural policy , which needs to be radically transformed .
In the interests of consistency , it should , however , be accepted that , where the new Member States are concerned , a certain amount of interest offsetting might take place to prevent mass unemployment from being created in the poorer parts of Europe .
This report concerns an extension to a regulation that has existed since 2004 and that compensates those new Member States whose interest substantially exceeds the EU average .
The cost of an extension amounts to approximately EUR 10 million per year .
It has been proposed that funding be obtained from savings within other budget headings so that there are no additional aggregate budget increases .
The Commission also regards this extension as part of a package in which the removal of subsidies for maize cultivation is also proposed - a step that would mean a significant saving of approximately EUR 35 million in 2008 ( with , according to the Commission , a total saving for 2008-2014 of EUR 617.8 million ) .
In the longer term , a ' no ' vote would be in danger not only of having a bad effect on the new Member States , but also of jeopardising the Commission 's proposed saving of just over EUR 600 million .
I have therefore chosen , in spite of everything , to vote in favour of this report .

( DE ) Mr President , although it is very difficult to give a statement of vote with all this noise going on , I would like to say that I abstained from voting on the grounds that I find this state of affairs unsatisfactory .
Germany and a number of recalcitrant deficit-runners may well now be on the road to recovery , but I do not see that as an occasion for rejoicing , and all the less so in view of the fact that they , while benefiting from the surprising strong economic growth , are nevertheless considering extracting even more money from the consumers ' pockets .
It is for that reason that I have abstained from voting .
in writing .
( PL ) I voted in favour of adoption of the report on the opinion on the Council Regulation repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2040 / 2000 on budgetary discipline- C6- 0277 / 2006-
Mr Lewandowski presented a good report .
Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2040 / 2000 of 26 September 2000 became redundant following implementation of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1290 / 2005 and implementation of the new credit guarantee reserve mechanism for the period 2007-2013 .
Repeal of this regulation will improve the quality of Community legislation .
Doing away with outdated provisions will significantly improve the transparency of our legislation , and facilitate its implementation .
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal to amend a number of directives as regards procedural rules and evaluation criteria for the prudential assessment of acquisitions aims principally at promoting cross-border mergers and acquisitions ( M [ amp ] A ) in the banking and financial sector . In other words , it aims at promoting the concentration and centralisation of capital at European level , by improving the penetration ability of foreign capital and the integration of the financial markets .
Prudential assessment is thus seen as an obstacle to cross-border M [ amp ] A , following a Commission survey presented in November 2005 on barriers to consolidation of the financial sector within the internal market .
Apart from maximum harmonisation , among other technical details , the proposal provides for reducing the periods for prudential assessment by the competent national and banking supervisory authorities from the current 65 days to 30 days .
The compromise proposal extends the period proposed by the Commission but still accepts a reduction to the current period .
We therefore voted against .
in writing . The unanimity of agreement between the committee members who actively considered this report underlines the concerns for shareholders .
Institutional shareholdings by fund managers who sought to repatriate rights to owners of those shares was critical to the success and balance of this report .
Similarly the level of communications and appropriate timing has renewed the connection between share owners and boards of directors , allowing questions to be put without the ' nuisance effect ' which could jeopardise effective management of shareholder meetings .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to explain why I voted against the Howitt report .
The attempt is being made to compel people , under the heading of Corporate Social Responsibility , to do what small and medium-sized enterprises have always done in any case , for social responsibility is a major characteristic of small and medium-sized businesses and a permanent feature of their entrepreneurial culture .
The European Union 's misguided subsidies policy , though , has for years on end supported big businesses and limited companies for which the worker is no more than an exchangeable item , and which have , slowly but surely , driven small and medium-sized enterprises off the market . It is for this reason that I voted against this report .
in writing . The UK Conservative delegation voted against the Howitt report in committee , as did the EPP-ED , because it was oppressive and regulatory in tone .
The UK Labour rapporteur had called for yet more EU legislation , rather than inspiring companies to choose to adopt the concept themselves .
As a result of my amendments in plenary this report has been completely turned around .
The voluntary nature proposed by the Commission has been endorsed .
Parliament has accepted that a social EU does not automatically need more EU regulation .
As is increasingly the case , it has been UK Conservatives setting the agenda .
in writing . - ( PT ) The current trend in the majority of EU countries , with the increase in insecure and badly paid jobs and the exploitation of migrant workers both from outside the European Union and from within the EU itself - as has been happening with Portuguese workers in the Netherlands and Spain , for instance , and now in the United Kingdom - goes to show that companies are accepting less and less social responsibility .
Furthermore , the countless relocations by multinationals , even when their productivity levels are high , just because they want ever larger profits , demonstrating complete insensitivity towards the thousands of people they make redundant , are proof that most large companies practise no social responsibility whatsoever .
It is symptomatic that the proposals that we tabled in plenary were rejected , since they highlight the incongruence between the objectives attributed to corporate social responsibility and the employment policies put forward by the Commission , particularly ' flexicurity ' , designed to liberalise unfair dismissals , support the proliferation of precarious work and devalue collective agreements and employment with rights .
Therefore , despite the positive proposals contained in the report , little is likely to change in practice until there is political will for change and a proper review of labour law and International Labour Organisation rules .
I see three fundamental contradictions in this report on corporate social responsibility .
The first is the claim that this responsibility is established on a voluntary basis while there is a requirement for frameworks , standards , definitions , controls and incentives to be created that are so diverse and restrictive as to undermine the very voluntary nature of this approach .
The second is the claim that businesses are being encouraged to be socially responsible when all EU policies , and especially competition policy , actually encourage businesses to relocate and to look for the lowest fiscal , social , environmental and labour cost bidder , including within the EU .
The third is the desire to make European businesses act in a socially responsible way , without excessive international trade really being challenged and with our markets continuing to be opened up to imports from countries that practise all forms of dumping , forced labour , child labour and political prisoner labour .
There is a certain hypocrisy to that .
Even if you deny it , you are making businesses bear the responsibility and making them suffer the consequences of your policies , your failures , your powerlessness and your defeats .
in writing . - ( FR ) Corporate social responsibility is a mish-mash of a concept that , notwithstanding the imagination of the ultra-Europeans , has nothing original to it .
This non-binding gimmick appeared in the United States as far back as the 1950s .
In France , the notion of ' socially responsible companies ' came about specifically at the time of the Sudreau report in 1975 .
And , in 1982 , social objectives were imposed on businesses in the public competition sector in an attempt to shock the people and the executives of triumphant socialism .
Twenty-five years later , CSR is aimed quite simply at humanising and regulating globalisation .
These pious hopes in times of unemployment and social precarity against a backdrop of international instability make CSR seem like a huge con .
We must clearly stop wasting our time and our money on considerations that are aimed merely at sending out polite weedy messages when we are lagging behind the world .
Let us be responsible , first and foremost , for ourselves .
Let us show respect for ourselves by implementing a Europe-wide system of preference and of Community protection for people , production and businesses .
Let us increase , for instance , customs duties on imports of third-country goods that have not been manufactured in accordance with minimum European social standards .
in writing . - ( PT ) In a perfect market , both the economic performance and the social or environmental impact of a company would be taken into account in determining its worth and its public image .
In a perfect market , consumers would choose the products that were directly best for them and indirectly best for their other interests .
Of course , such a market does not exist .
Those who follow a continually interventionist line will therefore argue for greater regulation and more legislation .
That is not the route that I advocate .
Even though I realise that the market is not and never will be perfect , my preference lies with market mechanisms and with solutions that bring such mechanisms to bear .
Thus , measures that promote and disseminate good practice and , above all , those that foster a demanding consumer culture are preferable in my view .
That leaves the issue of competitiveness .
I am not convinced by the idea that profit , or simply economic viability , always has to be at odds with the environment , employment and social responsibility .
Profit is not an evil : it is a good thing , provided that it is gained in accordance with the rules , particularly those created within the market as a result of greater pressure from consumers .
These are the rules that we must bring to bear .
Not by a long shot is it taken as self-evident , as it should be , that companies should exercise corporate social responsibility .
Companies that consider themselves to be socially responsible owe it to society to reduce to a minimum the negative social and environmental effects of their activities .
Meanwhile , since many initiatives have claimed the label of ' socially responsible ' , consumers can no longer see the wood for the trees and every inspection becomes an impossible task to the layman .
Moreover , the effects of the free market and the destructive nature of the constant quest for the lowest prices is progressively becoming a matter of common knowledge .
Regulations are needed in this area in order to strengthen the consumer 's hand and reinforce the supporting structure of the odd well-meaning company .
Europe can play a pioneering role on the social responsibility front by developing policy that creates , and enforces , standards whilst at the same time guaranteeing a level playing field .
This is exactly what Mr Howitt 's report on ' corporate social responsibility : a new partnership ' is doing .
It pleads , inter alia , in favour of compulsory reporting , chain responsibility and more transparency where lobbyists are concerned .
It also argues in favour of lending more weight to the social and environmental effects in public tenders .
Since the report quite clearly opts in favour of sustainability , it receives my unqualified support .
in writing . I welcome the rapporteur 's own-initiative report .
The concept of a European standard for product-labelling recognising human rights and workers ' rights should be supported .
There are still too many people in our world today , many of whom are children , living under modern-day slavery .
With the bicentenary of the abolition of slavery being remembered on 25 March , we need to do all that we can to combat modern-day slavery .
Corporate social responsibility helps us in this battle .
in writing . ( DE ) My reason for rejecting the Howitt report is that the most essential characteristic of Corporate Social Responsibility is voluntarism rather than dirigisme .
Mandatory social and environmental reporting goes against the Lisbon Strategy and militates against the reduction of bureaucracy to such an extent that I find myself unable to support it .
Such dirigisme handicaps and endangers most of all small and medium-sized businesses , which were and still are the backbone of the German economy .
It is out of concern at this approach that I firmly repudiate the report .
( DE ) Mr President , like the Austrian People 's Party delegation as a whole , I voted in favour of the Sartori report , since we take the view - and it is a sad and lamentable fact that that view still has to be expressed - that women are no more able than they were to lead a life combining work , career , and children , that is to say , a life in every circumstance of which they determine for themselves what they shall do .
We are in favour of women being given in this respect , once and for all , the freedom to choose , and of policymakers creating the conditions under which women will be able to do just that , particularly with regard to education , vocational training and equal pay for equal work .
( NL ) Mr President , for clarity 's sake , I should like to say that my vote against the Sartori report should not be seen as a rejection of gender equality .
This is a principle I wholeheartedly endorse and regard as an important achievement of our European civilisation .
It is a principle that is increasingly being challenged in our society due to the mobilisation of Islam in Europe , and this mobilisation of Islam and its effects on our values and our civilisation is indeed something about which a great deal can be said .
Unfortunately , the report does not breathe a word about this .
What I am opposed to , though - and hence my vote against the report - is the compulsory quotas and parities in all kinds of institutions and in the political world .
In fact , I regard this mandatory quota for women as an insult , and I take the view that women do not need positive discrimination in order to claim their legitimate place in society in the way , and when , they want this .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Sartori report on a roadmap for equality between women and men ( 2006-2010 ) .
Although gender equality is a value proclaimed by the European Union , there is still some way to go , for example regarding equal pay .
In this regard , I endorse the rapporteur 's proposals aimed at requesting the application of the equal pay principle so that the 15 % gap between the pay awarded to a man and to a woman doing the same job is no longer the rule .
I welcome the implementation of practical strategies aimed at promoting female entrepreneurship .
Furthermore , I am delighted by the proposal in the report that calls on the Commission to speed up the creation of policies aimed at reconciling family and professional life , not least by actively encouraging fathers to make use of available flexible working time options and to take on household chores and family work .
I am also delighted by the measures designed to protect women and children from all forms of violence , including slavery , honour crimes , human trafficking and polygamy .
Finally , I am delighted by the request made to the Commission concerning the adoption of practical initiatives for promoting the emancipation and integration of migrant women .
in writing . ( SV ) Because we think it obvious that men and women should be equal , we have voted in favour of the equality road map .
We also believe , however , that responsibility for most of the actions taken to achieve equality should lie with individuals .
Because the measures requiring legislation come , more often than not , within the competence of the individual Member States , we have voted against a long list of separate proposals in the report .
We do not , for example , believe that the EU should decide on matters such as childcare , maternity and paternity leave or abortion legislation in the Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) All the proposals that we tabled to clarify the causes of the kinds of discrimination that still exist were rejected in the plenary vote . I would highlight the following :
Emphasises the need to amend the European Union 's economic policies so that all women , men and children can live with dignity and without the threat of poverty ;
Underlines the importance of establishing Community indicators on childcare facilities and on the gap in wages and other income between men and women , by sector , not least as regards atypical work and part-time work ;
Underlines the need to fight for the mainstreaming of gender equality in the economic guidelines , including in the accession process , with a view to avoiding the adverse effects in terms of gender equality that are generated by privatisation and liberalisation processes and cuts in public spending in social sectors , and reaffirms that high-quality public services are essential , calling for an increase in budget funding in social areas so as to prevent social exclusion and combat the trafficking of women ;
Fears that policies focusing on increasing EU competitiveness may jeopardise the interests of women in other regions of the world .
Hence our decision to abstain .
in writing . ( SV ) Gender equality and women 's vulnerability in both private life and the life of society as a whole are among the greatest issues of our time .
We have voted against the report , however , because we are confident that the national parliaments of the individual Member States can manage these important issues appropriately .
We do not believe that the EU should express opinions on issues of this type in far-reaching reports resembling political programmes more than anything else , and we object in principle to the general trend whereby the EU institutions endeavour to achieve influence and competence within ever more areas .
The role of the EU in this connection is to ensure that no existing or future Member States offend against the values pertaining to gender equality .
in writing . - ( FR ) The fact that we are discussing gender equality 50 years after the Treaty of Rome is not an illustration of success .
This principle has been enshrined in the Treaty since 1999 .
The legal basis for this policy is therefore sound .
Although this report is useful in terms of making up time , it leaves a lot to be desired .
On the occasion of International Women 's Day , the main theme in my country was the tailoring of pension rights to individual needs and the dividing up of those rights accumulated during marriage in the event of divorce .
I am delighted that the roadmap stipulates that social protection systems should allow people to accrue individual pension rights .
I should like to point out that , on the basis of one of my 1991 resolutions , this House adopted a report in 1994 on the sharing out of pension rights in the event of divorce .
The report made some practical proposals to the Commission , which took no follow-up action whatsoever .
Why ?
The same goes for my report and our proposals aimed at creating a framework for establishing a status for assisting spouses .
All of this forms part of equal opportunities policy .
We have heard enough fine words from the successive commissioners : where is the action ?
in writing . - ( FR ) Five days on from International Women 's Day , the European Parliament is proposing a roadmap for equality between men and women .
Is the timing a coincidence ?
The fact remains that women are at the forefront , if not in reality , then at least in the texts .
The report presented to us proposes a near exhaustive list of the measures to be taken to guarantee equality between women and men .
While numerous proposals have been put forward , not least those relating to the measures aimed at better reconciling the obligations of family and professional life , it must unfortunately be said that many worrying and meaningless points feature in this report .
I am talking , for example , about yet another attempt to introduce a system of quotas for the recruitment and participation of women in all economic and political sectors .
We know that this measure can only be counterproductive in terms of the way in which women are portrayed and thought of .
However , I am also talking about the pointless proposal to create a ' Ms Lisbon ' in charge of ensuring that the Lisbon Strategy is implemented properly : a kind of ' European superwoman ' .
Proposals such as this only discredit the initiatives taken to promote women .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality has approved an ambitious report on the Roadmap for equality between women and men .
Reconciling a fully-fledged job with the other things to which people aspire , such as family , social and personal involvement , is a challenge for the future for both women and men .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has voted against certain elements of the report , either because these fly in the face of our political conviction , or because the areas involved should fall within the remit of the Member States rather than that of the European Union .
As we see it , equal opportunities policy is a serious matter , and we take the view that this report , even if it does not contain any legislative commitments , is sufficiently important to take note of what is and is not included in it .
Even though we do not agree with everything that is in this report from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , we still want to send a message that , in the area of gender equality , 50 years after the Treaty of Rome , a great deal can , and indeed must , be done .
Let there be no doubt about the fact that we too want equal opportunities , for we , too , are persuaded that Europe has a great deal to do in that area , and that is why our group has voted unanimously in favour of Mrs Sartori 's report .
in writing . - ( PT ) We agree in general with the proposals included in this report seeking clarification from the Commission on the recommendation on collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights for legitimate online music services .
The Commission proposal has sown considerable unease in the relations among European collective rights management societies ( CRMs ) , with divisions between the large , small and medium-sized ones .
It must be pointed out that the Commission recommendation would benefit the major operators and the large multinational recording publishers in the online music market and would harm both authors and cultural diversity .
At the same time , it would be an open invitation to concentrate nearly all rights management in the hands of two or three enormous CRMs , which would distort the concept underlying their establishment , which is the concept that gives them legitimacy .
We therefore generally agree with the proposals to amend the recommendation , which aim at making it more effective and fairer , thus safeguarding cultural diversity .
We believe there should be a proposal for a directive on this issue as soon as possible , in order to minimise the damage that the recommendation is causing to relations among CRMs , and between them and their various users .
While the introduction of competition between collective management societies may be beneficial for rightholders and music services alike , it is imperative that it be controlled .
The fact that rightholders may freely select the manager of their choice throughout the entire European Union , and this irrespective of their country of origin , is liable to have various consequences .
In particular , it will help ensure that rights are concentrated in the hands of the largest collective management societies .
It is also liable to have unfavourable consequences for the most modest rightholders , insofar as rights managers will seek to attract the most profitable rightholders , and even to compromise fair treatment for all rightholders and thus to undermine cultural diversity .
Therefore , although the recommendation is supposed to be aimed at promoting fair competition , it is actually in danger of creating the opposite effect .
I voted in favour of adoption of the report by Mrs Lévai on the Commission Recommendation of 18 October 2005 on collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights for legitimate online music services ( Recommendation 2005 / 737 / EC ) .
It should be remembered that a great deal of work was involved in preparing the aforementioned report .
The rapporteur took due account of the serious nature of the problem of copyright , the dangers posed by market monopoly and the issue of protecting consumers ' rights .
In line with the spirit of the report , I hope that the European market in online music services will be able to enjoy freedom of development , without detriment to cultural diversity .
I wish to say that I support the request for the Commission to undertake an in depth study of the impact of multi-territorial and multi-range licences on online music services , and for the results of the study to be submitted to the European Parliament .
This House is now right to conclude that the Commission , with its recommendation of 18 October 2005 on ' collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights for legitimate online music services ' has gone too far .
Neither the music industry , Parliament , nor the Council have been consulted , and the ' soft legislative approach ' proposed by the Commission has already influenced market decisions , which makes it more than a recommendation .
At the moment , companies that want to offer online music services in Europe must organise the rights with copyright organisations and record companies in each country individually .
The Commission is right to say that this can be simplified .
The recommendation , however , opens up the possibility for a completely free market , which could put cultural diversity and local repertoire at risk , as attracting the most profitable right-holders is , indeed , a more viable proposition for collective copyright managers .
Moreover , the Commission rates commercial interests higher than cultural diversity .
This House argues in favour of controlled competition by prescribing a number of clear conditions , such as the equal treatment of authors , a fair and transparent competition structure which prevents the income of authors from going down and a fair representation of all interested parties in the management structures .
This report values unity in diversity , and so it can count on my support .
I voted in favour of adoption of the report by Mrs Lévai on collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights for legitimate online music services .
Mrs Lévai presented a very good report to the House .
Technical progress and the development of our civilisation have resulted in the emergence of a new generation of cross-border commercial copyright users .
These are the suppliers of Internet music services .
It shows how the market in copyright and related rights is evolving and developing , which further confirms the need for the initiatives taken in this area .
As we conduct the debate we are engaged in we should also bear in mind the possibility of responding to future needs resulting from the nature of collective cross-border management of copyright and related rights .
For that reason also , it is essential to conduct an in depth study of the impact of multi-territorial and multi-range licences for online music services and of the effects on the socio-economic situation of the rightholders and on cultural diversity .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions
Mr President , I rise on my own behalf and on behalf of at least a hundred other colleagues who missed the two roll-call votes on the two Parish reports .
We were here , but , by the time we had got our cards out , we could no longer record our votes .
I would like my vote recorded as ' in favour ' for both the roll-call votes on the Parish reports .
I would ask you to take into consideration that literally over a hundred colleagues missed those two votes , as they were scheduled first today and there were no further roll-call votes .
This is not usually the way colleagues are treated .
It is not your fault , Mr President : the agenda was not yours to determine , but I would ask that this be taken into account .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to endorse what Mrs Doyle has said .
I , too , was present the whole time , but did not have my card with me , and so I wish it to be noted that I , too , in the roll-call vote , voted in favour .
( FR ) Mr President , I was present for the vote on the Parish reports .
I voted in favour of both reports , but unfortunately I forgot to insert my card in the little box , so my vote was not registered ; I should like that to go on record .
You are not all going to do the same thing one after another .
You will make your position known to the services .

( PL ) Mr President , my name is Marcin Libicki , and I should like to say on my own behalf and on behalf of Mr Kamiński that we both voted in favour and the card did not work either .
Mr President , as chairman of the Quaestors , I can say that a lot of Members have already contacted me on this .
We never schedule roll-call votes during the first two items in voting time because we know Members are making their way to their seats and have to find their cards .
I met one Vice-President running down to get his card as he had left it behind .
I think Parliament 's services really need to look at this , and I think we need to deem that , today , Members were in their places because this will be a disaster for us .
I can see us getting a hundred requests at the Quaestors from people telling us they were here and they did vote .
So , will you please pass this on to the Conference of Presidents or whoever is responsible ?
The Quaestors do not have time to deal with this every time people cannot turn up and we have only two roll-call votes .
The point will perhaps be raised at the Bureau or with the Quaestors .
The fact remains that roll-call votes are shown on the voting lists to which everyone should have access and should consult before coming here .
( PL ) I simply wanted to endorse what previous speakers have said concerning the voting procedure and scheduling such important votes that are counted electronically first .
I wish to endorse what those who took the floor earlier have stated .
It was your own group , Mr Buzek , that requested it .
( PL ) Mr President , with regard to the report by Mrs Sartori , I wanted to point out that , when the verification vote on paragraph 20 was taken , my machine failed to work and I was unable to vote against the proposed text .
As I have the floor , I should like to take advantage of this opportunity to endorse what previous speakers have said and also to state that , although a formal vote was not taken , I voted in favour of the two reports by Mr Parish .
The machine did not work then either , even though it was the start of the vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.30 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting
Yesterday 's Minutes have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , Item 13 of the Minutes refers to a Member changing political group to join the ITS Group .
It makes no reference to Mr Wise leaving the IND / DEM Group and I wondered whether this was a mistake .
I understand his party , the UK Independence Party , has suspended him pending the investigations into alleged fraud in his case .
Does this not mean that his group has also suspended him , or was the press campaign deliberately misleading ?
I think your point is made , Mr Corbett .
We will look into it .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
Non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament ( debate )
The next item is Council and Commission statements on non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament .

Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and of the means of delivering them has the potential to present what is perhaps the greatest risk to international security , and that is why the European Union , in its comprehensive strategy for combating them , which dates back to 2003 , stressed that , in this area , the best way of maintaining security and international order was a multilateral approach combining disarmament and non-proliferation on an equal footing .
So , then , the Treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons is , and remains , the fundamental cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime .
The European Union endorses the provisions of the NPT and advocates and endorses measures aimed at further reinforcing them .
Thinking forward to the first meeting of the committee preparing the conference on the review of this treaty in 2010 , the European Union has already started to do extensive preparatory work at home .
We are firmly determined to continue , in 2007 , to play an active and constructive role in the debates at the preparatory conference , and since our intention is that the European Union should begin the review cycle in a constructive atmosphere , it is strongly endorsing the plans put forward by the Japanese ambassador Amano , who has been appointed as the chairman of the first preparatory committee .

The European Union takes the view that all three pillars of the Non-Proliferation Treaty - those being nuclear non-proliferation , disarmament , and the peaceful use of nuclear energy - must be considered and held in balance in the review debate .
It is that sort of even-handedness alone that will make it possible for the forthcoming review cycle of the Non-Proliferation Treaty to progress successfully , and it is on that , though , that the joint decisions to be taken by the review conference on the reinforcement of the treaty depend .
The Common Position of the European Union , as adopted on the occasion of the 2005 review conference , remains , unchanged , the basis of these even-handed positions by the EU .
The European Union has always attached great importance to the prompt entry into force of the Test Ban Treaty , and this has acquired even greater relevance since the North Koreans tested an atom bomb .
The European Union is already helping to shore up the atom test ban regime by adopting common actions intended , among other things , to further reinforce the treaty 's verification system .
The European Union is also calling for a prompt start to negotiations on a treaty outlawing the production of fissile material for explosive purposes , and for such negotiations to be conducted without preconditions .
Conclusion of such a treaty would constitute a considerable step on the road to the control of nuclear weapons and to nuclear disarmament , and would thereby make a decisive contribution to the implementation of the positions agreed on and adopted by the Community at the review conferences in 1995 and 2000 .
The consolidation and reinforcement of the provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty are still largely conditional upon the dedicated and complete discharge of all obligations arising from it , and particular attention needs to be paid to the regional dimension in this regard .
You will be aware that the EU is actively involved in the efforts to resolve the crisis occasioned by the Iranian nuclear programme .
We are persuaded that a solution can be reached only by diplomatic means , and so the European Union had a pivotal role in shaping the very generous offer made to Iran in June 2006 , and I would emphasise that this was supported by the United States , Russia and China .
The European Union will also continue to work towards a peaceful resolution to the crisis .
The European Union is well aware of the risks attendant on any further spread of enrichment and reprocessing technology , and therefore supports efforts towards multilateral guarantees on the supply of nuclear fuel .
Initiatives to this end can also help to persuade countries with an interest in the development of nuclear power that the development of their own nuclear fuel cycle is not necessary , with the effect that they will then freely and voluntarily refrain from acquiring one .
The European Union will be stepping up its efforts at maintaining and further reinforcing the provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty in order to be able to meet the challenges I have described , and these include the debate largely initiated by the EU on the strengthening of the Treaty 's provisions relating to the consequences of a withdrawal from it .
It is to be regretted that the 2005 treaty review conference was unable to agree on a substantial final document that would have constituted a response to the most pressing challenges to the Treaty .
This experience must be another reason for the European Union to make every effort to make the 2010 review process a successful one .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , honourable Members , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and among them nuclear weapons , is potentially the greatest threat to European security .
Nuclear weapons proliferation is headline news , not least when it concerns Iran and North Korea .
On Iran , we are still at a delicate stage .
We noted with concern Dr ElBaradei 's recent report that Iran has not yet suspended its enrichment-related activities and does not appear to have taken the necessary steps to ensure compliance with UN Security Council Resolution 1737 .
The European Union 's External Relations Council has just formally adopted a common position calling for the necessary firmness to be shown by the international community .
We are serious about the double-track policy which , as Mr Gloser has just outlined , has been cemented also by the recent ' three and three ' talks in London .
This means that we may aim at maintaining dialogue and enhancing our contacts with civil society , as well as also exerting pressure .
Discussions in New York are now focusing on moving beyond the existing sanctions towards a new Security Council resolution .
On North Korea , we welcome the results of the Six Party Talks held in Beijing on 13 February 2007 .
The EU is consulting with the Six , offering the best means by which we can assist in this process , while remaining committed to the implementation of Security Council Resolution 1718 .
We support very strongly the current mission of Dr ElBaradei to North Korea aiming at the return of the IAEA inspectors as part of this accord and I share his assessment that this is a crucial confidence-building process .
I hope that the shutdown of the Yongbyon plant goes ahead by mid-April .
The 1970 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ( NPT ) established the non-proliferation regime as we know it - with its fundamental balance between nuclear disarmament , non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy .
From it then followed several aspects which are of great importance to the European Union , namely the principle of regulated nuclear trade , nuclear safeguards and the International Atomic Energy Agency , which monitors compliance .
Strengthening the effectiveness of the NPT will make the world safer .
States parties should be encouraged to work towards this aim with a view to the upcoming review conference .
While the headlines have focused on the regime 's difficulties , we should not underestimate its successes .
South Africa , Argentina , Brazil , South Korea and Libya , for example , have all decided to forego nuclear weapons programmes .
My recent visit to India also gave me an opportunity to stress to the Indian leadership our hope that India will come much closer to the NPT regime and join the comprehensive test ban treaty .
We are looking forward to civil nuclear cooperation with India , once the necessary preconditions are met .
These developments should also increase Pakistan 's willingness to cooperate with the international community in the non-proliferation context .
Nuclear non-proliferation is an area in which the Commission makes an important contribution .
Since 1957 , the Euratom Treaty has provided the Commission with wide-ranging responsibilities .
The Commission 's safeguard activities are closely coordinated with the IAEA , freeing up its resources to be deployed to more troublesome regions of the world .
We are also playing our part in ensuring that the EU 's nuclear export controls are as robust as possible , supporting the Dual-Use Regulation 1334 from the year 2000 .
We also assist third states in enhancing their export controls and combating illicit trafficking in nuclear and radiological materials .
The Commission is also a major provider of assistance for international non-proliferation efforts .
One important example is the G8 Global Partnership against Weapons of Mass Destruction , where one billion euros have been pledged for assistance in the former Soviet Union , 400 million of which have already been spent .
For more than 25 years the Commission 's Joint Research Centre has been working closely with the IAEA , providing it with scientific and technological support .
As I said , in the future we will do more .
Under the new Instrument for Stability we will have resources to continue and strengthen work to enhance our security against nuclear proliferation threats .
In closing , let me take the opportunity to thank this Parliament once again for the support it has given the Commission in setting up a new generation of non-proliferation assistance programmes through a series of pilot projects .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from 1970 , when it entered into force , until the end of the Cold War , the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty made a decisive contribution to restricting the spread of nuclear weapons and to reducing their numbers .
This treaty historically has been of fundamental importance in preventing proliferation and promoting nuclear disarmament and it is for this reason that it was extended unconditionally for an unlimited period in 1995 .
As the President-in-Office of the Council stated , the treaty is based on three principles : disarmament , non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy .
If we start again from these three principles , adjusted for today 's international situation , we can give new impetus to the treaty , remembering that the balance achieved through the application of the treaty by over 180 countries is today in danger .
Today the international community is faced with new threats to its security .
We must strenuously reaffirm the principle whereby the treaty is the single , indispensable , multilateral instrument for maintaining and reinforcing peace , security and international stability , since it establishes the legal framework to prevent a growing proliferation of nuclear weapons .
The European security strategy and the European strategy on weapons of mass destruction emphasise the importance of nuclear non-proliferation , disarmament and the treaty itself , which all the Member States have signed .
Having summarised the situation , I believe it is vital for the European Parliament to be clear about the position for the future .
The European Union must remain committed to the implementation of the treaty , and must present a united front at Vienna , where preparations will be made for the 2010 review conference .
For this reason , it will be fundamental for the European Parliament to vote unanimously , sending out a strong signal to the Council and the Commission , so that at Vienna they can have the necessary authority to play an active role in strengthening the current non-proliferation system .
In order to achieve the objectives set out in the treaty , the European Union must contribute to a structured and balanced review , at the review conference , of the way the treaty operates .
This must include the implementation of the undertakings made by the signatory States and the identification of sectors and methods through which to achieve future progress , as well as further development of the inspection system to guarantee that nuclear energy is used for exclusively peaceful ends by States not possessing nuclear weapons and recognised as such .
We must reaffirm the principle whereby all possible cooperation in terms of the development of nuclear energy for peaceful ends must take place on the basis of the treaty , and it is in this sphere that the European Union can make a decisive contribution , since it is at the forefront of research and production .
The international situation demands that we display a commitment to non-proliferation , to disarmament and to the peaceful use of nuclear energy .
Finally , I hope that Europe can also have a united strategy for combating terrorist organisations that might gain access to weapons of this kind .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the undisputed triumphs of the European Union is the added security that this continent enjoys as a consequence of integration .
The work of reconciliation that brought Europe into the world has also made us a zone in which peace prevails and in which military action between the partner states of the European Union has become virtually unthinkable .
That is the foundation that must underpin the philosophy of a security policy for the European Union , which is that we must take this concept of peace , which we have made a reality at home , and export it to the world as well .
We in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament base this thinking on a concept of security that relies on dialogue , diplomacy , disarmament , prevention , and on sustainable and fair development .
All these elements belong together , and are held together by sustainable conflict resolution , which itself is feasible only within the framework of an overall conception .
While the European Union and NATO have their parts to play in this , so , too , do others - Russia , for example - and that is why we , when we talk about disarmament initiatives - about which I shall have more to say in a moment - have to ask ourselves whether Russia is our partner or our adversary .
In view of what I have just said , I would recommend approaching it as a partner , engaging in dialogue with it rather than marginalising it .
Disarmament is one of the central issues when peoples seek to coexist , and the trustworthiness of parties to treaties is crucial .
If , as we review the nuclear weapons non-proliferation treaty today , we take a really close look , we will have to see that the record is a downright shameful one , for , since it was signed , no fewer nuclear weapons have been dispersed around the world , but rather significantly more of them , and that cannot be attributable to the signatory states , or some of their number , taking this treaty seriously , for the very opposite is the case .
There were many who , having signed this treaty , promptly proceeded to disregard it and instead , contrary to what had been agreed , exported nuclear weapons , or the technology needed to produce them , around the world .
This is where there is a need for a complete turnaround .
Fundamental to any review of the Treaty is the intention to be faithful to it ; that is why a primary condition for the renewal of the Treaty is that those who sign it abide by it , and the United States of America have not been alone in failing to do that .
A world free of nuclear weapons may well sound like something out of a daydream , for we do not live in one - the very opposite is the case .
We are having a debate on the spread of the peaceful use of nuclear energy , and on that I think congratulations are in order .
We have just heard from your own lips about the efforts required to prevent the civil use of nuclear energy becoming military , and Iran is a case in point here .
More nuclear power stations are being built all around the world , and then we are surprised to find ourselves lumbered with not just one Iran , but many .
One aspect of any review of military nuclear policy must be asking critical questions about civil use .
The German Council Presidency has the opportunity to put this issue on the agenda of the Council and also of the G8 , and critical questions also need to be asked about the anti-missile system that is now , at the American administration 's behest , to be installed in the Czech Republic and in Poland in line with the Bush administration 's philosophy , the inconsistency of which can hardly be surpassed , the delusory nature of which is demonstrated by many examples , and which is set to cost USD 58 billion .
I have a recommendation to make .
It is that , rather than having us Europeans allow ourselves - yet again - to be divided - for we can say goodbye to any single foreign and security policy if we in the EU cannot agree on something like this , these 58 billion dollars would , rather than being spent on the installation of anti-missile systems , be better invested in sustainable development , which would make more of a contribution to peace than the setting up of a dodgy missile system .
Mr President , the reason why I venture to say that with reference to the non-proliferation treaty and the review thereof , is that these things are interconnected , and I hope that Mrs Merkel , having announced that this issue will be put on the agendas of both the G8 and the EU , will see to it that it is .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mr Gloser , ladies and gentlemen , non-proliferation , and above all , nuclear non-proliferation , is indeed the cornerstone of any policy geared towards peace .
Having had a little browse in older documents related to this subject , I came across the 13 practical steps that were agreed upon during the Non-proliferation Treaty review conference in 2000 , which is less than seven years ago .
When I read those steps , I , too , cannot fail to conclude that we really have not made any progress at all , and that if anything , we have done the exact opposite .
It is obvious that the brutal attacks of 11 September 2001 and everything that followed have , in fact , brought the serious efforts in the area of disarmament in general and nuclear disarmament in particular to a standstill .
This is something I deeply regret .
I am also - and I am also speaking personally when I say this - very worried about the lack , to date , of any group position on the initiatives with regard to the Member States Poland and the Czech Republic .
I too wonder whether this might not be the start of a fresh arms race , which is surely the last thing we need .
I was pleased to take note of the presidency 's assurance that a great deal of hard work will go into a common position of all Member States with a view to the conference this coming April .
I hope , Mr President , that you - or rather the Presidency - will indeed succeed in this , because the poor result in 2005 was attributable to a lack of true unanimity among the EU Member States .
I hope that history will not repeat itself .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Mr President , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , representatives of the Council , representatives of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I think that everyone is agreed that nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament is a special component of the European Union 's common foreign and security policy .
My colleagues just now expressed the opinion in this Chamber that the results of implementing this policy can almost be seen as a step backwards .
When we look at the Council and Commission documents , however , it must be said that they are more optimistic , and in my view , if we assess what has actually been achieved then the progress made by the European Union must be acknowledged .
The European Union 's institutions permanently collaborate to coordinate their work .
Of course , the High Representative for the CFSP works actively on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament issues , we at the European Parliament regularly consider these issues , there are discussions between the institutions and exchanges of information with the European Union Situation Centre and the counter-terrorism coordinator .
This means that work is actually being done , but the cases of North Korea and Iran , the unsuccessful conference in 2005 to review the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and differences between the United States of America , China and Russia show that much still remains to be done .
I would therefore like to express my appreciation for the advance preparations for the 2010 conference on the review of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty , and I would also ask the Council to take into consideration the European Parliament 's wish to play an active part in this work , as well as the initiative expressed in Parliament 's resolution , and in the very near future to include MEPs in this conference to work as members of the European Union delegation .



on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I wish to thank Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner and Mr Gloser for what they have said , but first let me thank all the Members from the other groups for welcoming the Greens ' initiative for this debate , and particularly for making it possible for us , during this part-session , to adopt a compromise motion with which we can all identify , something that I , particularly in view of the current situation , see as a good and important signal .
The Commissioner has already sketched out the various problem areas .
Let me , then , take a brief look back to twenty years ago , to 8 December 1987 , when a shock went around the world , for , before the Cold War 's nuclear threat had passed , the INF Treaty was signed , constituting real agreement on nuclear disarmament .
Where are we now ?
It has to be said , with regret , that we have in some respects gone backwards , for both Kofi Annan and Henry Kissinger have said that the campaign against the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the efforts at nuclear disarmament are on the point of complete and final failure .
What can we in Europe do in this situation ?
Do we have enough confidence to raise - multilaterally and in international fora - issues on which we can hope to see progress made ?
Would it not be timely to use the forthcoming meeting of the Nuclear Supplies Group in Cape Town from 16 to 20 April as an opportunity to speak out against the planned deal between India and the USA ?
If we do not do that , what kind of signal is being sent to the other states ?
Are we not then saying to them , ' Build nuclear programmes and nuclear weapons , even outside the NPT , and the USA will even reward and support you ' ?
What kind of signal does that send to Iran ?
I say that quite deliberately , and as one who takes a decidedly different view of these things .
Where Iran is concerned , we are stuck in a cul-de-sac , and we have helped ourselves get into it .
Everyone in it needs to put themselves into reverse gear in order to get back out again , or else the troops will end up being sent in .
We want to help keep this Treaty alive .
On Thursday , we will be adopting a resolution to the effect that a delegation will be sent to Vienna to actively monitor this process , and I hope that we will , there , together , enable these important NPT provisions to give signs of continued life .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the nuclear weapons non-proliferation treaty faces dangers on many fronts , or so it appears from the latest reports .
According to the 3 March edition of the Süddeutsche Zeitung , the Americans are planning new nuclear warheads , and that is something on which we take a critical line .
In the UK - an EU Member State - Mr Blair , the Prime Minister , wants to spend EUR 30 billion on modernising the British armed forces ' nuclear weaponry .
The British House of Commons is due to vote on it tomorrow .
That is nuclear rearmament and puts the non-proliferation treaty at risk ; a critical statement from the German Presidency of the Council is called for .
We endorse the protests against the nuclear programme whereby the USA plans a missile defence system in the Czech Republic , Poland and in the Caucasus , with NATO - according to Mr de Hoop Scheffer as reported yesterday - wanting to take part with one of its own .
The German Minister for the Armed Forces , Mr Jung , wants to put the whole system under NATO control .
It is about time the Council and the Commission got round to expressing forthright criticism of these anti-missile schemes , and , together with two colleagues , I have tabled a declaration expressing opposition to this system .
At the same time , according to the former NATO commander-in-chief Wesley Clark , preparations are in hand for a war against Iran .
It is hypocrisy to criticise Iran if we ourselves possess nuclear weapons and are engaged in updating them .
The nuclear weapons non-proliferation treaty requires that all nuclear weapons be disposed of .
The fact is that there are no good nuclear weapons , and what is needed , and right now , is disarmament .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the nuclear aspirations of Pyongyang and Teheran constitute a direct threat to the Non-Proliferation Treaty , the NPT , with their respective neighbouring countries in North-East Asia and the Middle East , perhaps feeling obliged to join the nuclear powers .
In addition , in the event of the NPT being eroded , a negative effect is to be expected , similar to that in respect of the biological and chemical weapons .
In short , the entire multilateral arms control structure is at risk of collapsing - truly , a spectre menacing the whole world .
Meanwhile , the question arises as to what sort of authority the UN Security Council is left with , when UN members stock up on nuclear weapons against its express will .
Do the Council and Commission share my view that the crisis of the NPT is also a crisis situation for the highest international authority ?
Given this extremely serious situation , I expect them to make a maximum effort to convince the UN Security Council to persuade Pyongyang and Teheran away from their ominous nuclear course , as time is pressing .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the nuclear weapons non-proliferation treaty was a great achievement , but we see nuclear weapons continuing to proliferate .
We also , alas , cannot fail to see that the review conference has , for the moment , proved abortive , and that is why this preparatory conference in Vienna is so important .
It is also of the very utmost importance that this House should be able to contribute its opinion to it , but the effectiveness of this is conditional upon the resolution being a joint effort , and one reflecting all our views .
I hope that we will achieve that sort of result when we come to the vote .
After the Soviet Union collapsed , we all believed that the days of mutually assured destruction were behind us , but , today , the risk is that , while that may have been banished from the global stage , it may be about to resume regionally .
We must , together , do everything in our power to prevent this from happening .

I would like to say something about one of the proposals , of which there are many , namely the international system for uranium enrichment , something that has now acquired extraordinary importance , but I also want to say something about another matter that is not directly connected with this debate , although it does have to be the subject of public discussion , and that is the issue of the anti-missile system .
Here in Europe , we are currently discussing an American anti-missile defence system and its effects on us , but what must be of real interest to us is the security of Europe .
The Iranian rockets against which the Americans are protecting themselves , are much closer to Europe than they are to America .
We are told , for example , that these Iranian rockets are already capable of reaching Southern Italy and Greece , and that is why we have to have a general debate on the question of whether this sort of system is needed , for if it is , it is we , Europeans , who need it just as much .
That is something else that we in this House must discuss and on which we have to reach decisions .
( NL ) Mr President , the Non-Proliferation Treaty is , in fact , the most important pillar underlying the international consensus that the spread of nuclear arms must be stopped , with the ultimate goal , of course , as my group Chairman underlined a moment ago , of bringing about general nuclear disarmament .
Since the spread of weapons of mass destruction forms an increasing threat to international peace and security , we must reassess the treaty , breathe new life into it and strengthen it .
Needless to say , the developments in Iran are causing us great concern .
Despite repeated warnings from the international community , Iran continues its efforts in the area of uranium enrichment .
At the same time , we know that there is a real risk that terrorist groups have access to nuclear weapons or similar .
In order to stop the spread of weapons of mass destruction , an effective multilateral stance is indispensable .
What is more , the Non-Proliferation Treaty stands or falls by it .
By acting independently and unilaterally , though , all common efforts in this area are set to be undermined .
This is why the recognised nuclear powers must make a visible investment .
They are , in fact , also responsible for the credibility of the Non-Proliferation Treaty as it currently stands .
Precisely in this light , we are placing question marks by the recent attempt by the US to get Poland and the Czech Republic to agree to the stationing elements of an anti-rocket shield on their territories .
According to the Americans , the rocket defence system offers protection against possible attacks from North Korea and Iran .
This does , in fact , go against the intention to prevent these countries from developing a nuclear arms arsenal .
With their proposal , the Americans are also ignoring the concerns of Russia , which , rightly or wrongly , regards the rocket shield as a provocation , or even as a threat to its domestic security .
A protective shield that subsequently leads to mistrust between the three key partners - the US , Russia and the EU - that wish to stop proliferation , is not exactly the multilateral action we had in mind .
Moreover , we wonder how such bilateral cooperation fits into the European security strategy and the NATO partnership .
For this reason , we have major objections to this course of affairs , and we therefore call on the United States and the EU Member States involved to reconsider the plans and to seek multilateral alternatives compatible with the security arrangements mutually agreed by us in the European Union .
( HU ) Let us not embellish things , the NPT supervisory conference 2005 was a failure .
Unfortunately the whole story of the NPT is singularly lacking in success stories .
North Korea has withdrawn from the system , and has launched its own military nuclear programme .
Iran , too , has turned against the system , and we do not know how far along things are , but its intentions are in any case not favourable .
India , Pakistan and Israel show no inclination to join .
Nevertheless , there are some positive developments as well : on 16 February , the Six-Party Talks at Beijing gave rise to an agreement .
We will soon find out what the value of such an agreement is .
Mr El Baradei will visit North Korea tomorrow , and his visit will no doubt ascertain whether the intentions of the North Koreans are sincere .
The current action is very significant .
Respect for the whole NPT is at stake .
We need to combine flexibility with consistency .
We must be flexible in methods and timing , but we cannot be flexible as regards goals .
The goals must be clear and unambiguous .
North Korea must return to the NPT system and immediately put a stop to the military nuclear programme .
The way we handle the problems of North Korea will have a direct influence on Iran as well .
If we are successful in North Korea , then we will also succeed in relation to Iran .
If we should fail to achieve success here , then it is to be feared that we will not be able to keep even Iran on the right path .
Preparations for the review conference will be real and successful if we can thereby face these two great challenges , namely North Korea and Iran , and successfully solve these two problems .
There is now a slight chance of this , but only if we are consistent and consistently represent our principles .
Commissioner , you said that proliferation is potentially the greatest threat to our security , and I agree with you .
How ironic is it , then , that tomorrow the UK Government is likely to take a decision to replace the Trident nuclear submarine system that will precisely accelerate that proliferation and thus undermine our collective security ?
When it does so , it will be demonstrating the most breathtaking hypocrisy : maintaining and further developing the UK 's own nuclear weapons , whilst waging illegal wars to try to stop others from obtaining them .
What moral authority can the UK Government possibly think it has to lecture countries like Iran about not developing nuclear weapons , when we ourselves continue to do exactly that ?
The NPT is made up of two pledges : non-nuclear states agree not to acquire nuclear weapons , provided that nuclear states begin a serious process of getting rid of theirs .
If we do not keep our side of that bargain , if we do not abide by international law , we can hardly be surprised if others do not keep their side of the bargain either .
The UK Government 's upgrading of Trident fundamentally undermines the EU 's collective position on non-proliferation and , therefore , both the UK and , indeed , France , should be strongly condemned by both the Council and the Commission .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the nuclear crises in North Korea and Iran have once again spread fear throughout the world and triggered suspicion between nations and peoples .
The international debate on nuclear rearmament has again called the future of mankind into question .
We must restart negotiations with Iran and shun any military action , as this would only serve to exacerbate the current crisis .
It is therefore vital to relaunch debate regarding the renewal of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 2010 .
The European Union must apply suitable political , economic and commercial pressure on countries such as India , Pakistan , Iran , North Korea and other countries such as China and the United States .
In addition , the European Union must , as a matter of the utmost urgency , promote a Mediterranean free of nuclear weapons .
By means of suitable economic and social policies we must transform the Mediterranean into a sea of peace - an area that is completely non-nuclear .
This is why we must apply the pressure we have mentioned to Israel too , which certainly has the right to look after its own security but which must not be founded upon nuclear fear and the annihilation of other peoples .
In addition , the recent decision by President Bush to install missile launchers in the Czech Republic or new military nuclear surveillance installations in Poland only worsens military relations with Russia .
This decision by President Bush is one that I must condemn immediately .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are all agreed that a renewed commitment is needed against the proliferation of thermonuclear weapons , as Mr Schulz said in his speech , but at the same time we need to start saying more clearly that it is not enough to prevent proliferation , but we must start fighting once again for universal disarmament .
In truth , there will never be a true planetary democracy if some countries can dominate the world because they have the power to destroy it several times over .
In fact , the countries in the nuclear club , and in particular , today , the United Kingdom and France , will have the authority and the moral right to prevent proliferation by other countries if they themselves begin to disarm and if they place on the agenda a ban on all weapons of mass destruction .
Unfortunately , this is not the course which is being pursued , if we look at the unilateral policy adopted by the United States of America - a policy which also runs counter to NATO . The United States has secretly negotiated with some European countries to host US anti-missile programmes , and we have tabled a specific amendment against this .
We must , therefore , block these plans , saying ' No ' to proliferation but ' Yes ' to a European initiative designed to achieve universal disarmament .
Mr President , as we look ahead to the nuclear non-proliferation Treaty review conference in 2010 there is no doubt that the Treaty is already under considerable stress , particularly with the debates about Iran and North Korea , so there could be no worse time for a country to send out the message that nuclear weapons are essential for any country 's security , however useless they are against the real threats that we face , like climate change and terrorism .
But that is exactly what the British Government is proposing to do and , as we have already heard , tomorrow in Westminster MPs will be voting on whether to renew the Trident nuclear weapons system and take the UK and the rest of the world into a new nuclear age and a new nuclear arms race .
Under the NPT we should be discussing a timetable for disarmament of these illegal and immoral weapons , not their renewal .
I would urge all the groups in this Parliament to support the resolution and the amendments to encourage UK MPs tomorrow to oppose Trident replacement and to honour the commitment made over 35 years ago when the NPT was signed .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the nuclear threat is for real , and , unfortunately , also getting more acute , as you , Mr President-in-Office , pointed out by reference to the two hot spots in Iran and North Korea .
There is no doubt about the need for us to get started , right now , on preparing the review conference in good time , in order , there , to set out our priorities as we need to do , but it is even more important by far that we should be trying , right now , to take measures to reinforce the credibility of the international community and of the European Union where the implementation and enforcement of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty are concerned , for the quality of that treaty will be measured in terms of the successes it actually achieves .
At present , I see the chances of such strategies being implemented as very good , particularly in view of what I see of the situation in North Korea and the contacts we have with both the South and the North of that land in my capacity as Chairman of the Parliament 's delegation for relations with the Korean peninsula .

This European Union of ours , and our Parliament in particular , have helped bring about the resumption of the six-party talks , in which we are a welcome partner , albeit not as part of the six-party talks , but warmly welcomed as a facilitator and as an outside source of support , and we have played our part in getting the talks restarted on 13 February .
I am cautiously optimistic .
What is at stake is that disarmament be put into effect ; we have been assured that it will be , and now is the time for North Korea to take action , but , contrariwise , it is also necessary that we , as a Union , should play our part in taking action that will help bring about political change in North Korea , by , for example , supporting the food security , regional security and human security programmes , with the ultimate goal of a Korean peninsula free of nuclear weapons , so that the present threat - not least to Europe - fades away .
( PT ) The forthcoming conference in Vienna is an opportunity for the European Union to take the lead .
Europe 's position should be based on two essential ideas : strengthening the International Atomic Energy Agency and pressing for compliance with Article 6 of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty .
In this respect , I agree that updating Trident is incompatible with Article 6 of the NTP and , since it affects the United Kingdom , it also affects the European Union .
The European Union must support the multilateral approach to uranium enrichment and ensure that all countries sign the additional protocol to the safeguard agreement .
That may prevent further challenges like those posed by Iran .
In addition , the EU must do all it can to ensure that the 13 steps to disarmament identified at PrepCom 2000 are implemented as quickly as possible .
Unless Europe takes it upon itself to uphold the essential balance on which the NTP is based , PrepCom 2007 may mark the beginning of the end for the Treaty .
Mr President , in this respect the fact that Poland , the Czech Republic and the United Kingdom are unilaterally considering taking part in the US missile defence system is a scandalous threat to European commitments .
What is the point of having a European Union or even NATO if it is not to discuss the strategic future of Europe ?
( CS ) Commissioner , Mr President , at the end of the 20th century there were two schools of thought regarding security matters .
According to one , the biggest threat to the world was the unfavourable impact of high oil production on the stability of the Middle East , and the second referred to environmental factors and climate change .
11 September and Hurricane Katrina demonstrated that the source of the danger is identical : energy greed and excessive energy consumption .
Ensuring that 20 % of the energy we use is from renewable sources will not bring a complete solution ; the only solution whereby we could see off both threats , cut emissions and reduce dependence on the unstable Middle East is nuclear energy .
Let us confront the Greens with their now outdated arguments about the dangers of nuclear energy .
We must not let them use the situation in Iran and elsewhere to hold us to ransom on the grounds of the possible misuse of nuclear energy .
We have one instrument at our disposal to counteract this : the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) .
One positive result of the 2010 conference will be key security measures .
In our view , the core issues are as follows : uranium enrichment and reprocessing pursuant to Article 4 , including debates on regional nuclear fuel distribution centres ; and secondly the need to find solutions to unauthorised withdrawals from Article 10 of the Treaty . We therefore call on the Council and the Commission to take the lead in negotiations at the preparatory committee in Vienna and make a substantial contribution towards a positive result in the 2010 conference .
We also ask you for a implementation report on the 43 measures arising from the Council 's common position , which already applied to the unfortunate debate on the Treaty in 2005 .
We also urge the Member States to comply strictly with the tough wording of relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions in relation to the NPT , and this includes banking operations and businesses in some southern European states .
Commissioner , one final word , if I may .
We must begin to look for a way of inviting Israel to negotiate the revision of the NPT .
Please consult and work together with us .
( PL ) Mr President , we have lived with the threat posed by proliferation of weapons of mass destruction for many years now .
We have become even more aware of it in recent times because of the danger that fissile material and chemical or biological weapons might fall into terrorist hands .
This fear has resulted in strategic documents drawn up both by the European Union and by other international organisations .
In particular , I would like to draw attention to the Comprehensive Political Guidance adopted by NATO at the end of last year .
The nuclear aspirations of certain countries , notably North Korea and Iran , have also given rise to concern as was mentioned earlier .
We are pleased to note that some progress has been made in the multilateral negotiations with North Korea and regret the lack of progress in the negotiations with Iran .
It appears that four conditions must be met if the very serious threat posed by proliferation is to be overcome .
Firstly , the current non-proliferation regime in the framework of the Non-Proliferation Treaty must be maintained and perhaps even strengthened in 2010 on the occasion of the review conference .
I endorse the call for the European Union Member States to speak with one voice at that conference .
Their determination and cohesive approach are required .
Secondly , it is important for the alliance between Europe and the United States to continue combating terrorism consistently .
Thirdly , it is important for the negotiations with North Korea to prove effective and to maintain the diplomatic approach to Iran .
Fourthly , contrary to the opinions of certain Members on the Left , it is important to create an anti-missile shield that will defend not only the United States but also its European allies from strategic missile attacks .
It is important for this shield to have an interoperative system protecting against short and medium-range missiles and for the system to be a joint one .
The TBMD project that NATO is to complete by 2010 is therefore of vital importance .
Mr President , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , honourable Members , I want to say how very grateful I am for your support , for it does after all turn out that we agree on many things .
Taking our present situation as our starting point , we must address ourselves with greater energy to achieving , at this preparatory stage , a common position on the matters in which we , in 2005 , perceived setbacks .
I would like to make it clear that while it is not a matter of doubt that the nuclear non-proliferation treaty has come under pressure from different sides , it does - if we take it seriously and have agreed on the 2005 Common Position - offer us a basis on which we can and must rely in the present preparatory conference .


I certainly want to underline what so many of you , including Mr Schulz , have said about the importance of putting an emphasis on the multilateral approach , for we do , indeed , all know from experience that unilateralism gets us nowhere , that we need the multilateral approach , and that the more we demand it , the more necessary it becomes that we , within the European Union , should take up a common position in order to make progress on this front .
The path that the European Union has sketched out in relation to Iran is the right one in both political and diplomatic terms , and the offer reiterated by the Council a few weeks ago is the right one even though some are becoming impatient - not that there are many alternatives available .
We have both - a resolution on security with the relevant sanctions , while , by the same token , the door to negotiations with Iran is still open .
Let me emphasise once more what I said at the outset about non-proliferation and disarmament .
This issue must , in the interests of the peaceful use of nuclear energy , remain on the agenda , even though views may differ to some degree as regards the ways in which the dangers can be minimised .
It is important that we should get support from your House for the forthcoming discussions , which are sure not to be straightforward .
As for the exchange of information between Council and Parliament , and collaboration between them , I am able , on behalf of the Presidency to offer , firstly , a briefing for the relevant committee following the first session of the preparatory conference , and , secondly , a progress report detailing , by reference to the 43 points contained in a previous resolution , which of them have been achieved and which not .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , this was a very useful debate in a difficult situation .
We will study your recommendations very carefully , because the preparatory conference in Vienna gives us an important opportunity to better prepare for the 2010 conference and thus , hopefully , make up for a very difficult conference in 2005 .
We know that the seriousness and the importance of the situation as regards non-proliferation goes far beyond what is commonly known among our citizens .
We conclude also from recent Eurobarometer surveys that our people want positive action .
I agree with Mr Zappalà and Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck when they say that the agreement on the importance of the link between weapons of mass destruction , proliferation and terrorism is necessary .
This has to be stressed in the European security strategy , and it is being stressed , but we now have to implement it in the right way .
It is also my conviction that the efforts of the European Parliament to promote coherence and more joint action are absolutely crucial .
Everyone has mentioned that speaking with one voice is also crucial .
Therefore , the Commission needs your valuable support to maximise its impact with regard to the common objective .
Certainly , we will contribute to the work that will be done in Vienna because this will enhance our credibility , as many have said .
I should also like to thank Mr Pirker and Parliament 's delegation , particularly with regard to North Korea .
I agree that North Korea is important not only in itself but also as a possible window of opportunity for progress elsewhere .
However , we are still committed to never giving up as long as that is possible .
In our headlines , we see the non-proliferation issues mostly referred to with reference to individual countries .
However , let us not lose sight of the importance of the issue , as Mr Schulz has said , of the international system as a whole on the multilateral approach and effectiveness .
The most important four principles we should try to enhance again at the Preparatory Committee and then at the next review conference are as follows .
Firstly , the question of the non-parties : I think there are three states which have so far refused to adhere to the treaty .
Let us try to bring them in .
Secondly , on the withdrawals in January 2003 , the DPRK announced that it intended to withdraw from the NPT - it was the first state to do so .
Several states believe that the DPRK is still legally bound by the treaty and has not followed the correct legal procedures to withdraw .
Let us try to tackle this question on non-compliant parties .
Some states which acceded to the NNWS have , nevertheless , sought to acquire nuclear weapons in the past and this , therefore , needs to be tackled .
Finally , there is the question of good faith .
It has been mentioned a lot around the table that most non-nuclear weapons states believe the nuclear weapons states have not done enough to make progress towards the goal of nuclear disarmament - Article 6 .
I think this should be the main bone of our contention at the five-yearly review conferences .
We also see , therefore that a broad basis for a consensus is necessary , and all the big countries , like Russia and China , should be included in such a dialogue .
Pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) I have received six motions for resolutions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
I believe this is an important debate .
The proliferation of nuclear weapons makes the world less , rather than more , safe .
Whether Israel or India , Pakistan or North Korea , we should pressure them to join the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
Yet we should recall that the NPT talks not only about stopping the spread of nuclear weapons , but about the world 's nuclear powers reducing and removing their own capabilities .
The former gets more attention than the latter .
The Socialist amendment condemning the US anti-missile shield is all too appropriate .
As we have seen in NE Asia , with Japan 's deployment of Theatre Missile Defence and Theatre High Altitude Defence , these are enabling offensive technologies for the Bush Administration 's doctrine of pre-emptive deterrence .
With their deployment , the US will be able to launch an attack on countries with small numbers of nuclear weapons and defend against any orphan missile missed in the initial attack .
I will also be supporting Amendment 1 by the Greens .
I am not in favour of unilateral abolition of Britain 's Trident fleet , but I am entirely unconvinced of the need , at this stage , to renew it .
Childcare ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statement on childcare .

Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , the guiding and overarching principle of our Presidency 's programme in social policy is ' seizing demographic change as an opportunity and promoting equal opportunities for all at work and in society ' , for demographic change is a fact , and something of fundamental relevance to all the Member States of the EU .
We can , however , reverse this demographic trend by working towards the right conditions under which people can actually have the number of children that they want , but one essential condition for people to be able to earn a living is the compatibility of family and work .
The return to work after taking a break to have a family must be facilitated just as much as parallel working and childrearing for both parents , for it has been shown by a European comparative study that countries with a well-developed range of childcare options have overall a higher percentage of women going out to work , particularly where those women are the mothers of more than one child in need of care .
There is also a particularly low birth rate where relatively few women go out to work , while highly-qualified women delay starting a family for a long time or do without children altogether .
Whilst the average hours worked by men increases in line with the number of children they have , women who are also mothers reduce the number of hours they work , and that is why we , at Member State level , must endeavour to arrange things so that equality for women and men at work may improve and to get the conditions for them right .

It is because there is such a great need for action in this area that the German Presidency is the first since 2002 to make childcare one of its priorities , and one important step towards the improved provision of childcare places was taken as long ago as 2002 , when the Heads of State and Government , at the Barcelona European Council , resolved that the Member States would have to achieve a minimum provision level by 2010 , with childcare available for at least 90 % of children between the age of three and the age at which they are required to begin school , and for at least one-third of all children under the age of three years .
This target was , in 2003 , incorporated into the European Employment Strategy and reiterated in the Integrated Guidelines for Growth and Employment ( 2005-2008 ) .
There are countries in which these quotas for provision have already been exceeded , in some cases by a considerable degree ; for example , some seven Member States have achieved or exceeded the 33 % quota set for childcare services for children under the age of three years , and it is already apparent not only that the other states are lagging behind , but also that the level of provision in some of them is blatantly low .
The same can be said for the proportion of Member States that exceed or fail to meet the Barcelona target of 90 % for children between three and school entry age .
What that means is that many Member States have to make much more of an effort in order to achieve the targets set at Barcelona .
The 2006 / 2007 Joint Employment Report , which the Council adopted on 22 February - just a few weeks ago - enlarges on this point and is unambiguously critical of the slow progress where childcare is concerned .
The lack of progress being made in child care could well have adverse effects on the attempts to raise the average percentage of women in work in the EU to at least 60 % , which is another shared goal under the European Employment Strategy .
This means that it is of the utmost importance that the European Council on 8 / 9 March confirmed the European Alliance for Families , which will inject renewed impetus into the achievement of the agreed goals for childcare and women in the workplace , and will also be the subject of discussion at the EPSCO Council on 30 May of this year .

The European Alliance for Families helps to improve family-friendly living conditions in the European Union , and will create a platform for the exchange of opinions and information between the Member States .
It is closely involved with the actual enforcement of equality , for improved balance of work and family life helps to improve equality of opportunity in the world of work .
It has also been demonstrated that , if we are consistent in going down the road of improving conditions for young parents , of developing childcare and early-years education , of developing - hand in hand with the business sector - systematically family-friendly work structures , then we will be having a positive effect on the 2020-2030 period , the very period that is set to be particularly problematic in economic and demographic terms .
The issue of work / family compatibility presents challenges , however , not only to the state , but also to businesses .
Children are our future ; they are the workers , the consumers and the parents of tomorrow .
Consideration of family concerns must become part of entrepreneurial strategy and of business culture ; flexible working hours and models of part-time working - for both mothers and fathers - must become standard everywhere , and in this respect it would be helpful if it were to dawn on businesses that consideration of family concerns pays off in business terms , for mothers and fathers cannot give themselves completely to their work unless they know that their children are being looked after properly during the day .
Family-friendly attitudes at work also benefit the state and the social security agencies , for the more mothers and fathers are enabled to go out and earn money , the more taxes and social security contributions get paid .
I am keen , though , despite all this talk about the state and the economy , not to lose sight of the children , on whose well-being Europe ought to focus .
Children need high-quality facilities in order to learn cognitive and social skills .
Good and stimulating daycare for children is an important , necessary and valuable supplement to their upbringing in the family context , and that is what parents want .
We must not be content with ' care lite ' .
Another reason why it is so important is that , in many states , the reality of the situation is that not all children 's interests are best fostered within the family , and that many children are growing up without siblings .
Such children find in the crèche and the daycare provider a safe place , stable relationships and encouragement from various quarters to learn language and other skills .
Studies all around the world have shown that children benefit from being supported and taught in a daycare facility or by a daytime carer .
I am sure that we will , with your support , benefit from new impetus in the areas I have named and that we have set in motion an important debate in the European Union .
Mr President , honourable Members , five years have passed since the European Council set targets for pre-school childcare availability in the context of the European Employment Strategy .
In March 2002 , the European Council of Barcelona agreed that Member States should strive to provide childcare by 2010 to at least 90 % of all children between three years old and the mandatory age for starting school , and at least 33 % of all children under three years of age , in an effort to remove disincentives to female labour participation .
The European Council reiterated the need to achieve these targets in the European Pact for Gender Equality adopted in March 2006 .
These targets are a long way from being met , however .
The provision of affordable , accessible and quality childcare is vital if Europe is to meet its agendas of growth , employment and gender equality .
Childcare is needed to unleash the productive potential of the European workforce .
It allows women and men with young children to enter and stay in paid employment , while improving their quality of life .
It eliminates a major constraint that restricts the free choice of individuals to reconcile their professional and private lives .
It also offers children an excellent start in life .
Accessible , high-quality childcare is a vital prerequisite to achieving genuine gender equality .
Women continue to carry most of the responsibility for the care of children .
At the same time , women are affected by the gender gaps that persist in employment , unemployment and pay .
The provision of decent and widely accessible childcare contributes to the economic independence of women .
It also gives single parents , most of whom are women , the opportunity to improve their living conditions .
Childcare also contributes to addressing the demographic challenge of a falling birth rate , by supporting the individual choices of women and men , including decisions on the number of children they wish to have .
If affordable , accessible and quality childcare is provided , having more children will not hinder labour market participation .
The Commission is committed to supporting the achievement of the Barcelona goals .
In last year 's roadmap for achieving equality between women and men in 2006-2010 , the Commission committed itself to supporting the achievement of the Barcelona targets on childcare and the development of other care facilities through the Structural Funds and the exchange of good practice .
The current rules for the Structural Funds already allowed for this use .
In this context , the Commission pointed out that services and structures are adapting too slowly to a situation where both women and men work and where women continue to be regarded as the main carers of children and other dependants .
The implementation of the Barcelona targets is monitored in the framework of the Lisbon agenda for growth and jobs .
The Annual Progress Report in December noted that while there has been some progress in Member States to develop childcare facilities , progress towards the Barcelona targets remains slow .
The Commission has therefore invited Member States to focus in 2007 on ' increasing the availability and affordability of quality childcare in line with their own national targets ' .
In the Annual report on gender equality for 2006 published last month , the Commission pointed out that Member States should step up their efforts to meet the Barcelona targets and support the development of care for older and disabled persons .
It also underlined the qualitative aspect of childcare and the fact that families and parents working on a full-time basis require appropriate opening hours and flexible access .
The Commission welcomes the establishment of an Alliance for Families , which was announced in the conclusions of the European Council .
The ' Alliance for Families ' will serve as a platform for the exchange of views and knowledge on family-friendly policies as well as of best practices between Member States .
The Commission also invited Member States to make full use of the potential offered by the Cohesion Policy to support the promotion of equality between women and men , including improving access to affordable childcare , through programmes cofinanced by the Structural Funds .
The Commission believes that childcare should be viewed as an essential part of a comprehensive approach to reconciling work and private life .
Men should be encouraged to take an equal share of family responsibilities , in particular through incentives to take leave entitlements and by developing innovative and adaptable work patterns .
The need for care services for school-age children and other dependant persons should also be addressed .
I am pleased to announce today that I intend to submit , in 2008 , a Communication on Childcare in which I will make concrete proposals to increase the availability , quality and affordability of childcare .
We believe that this will be an important stimulus to Member States to meet the Barcelona targets .
Mr President , I welcome the commitment made by the Commission and the Council to do more to reconcile people 's family and professional lives and to increase the provision of affordable childcare .
However , I cannot hide my disappointment regarding the very mixed results obtained in the wake of the 2002 Barcelona Council .
As the study by your Directorate-General for Employment concluded in September 2005 , the insufficient number of affordable childcare structures represents not only a barrier to the economic and social integration of economically-disadvantaged families , but also , and above all , a major obstacle to the equal participation of women and men in the labour market and to the balanced division of tasks between women and men in family life .
It emerges from a very large number of studies that Europeans cannot have children , as they would like , or have as many children as they would like .
Furthermore , given the way in which the needs and demands of the labour market have developed , the Member States should work towards establishing more flexible and more diverse childcare services so as to broaden the range of choices and to respond to the specific preferences , needs and circumstances of parents and families .
There are people who wish to care for their children themselves ; we cannot let these people down or penalise them since they are helping to maintain the social cohesion of the family unit .
As for those men and women who care for dependents on a permanent or temporary basis , they should receive a recognised status granting them , among other things , social security and pension rights , and , just like those who are gainfully employed , they should be able to benefit from lifelong learning so that they can fulfil the demands of the job market .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , as has just been said , we have ambitious targets from the Barcelona Summit when it comes to the development of childcare .
A number of countries have achieved these already . Other countries are still a fair way from doing so , which is an unsatisfactory state of affairs .
Why is child care important , then ?
It is important for families with a view to their being able to combine family life and working life .
It is important in terms of gender equality because it has traditionally been women who have had to accept responsibility for childcare and so have not entered the labour market .
It is important for children to have access to high-quality childcare as an important stage in their progress towards , for example , school and the adult world .
It is also important for employment and growth as , if we look at those countries that have made good progress in developing childcare , they also have high levels of employment , including women 's employment , and thus higher growth too .
Looking at demographic development , we see the need to have women - indeed , everyone - in the labour market .
The method we have is that of best practice .
Many of the decisions are taken in the Member States , at local and regional levels . I have to say , however , how satisfactory it is that the debate has now been extended .
I am following , for example , the debate in Germany , which is extremely lively in a way that it has not been in the past .
It is important to have this ongoing debate in our Member States and for us to see the need for child care so that this development might get under way .
I wish to thank the German Presidency for having invited me , in my capacity as draftsman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to the informal meeting taking place in May , when these issues are to be discussed .
I am pleased to accept the invitation .
We hope that we can make some headway in developing child care , for the sake not only of children and families but also of employment .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , I warmly welcome this initiative on families and childcare .
Children and young people are the most valuable asset we have for our future .
We have to make the sort of decisions that enable them to live a full and secure life , and these decisions need to be made now .
I myself have been privileged in that , when my children were small , I was a house husband in Finland for five years .
In our society there was the option of staying at home , and that is also true today .
I can therefore state looking back that the five years I spent as a house husband looking after two boys were , without doubt , among the best years of my life .
It seems to me that when we speak of parenthood today , we still conventionally try and place the burden of responsibility solely on the shoulders of mothers and women .
Parenthood means that fathers too have to take full responsibility for their children .
We also need to ensure that work and family life can be reconciled so that families can choose which of the parents goes out to work if it is impossible for both to do so .
On the other hand , we should develop forms of day care so that children are provided with good , first-rate care if both parents are gainfully employed .
Childhood is an important time , as the data from research shows .
The first four to five years in a child 's life are reflected in the rest of that child 's life .
The decisions made then , the care and love received and the security that a child has felt will be conspicuous throughout a person 's life .
I am therefore in favour of these aims to try and promote the status of families and children .
I hope that something concrete will come of them and that they will not merely remain aims .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to point out to you , to the Commission and Council representatives , and to all those present in the Chamber that Europe 's demographic situation will not improve unless politicians really take children 's interests to heart .
This can only really happen if children are granted political rights .
I refer to voting rights for children , rights to be granted to children and entrusted to their legal guardians , namely their parents .
An attempt to do just this has already been made in the German Parliament , the Bundestag .
The Bundestag debated a bill to grant voting rights to children from birth .
The rights would be vested in the children 's parents and legal guardians .
Of course , significant legal changes would be needed to bring this about , but it does seem that it would be more conducive to righting Europe 's demographic situation than the current legal arrangements .
Unfortunately , it was because of the changes that the bill was rejected during debate in the Bundestag , even though it had the backing of many leading politicians and the support of the committee in which it had been discussed .
I just wished to point this out .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the most important reason for making women and men equal is to give women the right and the opportunity to provide for themselves .
It means giving them not only the right , but also the opportunity , to work by making good , high-quality childcare available to them . Unless society helps all children have access to good childcare , with fair financial costs for the parents , and accepts responsibility for bringing about such a state of affairs , women will be forced to rely on others providing for them .
As the Presidency did , I wish , however , to highlight children 's rights and the child 's perspective in this connection .
It is incredibly important for children to be able to associate with other children , to meet with and otherwise encounter adults other than their parents and to have access to the educational experiences necessary to children 's development .
Children who have the advantage of childcare involving both other children and adults trained as educators obtain a better start in life and increase their social skills .
Good childcare is just as important , then , for children themselves as it is for gender equality and economic growth .
I think that it is time for the EU institutions and , above all , the Member States to put at least as much commitment into children 's rights as they have hitherto put into the internal market for goods and services .
Otherwise , we shall not even achieve the Barcelona targets .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Commissioner , I rely heavily on child and adult special care to be here and to make my contribution to this debate today .
It is important for a woman to have the right to pursue a career if she chooses and good , affordable childcare is essential in ensuring this .
But , having worked at home and raised a large family , I know the important part I played in the development of my children .
I consider myself fortunate to have been able to stay home with my children and my children fortunate to have had me .
What is the debate about ?
It is important that we are honest .
Is this debate about children ?
My first grandchild was born this morning .
If we could ask him , he would say that he would choose to be cared for by his mother .
Is the debate about choice for women ?
If it is , we would , on the one hand , financially support childcare and flexible working conditions for mothers who choose to work and , on the other hand , financially support mothers who choose to work at home caring for children .
If the debate is about the EU economy , then in the short term providing an extensive childcare system and a network of legislation that actually gets women into the workplace , whether or not they want to be there , makes sense .
But in the long term , given EU demographics and the intricacies of child development , channelling the vast majority of mothers into the workplace during their children 's young years is a policy that I am convinced we will someday regret .
I am sure the European Parliament would like to join me in congratulating you on the birth of your grandson today .
( SK ) The problem of placing children in pre-school care facilities is also closely linked to the matter we were discussing here in Parliament last night , that is , gender equality and equal opportunities .
Besides her desire to be an equal partner at work , a woman also longs to become a mother .
The inadequate care that the state provides for children of pre-school age is one of the reasons why women are less likely to secure roles at decision-making levels .
For that reason , specific targets were set in 2002 at the European Union summit in Barcelona .
It was envisaged that by 2010 all Member States of the Union would ensure childcare for at least 90 % of children aged from 3 to 6 years old , as well as for 33 % of children under 3 years of age .
It is generally known that at this age children grow and develop particularly rapidly , and therefore it is essential to make the best use of this time and to prepare them not only for school but also for life .
The attainment of these targets will facilitate the social integration of children from problematic population groups .
The state should see to it that children from all social classes are given an equal opportunity to benefit from basic training for life , and to ensure that this opportunity is not determined by the wealth of their parents .
Facing decreasing birth rates in Europe and ominous demographic statistics , we should take a moment to ponder why young families are not motivated to have children .
We will all agree that a combination of short maternity leaves , taken immediately after a child is born , followed by part-time work and high quality child care facilities is the most effective mix possible .
This will put the conditions in place for the healthy growth of the young generation and for the fulfilment of their parents ' ambitions .
( SK ) I sincerely welcome the statement of the European Commission and Council drawing the attention of Member States to the obligations that they assumed in 2002 in Barcelona , because we no longer have much time left for them to be fulfilled .
As we heard , not even a quarter of the Member States have achieved the targets .
While in different Member States the situation apparently varies , in many of the new Member States it is deteriorating instead of improving .
It would be a real shame if we were to continue to waste time and to declare in 2010 that the targets were illusory and unattainable , as there is no excuse for the lack of preparedness and in this particular case time is unforgiving .
There is no doubt that providing adequate childcare is one of the basic conditions for a better work-life balance .
I am convinced that we cannot increase the employment of women and decrease unemployment among young people , which is very high indeed , without putting the conditions in place for proper childcare as well as care for dependant family members .
It is also sensible to demand that these services adapt to more flexible work patterns and better adapt to new requirements and changing conditions .
It might be worth considering whether this area should not be included in the notion of flexicurity , because without flexibility and the adequate social security and legal certainty associated with these services , flexicurity is not feasible .
In expanding the network of these facilities the question arises as to who should assume not only the start-up costs but also the operational costs .
There should be no doubt that responsibility rests with the Member States in this regard .
Mr President , five years ago the EU set targets for childcare .
Member States should strive to provide childcare for at least 90 % of children aged between three and the mandatory school age , and for 33 % of children under the age of three , by 2010 .
On the fifth anniversary of the Barcelona targets , we are here to evaluate the progress made in this area .
Sadly , these targets have not yet been reached .
Only five countries meet the 33 % target : Belgium , Denmark , France , the Netherlands and Sweden .
We must look at how the other Member States are performing .
I wonder if the Commission has been monitoring the situation regarding these targets .
Is the Commission preparing an analysis ?
Are there common standards in order to monitor childcare ?
What are the consequences for those Member States not implementing the targets ?
Why should Europe invest in childcare ?
It is not by chance that a childcare campaign was launched by the Party of European Socialists , who pleaded for accessible , affordable and good quality childcare .
We did so because we strongly believe that investing in childcare means investing in our future ; putting our children first gives them a good start in life and ensures equal opportunities when later entering the labour market .
It allows the EU to deal with demographic challenges in order to make the EU market a more competitive one , as well as making Europe more social .
It allows greater participation by women in the labour market and makes it possible for men and women to reconcile family and working life , as the Commissioner mentioned in his speech .
Clearly , by investing in childcare , we can make equal opportunities a reality and maximise life 's opportunities for all children .
This can contribute to the elimination of poverty , irrespective of the socioeconomic background .
Therefore , I ask Member States and the Commission to work together and to commit to achieving these targets .
Hungary is a good example : the Minister for Social and Legal Affairs recognised the importance of childcare and is committed to increasing childcare , particularly among children aged 0-3 years , from 8 % to 33 % in five years .
Mr President , our children are by far the most valuable of our assets .
However , at the same time they are also the most vulnerable , not just because of their sensitive somatic and psychological needs while growing up , but also because of the numerous perils encountered in modern living .
For these reasons , amongst many others , our children unquestionably need and deserve our utmost care and attention .
However , in a world in which both parents may be frantically fighting their way into a busy career rat race , a world in which both parents may be consumed in the daily fight of earning more , a world in which the forces of social strain may have destroyed family cohesion , a world in which geographical separation may have diminished the invaluable assistance of grandparents and other close family members - in such a world parental childcare may suffer severely .
This is the world that Member States must assist promptly and comprehensively .
There should be encouragement of initiatives to create a greater number of and better-suited childcare services ; provision for special leave flexibility for parents ; and the establishment of working environments adapted to the needs of parents .
These are just some of the main necessities .
In addition , innovative measures should also be encouraged and improved upon , such as parent counselling services or even schooling for parents , whereby parents may be given greater knowledge and support on how to be better parents and how best to cope with the problems of parenthood .
In conclusion , let us never forget that no childcare services , however good they may be , can replace parental love and affection .
Along with all other measures , perhaps we should also encourage people to re-evaluate their priorities in life .
Is it better for a family to have a higher income but less child-parent contact ?
Is it in the best interests of a family to have two full-time career-chasing parents who rarely meet up at the family dinner ?
Every parent should perhaps consider these questions and try to answer them honestly for their children 's sake .
( PL ) Mr President , our eyes and ears tell us that Europe is getting older .
Fewer and fewer children are being born in the Member States of the European Union .
Why is this ?
Do we not love children any more ?
That is certainly not the case .
What has happened is that we have become more aware of the difficulty of bringing up children .
Furthermore , women in Europe put off starting a family for longer and longer , if they actually decide to have children at all .
One of the reasons for this situation is the provision of childcare during working hours .
Women can only focus on their professional commitments if suitable childcare is provided .
Female unemployment is lowest in the states that provide proper care for women during pregnancy , at birth , and whilst they are feeding and later bringing up their children .
The provision of appropriate treatment for citizens irrespective of their gender or origin , and ensuring their proper development and protection from the moment of birth to advanced old age is a principle that simply must be respected in the contemporary world .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the issue we are discussing is extremely important and places the spotlight once again on social Europe .
For some time we have been pressing for this objective and it is therefore worth stating that investing in and expanding high-quality childcare , providing better training , good day care and new advantages for children would be an unmistakable signal of the political will to move in the right direction .
It is very clear that getting behind children with appropriate social and economic policies means not only thinking seriously about their future , but also helping to create new economic and social conditions for families ; it would make it possible for many parents and , above all , many women to enter the employment market .
After all , as has already been said , this could be a response to one of the challenges that Europe has to tackle - that of demographic change - in fuelling the employment market in a positive way , improving European competitiveness and making our societies richer .
Commissioner , what is therefore needed is more courage and farsightedness , to overcome the delays that exist in the individual Member States , and thus Parliament and the Commission must show commitment and display vigour and determination to achieve the objectives set out .
( PT ) First of all I welcome the communications from the Council and the Commission .
We all agree that there will never be true gender equality until there is a way to reconcile work and family life , both for women and for men .
It is essential that men should share family responsibilities and that women should be able to have a career .
For that to happen , the Member States must urgently establish networks of high-quality , affordable childcare facilities available at appropriate times .
It is lamentable that in 2007 , the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , we are still a long way off the Barcelona targets , and yet , with our ageing population and falling birth rates , the European Union needs as many adults in the job market as possible , and that means more women .
We are eagerly looking forward to the document on this subject that Commissioner Špidla announced here for 2008 .
Mr President , honourable Members , I am most warmly appreciative of your contributions .
If I have not misunderstood any of them , there is a great deal of agreement in this House as to the goal that we have set ourselves , which , indeed , we did a number of years ago , when we also accepted certain obligations .
We have also seen that we have not yet succeeded in achieving these objectives in all the Member States , and that relatively little time remains to us to discharge those obligations before 2010 .
It is also important that the debate on the Alliance for Families should be revived , and I will say quite deliberately that this needs to be done not only in Germany , as Mr Andersson said in the opening words of his speech .
Different views were expressed on the particular subject of whether it might be made obligatory that children be put in childcare facilities , so what we are talking about is freedom of choice .
Freedom of choice is a very important thing to aim for .
Nobody is stipulating in whose care children should be placed or how many children people have to have .
That is not what we are here to debate .
It has to be said , though , that there are special cases in which there is no such freedom of choice , because the specialised care facilities are not there , and that is why it is important , as has been said by the Commission , by you in your speeches and also by the presidency , to hold fast to this goal when there are so many different aspects to be considered .
Some of you have spoken about equality of opportunity , and others about the balance between work and family life , demographic change or children 's education .
Something else that is important is that we have undertaken to increase the proportion of women at work , using flexicurity as one of the means to that end .
It follows that diverse considerations have been taken into account in this debate .
I would like to reiterate how very glad I was to hear Commissioner Špidla announce his intention of submitting a document next year in order to find out what will have resulted from the debates in the Council and in your House and what will have been done about achieving these objectives .
In thanking you for the frankness of this debate , let me also say that it is for every one of us , in any Member State in which the targets have not yet been met or in which there is a risk of them not being met by 2010 , to take appropriate political steps in order that the goals we have set ourselves may - as we indeed hope - be achieved before that date .
Honourable Members , I feel it is abundantly clear that the Barcelona targets are appropriate and that the debate has confirmed that there is broad consensus on this issue .
There is also no doubt that a number of countries are a long way from meeting the targets and that we must do all we can to encourage the Member States to rectify this .
The advantages of the Barcelona Strategy are clear but I should like , if I may , to go over them once again .
Firstly , without responsible childcare structures , it is not possible to achieve basic targets on gender equality .
Secondly , without such arrangements the issue of demographic ageing cannot be addressed in a responsible manner .
Two questions clearly emerged from the debate : the first of which was whether the Commission has followed up the Barcelona Strategy .
As I stressed in my report as part of the Lisbon Strategy , the answer is yes .
The second question concerned measures with which to compare individual countries .
Individual countries are currently compared on the basis of data that they give on an individual basis and , concerning methodology , it is difficult to compare these data .
It is easy to monitor development in one 's own country but comparing one country with another is extremely difficult .
This situation is unsatisfactory , and we are therefore working on ways of making the various individual viewpoints ready for assessment , which should be completed by the end of the year .
There was also a third question that came through , which was whether or not , in the framework of the Barcelona Strategy , we are aiming for parental choice .
Yes , in accordance with the objectives as they are formulated , this is clearly the case .
The Member States should endeavour to provide childcare by 2010 for at least 90 % of children from three years up to school age ; that is , to provide care or to give parents the choice of whether or not to take up this opportunity .
In this regard the purpose of the objective is abundantly clear .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this debate .
I feel it is clear that there is still a great deal still to do , but that we are capable of accomplishing a great deal .
The debate is closed .
Commission Question Time
Marketing of the meat of bovine animals aged 12 months or less ( debate )
The next item is the report by Bernadette Bourzai , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the marketing of the meat of bovine animals aged twelve months or less C6-0330 / 2006 .
Mr President , before going into the details of the report , I would like to thank the rapporteur Mrs Bourzai and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their very good work carried out on this fairly sensitive issue , namely the marketing of bovine meat at an age lower than 12 months .
The report is a response to the request made by the Council in the middle of 2004 towards a harmonisation of the definition of veal within the European Community .
It follows a lengthy consultation process involving different stakeholders and Member State experts , during which the Commission has demonstrated its readiness to take into account , to the greatest extent possible , traditions and habits in different Member States .
The Commission has also considered the main feature of the consumption and the production of veal within the European Union .
It allows the main problems as regards the marketing of the meat of these young animals to be addressed , and I think it offers a balanced response to most of the concerns that have been raised .
For the first time , it is now possible to reach an agreement on this difficult issue .
Many of the amendments that have been proposed or introduced aim to simplify the Commission proposal in order to try to cut red tape , to reduce the administrative burdens and the cost as much as possible , and in principle these amendments should not raise any problems .
I am looking forward to listening to the discussion , and hopefully we can find a solution .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted first of all to thank you all for your contributions , and also to congratulate the officials of Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and of the European Commission who gave me the necessary technical support .
This is a sensitive matter on which the Member States and the European Commission have been seeking an agreement since the beginning of the nineties , as the Commissioner has just reminded us .
The crux of the problem is that usually , when meat from calves is sold , no reference is made either to the type of feed the animals are given or to their age at the time of slaughter , although production practices differ greatly from one Member State to another .
Consequently , because of differing interpretations , traders and consumers find themselves faced with very different products , but sold under one and the same description : veal .
As the European Commission has emphasised , this practice could disturb trade and encourage unfair competition .
Studies show that the term ' veal ' is a sales description that adds value and some traders make use of it to benefit from substantially higher market prices , when in fact they are marketing meat from young bovine animals with very different organoleptic qualities .
It is at the request of several Member States and of the European beef sector , who want clarification , that the Commission has set out its initial proposal , which I think is entirely appropriate .
The Commission proposal is to lay down precise sales descriptions according to age at the time of slaughter , a criterion that is significant enough and easier to monitor than the feeding regime .
It proposes the introduction of two categories and the use of a letter to identify them : ' X ' for animals slaughtered up to the age of eight months and ' Y ' for animals slaughtered between the ages of nine and twelve months , letters that Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has chosen to replace with ' V ' and ' Z ' in order to avoid confusions linked with gender .
For the first category , the sales description will continue to use the term ' veal ' .
For the second , a different term will be used : ' jeune bovin ' in French , ' vitellone ' in Italian , etc .
On this subject I refer you to Annex II ( B ) of the regulation .
There is an exception for trade carried out on the domestic market in four countries , Denmark , Greece , Spain and the Netherlands , where , in order to take account of local customs and cultural traditions , it will still be possible to use the term ' veal ' in the second category .
The terms ' veal ' , ' veal meat ' , or any other sales description defined in the proposal may no longer be used in the labelling of meat obtained from animals aged more than 12 months .
Traders who wish to supplement the sales descriptions laid down in this proposal with other , optional information , such as the feed used , will , of course , be able to do so .
Therefore , coming from Limousin , I could speak to you about ' white veal ' .
I was keen to propose changes to the European Commission 's initial proposal to make this legislation more coherent and restrictive and I thank my colleagues for having supported me .
In particular I asked for a system of penalties to be introduced in the event of failure to respect the rules , and I proposed amendments to include within the scope of the regulation meat-based products intended for human consumption , prepared , processed or cooked products .
I also insisted that the sales description should be used at each stage of production and marketing .
I think , however , that certain points are not acceptable and could spoil the balance of the proposal for a regulation .
I am talking about Amendments 8 and 12 , which were adopted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Amendment 8 suggests that designations and IGPs ( protected geographical indications ) registered after the publication of this regulation could be exempted from it , and this is not consistent with the legislation as a whole .
Designations of origin and protected geographical indications that have already been registered are not affected , but it is important that new AOCs and IGPs should be subject to the provisions of this regulation , otherwise they could be completely bypassed .
Amendment 12 calls into question the proposal for a regulation based on the criterion of age .
In fact , as Annex II shows , the United Kingdom has chosen to give the description ' veal ' to the first category , and the description ' beef ' to the second category .
This country 's specific requirements have , therefore , been taken into account .
Furthermore , I do not support the two new Amendments 26 and 27 presented to plenary .
These two amendments introduce a new derogation that , in my opinion , is incompatible with Article 3 of the Regulation , as they allow a given Member State not to apply the regulation if its production of animals in the first category , aged less than 8 months , does not exceed 3 % of the total production of animals aged less than 12 months .
Ladies and gentlemen , I ask you to support me and to reject these four amendments which would reduce the scope of the Regulation , which is supposed to apply to the whole of the European Union and the scope of harmonisation of the first category ' up to eight months ' , which has been very difficult to attain .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the marketing of the meat of bovine animals aged 12 months or less was in need of clarification , and so I should first of all like to praise the Commission 's proposal .
Laying down precise sales descriptions according to age at slaughter - an easier criterion to monitor than type of feed - to be used by all Member States will make it easier for consumers to understand and will prevent any possible unfair competition .
It is particularly important that the term ' veal ' and other terms defined in the Commission proposal should not be used in labelling meat from animals aged over 12 months .
Another point that I consider vital is that meat imported from non-EU countries should be subject to this regulation , thus preventing any risk of unfair competition .
In common with the rapporteur , Mrs Bourzai , whom I should like to congratulate on the excellent work she has produced and on the dialogue she initiated , I believe that the Commission 's proposal is a good one and that this subject has been calling out for a solution for a long time .
In addition , we both think that the letters considered by the Commission for identifying carcasses are not the most appropriate , since they may give rise to confusion with the sex of the animal .
This and other aspects of the draft regulation were improved by amendments adopted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and included in the report that we are debating here .
I have to say that any possible reservations regarding particular traditions that call the new provisions into question should not be taken to the point of jeopardising the work carried out by the Commission and Parliament .
Finally , I would remind Members that the descriptions proposed by the Commission were arrived at after consultation with organisations from the various Member States , as the Commissioner has already pointed out , and that the draft regulation allows for the possibility of amending the list of descriptions in Annex II in the future .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I straightaway congratulate Mrs Bernadette Bourzai , substitute member of Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , whose commitment and involvement deserve special mention .
I shall also congratulate the Commission on its excellent proposal , which should bring more clarity into the marketing of calf meat and enable the consumer to be better informed .
This proposal is the result of a long process of negotiation within the Member States and the relevant professional associations to give clearer information to consumers and allow fairer competition between the different producers .
Most of the latter were actually penalised by a designation that applied to a product , veal , whose physiological development resulted in great differences within a few months because of its rapidity .
A veal calf develops , within a few weeks , from being a monogastric mammal , during the time that it feeds almost entirely on milk , to being a ruminant mammal with four stomachs as soon as it moves on to fibrous foods such as grass , hay and cereals .
It is not difficult to imagine the consequences of this development on the dietary and nutritional composition of the meat , including a different vitamin content and the white , pink or red colouring of the meat resulting from the fact , in particular , that there is no iron in milk but there is in plants .
Therefore , to treat as equal and call ' veal ' meat from an animal up to the age of six or eight months that has been fed on milk and meat from an animal aged 14 to 16 months that eats , grazes and ruminates , allows neither the consumer nor the producer to determine what he is actually eating .
Within the European area , this harmonisation which makes it possible to differentiate between calf meat and that of young bovine animals , and I say this without in any way prejudging the quality of one or the other , is an important step in terms of respect for the consumer and the producers and reflects our concern for healthier and more balanced nutrition for more responsible consumers .
Mr President , Commissioner , that is a step in the right direction .
In the past , there was veal when the farmer 's wife was in her confinement .
We used to call that ' fasted veal ' .
It was distinguished by being white meat , because the calf had only ever drunk milk .
Then some people got the idea of penning the animals in and depriving them of natural food because the meat produced that way was considered good and expensive .
They were then fattened up to 170 to 200 kg .
Those calves still had white meat because they did not get any feed containing iron .
That is not changed by this directive .
However , because that meat fetched a particularly good price on the market , the practice was in that way indirectly supported .
If you ever saw how calves locked in their stalls started to gnaw at the gates to get something of what they really needed , then you will know what I am talking about .
Incorporating the time factor has not put an end to that , but it does now indirectly support species-appropriate animal husbandry .
Mother cows are kept at pasture , and the calves drink milk for several months but are also already eating grass , which contains iron , making their meat pink or red .
What the directive still does not contain , although it may encourage it indirectly , is the quality of animal husbandry and the process of the animals ' growth .
An end - or at any rate the beginning of an end - is now put to the practice of paying a high price for meat that comes from animals that have been tortured , and we will soon have nice pink veal from happy animals .
That does not mean that the farmer 's wife will no longer get white meat in her confinement , but that meat really will be from calves that have ' fasted ' .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for once it is a pleasure to read Mrs Bourzai 's report .
It is clear , well written , well documented and comes with a good proposal .
With the veal market , once again , we come face to face with the distortions of competition , indeed frauds , brought about by the single market in all fields .
We shall be called upon to speak about it again in relation to wine , Commissioner , with countries that have a land registry and others that do not , with the composition of wines that can vary depending on the country while the description remains the same .
There is also the area of VAT , with the intracommunity frauds that the single market allows , with fiscal dumping and our Baltic friends who benefit from their ' flat tax ' , to give themselves an advantage .
There is , of course , the veal market , where , if there is not fraud , there is unfair competition .
Forgive me , Mr President , but they say that our Spanish or Danish friends have old calves more than eight , nine or ten months old , sort of grandfather calves , that they still call ' veal ' .
Obviously , with a price difference of two or three euros on leaving the abattoir , according to whether it is a real calf or an extremely old grandfather calf , it is sure that the added value can be extremely profitable , even though 800 000 tonnes of calves are not all involved - thank God ! - since 80 % of the production and 70 % of the consumption takes place in countries that have harmonised the definition of veal or of vitellone .
The distortion of competition is , therefore , limited , but it does exist .
Commissioner , after almost 20 years in Parliament , for once I congratulate the Commission , which proves that you should never give up hope about anything .
The system that has been proposed to us is excellent .
First of all defining the age of veal according to a fixed limit of more or less than eight months old is very clear , just as it is very clear to distinguish them by two letters , X and Y. In this respect , there was an ambiguity , hormonal or sexual or something , and the rapporteur did well to propose the letter V as veal and the letter Z as , we do not quite know what , but it is better .
Providing for a system of penalties is excellent and extending the legislation to meat based preserves , that is very good .
Excluding AOCs and IGPs , everyone can only be delighted about that .
After all , Mr President , Commissioner , perhaps all that offers us a good example : if one could define right or left wing politicians according to their age , according to their diet , according to whether they are monogastric or according to whether they are mammals , it would make it easier for electors to know whether they are dealing with a left wing calf or a right wing calf .
Maybe our rapporteur is proposing this as an avenue for us to explore .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to welcome the Commission 's proposal as well as the report prepared by Mrs Bourzai .
By supporting the Commission 's proposal as modified by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's report , we can put an end to the further spread of the abuse of competitive advantages stemming from inadequacies in regulation as well as of confusing market information about beef .
Unfortunately , the diversity of regulations used in Member States provides opportunities for abuses , and therefore in numerous cases there have been requests for clarification of the definition of ' veal ' and for its harmonisation among various States .
Since the manner of producing and marketing the meat of bovine animals aged 12 months or less varies from one country to the next , therefore the finished manufactured products can also differ significantly amongst each other .
As a result , they come to market under different names and their selling prices can also differ significantly among each other .
I consider important the Council 's proposed directive appearing on the agenda of this sitting , which is to regulate the market and provide more precise consumer information than is presently available .
In this way we will be able to rule out market distortions in marketing , and provide the opportunity to solve the resulting problems with nation-wide measures .
The harmonisation and identification of trade names in the various Member States can contribute to market transparency .
In addition , we would thereby make it possible for consumers to be properly informed about meat originating in any Member State .
At a later stage we will need to devote attention as well to ensuring that the end users receive information on the trade names that will be introduced , especially if this would differ in a Member State from the customary and commonly used names .
Those who stand to gain most from such harmonisation processes are the consumers and the manufacturers , since a transparent system of labelling offers a higher level of consumer protection and more reliable control .
It is precisely for this reason that I would like once more to welcome the systematic effort shown by the Commission here and in similar matters , to create appropriate regulations , and I would like in particular once again to congratulate Mrs Bourzai for her report .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I am grateful for the contributions made to this debate towards finding a solution on how to label these bovine animals of less than 12 months .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf called them ' happy animals ' .
As I said at the outset , the majority of these amendments should not create any difficulties .
I think we are all along the same lines in trying to simplify our legislation as much as possible without jeopardising the system .
However , there are amendments that cannot be accepted .
This is the case for Amendments 2 , 11 and 16 in particular , concerning the display of information on commercial documents .
This would put an additional burden on the sector .
Similarly , Amendments 1 and 9 , regarding the extension of the field of application to cover cooked products , are not indispensable .
Finally , Amendments 8 and 21 would not clarify the approval procedure for PDOs and PGIs and would also overly complicate the amendment procedure of the different annexes in the proposal .
With regard to Amendment 12 , aimed at marketing the use of sale descriptions established for meat of the second category of these animals -those between 8 and 12 months - I am prepared to try to find a solution with the ministers on the usefulness of this option .
Finally , even if this bovine issue has been a difficult one , I think we would face even more severe difficulties to try to find a label for Mr Martinez !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) For ten years now , different initiatives have been taken to harmonise the rules for marketing of meat from cattle aged less than 12 months , without success .
Until now , France and other Member States that favoured the quality of meat by fixing the age of cattle at time of slaughter at less than eight months and by feeding them on milk were disadvantaged by the lack of harmonisation in relation to the designation of veal .
The consumer could be misled , because two meats that were different in age , taste and quality could bear the same description and the same labelling .
I am very pleased , therefore , that we have at last found a compromise , and , what is more , a compromise that has not been reached at the expense of tradition , nor of quality .
Indeed , this report takes into account considerations linked with the internal market but respects traditions , by preserving IGPs ( protected geographical indications ) and AOCs ( registered designations of origin ) .
I am glad to see that Europe is not only concerned with the safety standards , which beef and veal meet , and that these difficulties have been overcome .
It remained to promote the quality and the information for the consumer , which is the purpose of the report on which we are voting today .
Ratification of the ILO 's 2006 Consolidated Maritime Labour Convention ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mary Lou McDonald , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision authorising the Member States to ratify , in the interests of the European Community , the 2006 Consolidated Maritime Labour Convention of the International Labour Organisation C6-0241 / 2006 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the International Labour Organisation has adopted the ambitious Maritime Labour Convention , which lays down minimum standards for working conditions on board : employment conditions , accommodation conditions , social security protection and welfare , not forgetting provisions for implementation .
The added value of this Convention , a real beginning for a code for international maritime labour , lies in that it makes the existing standards more effective , that it adapts them to globalisation , and above all that it makes it possible to increase the number of ratifications by States .
The Commission , like the ILO ( International Labour Organisation ) , considers that the goal of a level playing field is fundamental .
We are convinced that the Maritime Labour Convention will contribute to that , eliminate shipping that does not respect minimum standards and make careers at sea more attractive .
The Convention must , however , be ratified speedily in order to produce these positive effects .
A decision authorising Member States to ratify the Convention is legally required given that the ILO 's current rules do not allow the Community as such to ratify the text , even if it includes provisions that fall within the competence of the Community .
In order to avoid delaying the ratification procedures , the Commission has endeavoured to present its proposal for a decision hard on the heels of the adoption of the Convention .
In its proposal , the Commission anticipates the principle of authorisation to ratify and suggests 31 December 2008 as the target date for depositing the instruments of ratification .
Consequently , the Commission wishes to retain a strong wording on the commitment to ratify the Convention and rejects any editing that could weaken this principle .
Mrs McDonald , I should like to thank you and to give you my full support for your report , which upholds the target date of 2008 .
Taking into account the level of European standards , one may think that third countries will be much more affected by the Convention coming into force than the Member States , who already apply more exacting standards .
When the Convention comes into force it will reduce the disparities between the standards of most of the third countries and those of the Community , which should encourage fairer conditions for competition .
Whole sections of the Convention are already covered by equivalent provisions in Community law .
Member States , therefore , will not have to review their legislation entirely and will be able to accelerate ratification .
The Commission can understand the internal constraints of Member States and , in this context , can be more flexible about the time limit , but on the principle of a definite time limit without conditions attached .
It would be very sad to lose the momentum we had during the negotiations in Geneva by weakening the principle of depositing the instruments of ratification .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank you for your attention and once again I give my thanks to Mrs McDonald .
rapporteur . - Mr President , ' the ILO Maritime Labour Convention is the best thing that has ever been developed in the maritime labour field . '
These are not my words , but the words of Dierk Lindemann , who was the spokesperson for shipowners during the negotiations on the Convention .
The Convention brings together 65 previous ILO conventions into one consolidated document .
It sets minimum requirements for seafarers , with provisions on employment conditions and recruitment , working hours , wage protection , leave and repatriation , accommodation , recreation , food and catering , health and medical care , welfare and social security .
It will immeasurably improve the conditions of the millions of workers in this sector worldwide .
Because the maritime industry is global , it is important that global standards be adopted in order to limit the negative effects of globalisation , in particular social dumping .
The Convention , when ratified , will apply to all ships , even those flagged by countries which have not individually ratified .
It will shift the behaviour pattern of the whole industry by creating minimum standards , avoiding social dumping .
Immediately following its adoption in February 2006 , Chris Horrocks , Secretary-General of the International Shipping Federation , said , ' This landmark decision is just the beginning .
Now we have to ensure that every government ratifies this Convention as soon as possible and applies it in full . '
In July 2006 , the European Community Shipowners ' Association and the European Transport Workers ' Federation confirmed their full support for the Convention in a letter to EU transport ministers .
In their letter , they strongly recommend that Member States ratify the Convention and engage in processes to that end as soon as possible .
The representative of the ILO , Cleopatra Doumbia-Henry , speaking at the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , where it was discussed , said that a delay in ratification could slow down the extraordinary momentum which has built up in support of the Convention .
Strong words indeed for a representative of the ILO !
The Commission , having invested much in the negotiations on the Convention and ensuring that it was compatible with EU law , is also on record as supporting ratification of the Convention by the end of 2008 .
Ratification by that date would enable the Convention to enter into force by 2009 , almost ten years after negotiations began .
It seems to me that the only people who do not want the Convention to be ratified by 2008 are the Member States , who want , in their own words , ' to make efforts to ratify the Convention , preferably before 31 December 2010 ' .
The reality is that without the Convention , shipping in Europe will find it difficult to compete , as it is increasingly being undercut by ships flying flags of convenience .
I would urge Members to endorse the Convention overwhelmingly and , in adopting this report , send a message to the Member States that the shipping industry , and particularly workers within that industry , cannot wait .
Member States should stop dragging their feet and ratify this Convention speedily .
I should like to make some additional remarks about other measures that could be undertaken by the EU .
The Commission 's excellent communication on strengthening maritime labour standards provides a good starting point , and I hope that my report makes some small contribution to doing just that .
The EU needs to look at areas not fully covered by the Convention and , in particular , the regulation of recruitment agencies .
The EU should look at how to strengthen , complement or extend the standards of the ILO Convention and to go further in protecting the rights and interests of seafarers .
The EU should look at adopting measures to reduce the risks of different interpretations of the Convention between EU Member States .
Proposals should be brought forward to allow for family-friendly facilities to be available on ships .
The EU should try to enforce minimum employment standards and wages for all vessels operating in its waters and , in particular , I would say that the Commission should retable the proposal for an EU ferries directive .
However , the first and the most important step is the ratification of this ILO Maritime Labour Convention .
There is no time to be wasted in this matter and there can be no delay .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to thank the rapporteur on her work and to welcome the fact that we are very close to signing the Maritime Labour Convention , which both safeguards social rights and decent living conditions for seafarers and promotes careers at sea , because with education and by organising labour , we can safeguard the necessary quality in maritime labour , which the European Union needs for its competitiveness .
Apart from the quality of work of our seafarers , careers at sea may become more attractive , which we welcome , given the need for seafarers for the competitiveness of our shipping industry .
This convention is also very important for global shipping , because certain standards for the organisation of maritime labour will be applied uniformly .
Today the various states apply fragmentary provisions already in existence through this convention but , apart from that , conditions of healthy competition are also safeguarded ; with the clause precluding more favourable treatment , protection will be provided to the fleets of the states that ratify the convention , thereby preventing social dumping , to which the rapporteur referred just now and which is unfair to our seafarers and shipping companies , given that , as things stand , numerous companies already have the opportunity to recruit seafarers from countries with no social standards of the level which the international convention wishes to impose and to which the European Union aspires .
The other important issue is that it introduces the maritime labour certificate and the maritime labour declaration .
This system comes under the control of the port state , in which case it is possible for ships to be inspected and detained in the event of doubt as to whether these standards are being complied with .
I believe that the principles that we wish to disseminate throughout the world , over and above the application to our political entity , are expressed in this convention and it is a good thing that all the Member States are endeavouring to ratify it soon .
In the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we had amendments for deferral to 2010 , because we know that there is not the same type of ratification in the various Member States and we believe that it would be possible for sufficient time to be allowed to prepare such ratification properly .
In any event , the prevailing opinion is that we must have completed the procedures by 2008 , meaning that we need to hurry up and set a good example of proper integration and application , starting in the European Union .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , I congratulate Mrs McDonald , because with her report the European Parliament is agreeing to the Council 's proposal to authorise the Member States to ratify the International Labour Organisation Convention on Maritime Labour in the interest of the European Union .
Thus it is acknowledging how important it is for the status of seafarers to be safeguarded within the framework of globalisation and for exploitative practices to be prevented .
It also safeguards the existence of a Community regime coordinating the social insurance systems .
In ratifying the convention , the Member States will primarily be strengthening the global social framework , because they are aiming for decent conditions worldwide .
We consider it necessary to strengthen maritime safety , so that careers at sea attract young Europeans and so that 17 000 vacancies for Community seafarers can be filled , especially vacancies for bridge and engine officers .
This is an opportunity , Commissioner , for us to emphasise how very important it is to strengthen maritime education and the pan-European campaign for career guidance in careers at sea .
Current progress in technology allows direct daily contact between seafarers and their families and complements safe working conditions .
A campaign to attract people to careers at sea should include employment prospects for disabled seafarers in activities on shore or parallel alternative employment between sea and shore .
We also need to strengthen maritime jobseekers offices , so that there is optimum management of the available workforce .
It is a good thing that , at European level , social dialogue is to start between seafarers and shipowners and we hope that it will result in agreement .
The proper application of the ILO international convention also makes provision for monitoring by a tripartite committee with the participation of representatives of shipowners , seafarers and the state .
Finally , I would remind you that the European Commission quite rightly withdrew the proposal for minimum employment standards and wages for seafarers working on its waters in 2001 .
Plans for equal treatment of Community and non Community seafarers are good , but in practice a Community directive on car ferries cannot be applied as all voyages are international .
We call on the European Commission to be especially careful when it comes to the compatibility of its proposals with the international law of the sea .
Mr President , I also welcome the report and indeed I welcome the work which Ms McDonald has put into this issue .
There is no doubt whatsoever that this consolidated Convention on the working conditions of seafarers is an extremely important step forward .
It is an attempt to bring up to date some conventions which go back as far as 1920 , and it seeks to put in place some global standards which hopefully will lead to more humane conditions on board ships .
As has already been pointed out , however , even the higher minimum standards which the Convention will set out will still not reach the standards for employees and employment in the various EU Member States .
It is regrettable , therefore , that EU Member States are resisting a rapid ratification of this particular Convention .
In my view , it is part of the race to the bottom which many Member States have resisted . For instance in Ireland , there was the manning of ferries directive , and the experience was that Irish Ferries sought to sack their entire staff and subsequently employ cheaper labour at less than half the legal minimum wage rate in Ireland .
In conclusion , I think that the blocking of the manning of ferries directive and the attempt to slow down the ratification of this Convention is symptomatic of some Member States ' attitudes .
I agree with everything that Ms McDonald has said with regard to the need for Europe-wide regulation .
However , I say to her that in order to make this regulation , we need QMV in this area of work , which we do not have at present .
In order to get QMV we need the proposed European Constitution and I suggest that Ms McDonald ought to review her opposition to that Constitution if we are serious about making progress as regards implementing common labour standards across Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , we are currently in the middle of the Erika trial .
The Erika case is typical of those disasters that are avoidable but that nonetheless happen because the gains of a handful of individuals must necessarily take precedence over everything .
That is the outcome of liberal logic , of profit pushed to the extreme , according to which , for the sake of making a few euros more , everything is permitted , including disregarding the most elementary safety rules to the point of catastrophe .
It is this same logic that we have seen at work in the miserably famous case of Irish Ferries , which soon will have nothing Irish about it except its name .
In the name of profit , the entire staff complement of a company , which is nonetheless operating correctly , can be thrown overboard .
Again it is this same logic that pushes some shipowners carrying out intracommunity cabotage to operate ships with insufficient crew and in conditions that put both the crew and shipping as a whole at risk .
These miserable working conditions go so far as to jeopardise seafaring traditions and expertise because the image they give of the sector is such that it has become more and more difficult to recruit European seamen .
Of course , this pursuit of profit is never mentioned .
It is better to put forward the argument of international competition , which is essentially Asian and obviously unfair , to justify these practices , even when this competition does not exist .
Has anyone ever seen Chinese companies operating ferries in the Baltic or in the Channel ?
There is no question of denying this competition . It does affect part of the sector and it also has its merits , but it must be controlled and it must be fair .
It is possible to choose the basis on which it should operate . And if , sadly , social dumping is a reality in the maritime sector , it is not inevitable .
There are , of course , those who accept it and seek to profit from it , but one can also reject it by pushing for a general rise in social standards in the world as a whole so that , in the end , everyone can find themselves on an equal footing in terms of international competition .
That is , as you will have realised , the way that I would like Europe to go .
In Europe , as we know , competitiveness will not be achieved through minimising costs and lowering social standards .
It can only be achieved through quality .
The quality of vessels , the quality of crews , safeguarded by means of decent working and training conditions .
The ILO Convention that is being discussed this evening offers us the opportunity to make that choice .
It does not solve all of the problems , but it represents a step forward .
And it offers European shipowners and the Member States an opportunity to demonstrate their commitment to defending certain values enshrined in the European Union and in its social model .
On signing it in February 2006 , they were signing a statement of intent in that regard .
We now expect them to move on to actions .
As far as shipowners are concerned , I can only welcome the fact that they have given their firm and willing commitment to entering into social , European dialogue , with their trade union partners , with a view to signing , by the end of the year , a collective European agreement that would include the relevant provisions of this Convention .
An initial cycle of negotiations has ended today and the climate seems very constructive .
This is a good thing and I think that we can also welcome the constructive role played by the European Commission in facilitating this process .
As for the Member States , they hold the key to bringing this Convention into force .
It has been said , if the European Union and the European Free Trade Association ratify it , then the Convention will come into effect and will apply everywhere .
If Europe ratifies speedily , other nations will follow , and Europe will have been the driving force , in showing that another way , apart from exploitation and dumping , is possible , and that competition can go together with responsibility .
It is essential , therefore , if we believe in the unique quality of the European model , to see to it that this Convention is ratified speedily .
It is also essential to keep to the target date of the end of 2008 proposed by the ILO .
Mr President , first I shall again thank Mrs McDonald .
I should also like to say that the ILO Convention is an initial response .
By raising working standards , its effect will be to allow fairer competition .
In addition , the Commission has undertaken a very in-depth study on the ferries sector . The Commission will assess subsequently whether a new proposal for a directive on this subject would be relevant and appropriate .
I would like also to say that we are aware that the target date of December 2008 is ambitious , but it is realistic .
The ILO has worked out a plan of action that relies on the Maritime Labour Convention coming into force in 2010 and , at the latest , in 2011 .
The Commission , in proposing the depositing of instruments of ratification before the end of 2008 , guarantees that Member States will be in line with this timescale .
Taking into account the ILO 's own rules , if Member States deposit their instruments of ratification at the end of 2008 at the latest , the Convention would come into force before the beginning of 2010 .
You see , therefore , that it is essential that we stick to that date .
I shall also answer Mr Navarro and Mrs Panayotopoulos .
Alongside the European Parliament 's work in relation to the opinion on the draft decision authorising ratification of the Convention , the social partners have come together to negotiate a possible joint agreement on the basis of this same Convention .
I would remind you that the method of joint dialogue is a good thing for the European Union and it is true that I myself had the opportunity to express to the social partners , that is , both the shipowners and the unions , my wish to see them sign an agreement on this Convention .
The social partners who have the existing text do not have to renegotiate it but rather to select the relevant provisions to add to Community law .
It seems now as if the prospect of a joint agreement by the end of 2007 is really plausible .
As soon as it has an agreement from the social partners , the Commission will propose a directive to ensure that the provisions of the agreement will be respected in the whole of Europe .
Thanks to Parliament , we can expect the necessary ratification of the Convention and , thanks to the social partners , we have a joint agreement that will make it possible to speedily introduce the new provisions into European law .
I think that in this way we shall have worked well together for seafarers ' conditions and for a very important social advance , which will encourage , as you pointed out just now , the recruitment of young seamen , seamen whom the European Union needs in order to develop its maritime transport .
I warmly thank Parliament , Mr President , for its extremely determined action in support of this great Convention .
I am happy to see that Europe is leading the movement and , in some way , helping to advance that globalisation with a human face that we need .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs McDonald .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Annex - Commission Position
McDonald Report
The Commission can accept Amendments 1 , 2 and 3 .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( ET ) Maritime fields of activity provide work for 5 million people in the European Union .
The Baltic Sea is our inland sea , the Mediterranean and Black Seas hold a central position in our foreign policy , and the Northern Dimension expands our area of responsibility to Arctic waters .
It is time we began to see the European Union also as a union of maritime states , and took a corresponding position in the world .
My homeland , Estonia , has been a maritime country for centuries .
Ernest Hemingway noted that one could find an Estonian in every port in the world .
In the last ten years , however , we have lost 57 % of jobs in shipping .
Cargo ships have begun to operate under flags of convenience , and the people employed on them come from third countries that are willing to accept poorer working conditions .
In total , there is a shortage of 17 000 people in European maritime transport .
This is mainly due to the poor working conditions that prevail in this area .
We cannot permit the elimination of maritime-related jobs , especially when that leads to a reduction in the standards of maritime labour .
We cannot withdraw from a strategic sector that guarantees 90 % of the world 's shipping and 40 % of shipping within the European Union .
The ratification of standards for maritime work by our Member States would be a great step forward towards making those standards more universally accepted .
By helping to create fair competition in the global shipping business , we would essentially also be achieving the objectives of the Lisbon process by raising the European Union 's competitiveness on the seas .
Competitive advantage that has been obtained at the expense of human life and health cannot be justified by any economic considerations .
Standards that are dangerous to seamen and nature have no place in the 21st century .
Illegal bird hunting in Malta ( debate )
The next item is the oral question ( Ο-0013 / 2007 ) by Marcin Libicki , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , to the Commission on illegal bird hunting in Malta ( Β6-0015 / 2007 ) .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , I chair the Committee on Petitions .
For quite some time now , this committee has been dealing with the issue of reprehensible hunting of birds on Malta .
We have received a petition from a number of bird protection associations with a combined membership of several hundred thousand individuals .
This hunting activity is reprehensible for three reasons .
Firstly , because it takes place in the spring .
Secondly , because traps are used . Thirdly , because it is done from motorboats on the sea .
There is very strong opposition to the hunting and the Committee on Petitions has recently received two thick volumes detailing the latest infringements of the principles on which hunting is supposed to be conducted .
As you can see , there is a photograph of an osprey on the cover .
The osprey is an endangered bird in Europe , yet it is being hunted and killed in Malta .
It should be borne in mind that the hunting expeditions described only target migrating birds .
This is because no birds spend any length of time on Malta .
These are all birds that fly enormous distances , often from southern Africa up to northern Europe or back .
They land on Malta simply to rest a short while , only to die at the hands of the hunters .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have ascertained that most of the inhabitants of Malta are opposed to this hunting .
The Committee on Petitions undertook a special fact finding mission to Malta last year to report on the situation .
We formed the impression that only a small proportion of the population is involved in hunting .
These people are , however , drawn from many different political parties and therefore enjoy the support of various politicians on both sides of the political divide .
This means that although the hunting fraternity is only a small minority , it is in a strong position because it knows all the political parties will protect its interests .
In other words , all the parties are prepared to back these hunters who are intent on killing birds .
We have learnt recently that the government now wishes to grant licences for spring hunting once again .
It is the spring hunts that have the most detrimental effect on Malta 's bird population , and in fact on the bird population of the whole of Europe because migratory birds are involved , as I said earlier .
The repercussions are felt by bird populations across the whole continent .
Malta is actually the least affected as no birds are permanently resident there .
Accordingly , I have addressed a question to the European Commission .
The substance of the question is as follows .
Despite the fact that the Commission has opened proceedings against Malta for failing to meet its obligations and despite the recommendation made by the Committee on Petitions following its fact finding mission in May of last year , the Government of Malta is preparing to award licences for hunting wild birds in the spring of 2007 .
This is consistent with the practice adopted by Malta every year since its accession to the European Union in 2004 .
The question is : what urgent action does the European Commission intend to take to convince the Maltese authorities to impose an effective ban on hunting wild birds , especially in the spring migration season ?
It should be remembered that many of these birds are threatened with extinction , including predators such as the osprey .
How does the Commission intend to oblige the Government of Malta to honour the commitments it entered into ?
How does it intend to ensure that the directive on wild birds is adopted and suitably implemented in Malta ?
I look forward to your response , Commissioner , as does the Committee on Petitions and indeed the whole House .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Libicki for giving me an opportunity to formulate the Commission 's position on bird hunting in Malta .
This is a question of compliance with Community law .
The directive on the conservation of wild birds clearly bans the hunting of migratory birds returning to their rearing grounds , as contained in Annex ΙΙ to the directive .
As Mr Libicki also said , this spring hunting is the worst form of hunting .
Article 9 of the directive makes provision for the facility for derogation on the part of the Member States .
Nonetheless , this facility only applies under exceptional circumstances , subject to compliance with the very strict criteria laid down in that article .
In such cases , there is basically only a facility to derogate if there is no other satisfactory solution .
In 2004 , the Maltese Government decided to exercise the right to apply a derogation for hunting quail and turtle doves during their spring migration .
Nonetheless , according to information passed to the Commission by the Maltese authorities , the derogation in question does not appear to comply with the preconditions laid down in the Birds Directive .
More importantly , the Maltese authorities were unable to substantiate that there was no other satisfactory solution or that spring hunting was being carried out under conditions of strict surveillance .
For these reasons , the Commission came to the conclusion that the derogation for 2004 was in breach of Articles 7 and 9 of the Birds Directive .
In July 2006 , infringement proceedings were started in accordance with Article 226 of the Treaty and the Commission has not yet received an official response from the Maltese authorities .
The matter under discussion concerns the derogation for the year 2004 .
Nonetheless , the Commission knows that Malta allowed spring hunting during the following years also , in other words in 2005 and 2006 , and it would appear that it allowed it during this year , in 2007 .
The continuation of spring hunting in all these years , in breach of legislation , constitutes a systematic case of poor application of the Birds Directive .
For this reason , in order to extend the subject of the current infringement proceedings , we intend to send the Maltese authorities a supplementary warning letter about what is now standard practice on the part of the Maltese authorities over the years since 2004 .
The Commission decision is expected to be taken at its meeting on 21 March .
If Malta does not comply with the Birds Directive , the Commission will pursue the legal proceedings provided for to the end .
Despite this , we have not yet reached this stage and I still hope that the Maltese authorities will comply with Community legislation .
Within the limits of its competence , the Commission is taking and will continue to take the necessary measures , so that Malta , like every other Member State , complies with the Birds Directive .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( MT ) I would like to begin by reminding everybody present in this House , and in particular the Commissioner , that , during the negotiations between Malta and the European Union , the European Commission recognised in writing that , following accession to the European Union , Malta would make use of a derogation to allow spring hunting .
In fact , here in front of me I have the document dated 27 September 2002 , proving this .
The Commission is well aware that the negotiations with Malta were not easy because the decision on whether or not Malta should accede was one that concerned the whole country , yet , even so , Malta did not pursue its right to a derogation capriciously .
I do not , therefore , expect the Commissioner to come here and say , on the first occasion that Malta applies to make use of its derogation , ' now you cannot use it ' .
How can the Commission have accepted in writing the use of a derogation during the negotiations and then , the first time it is to be used , say that this is not allowed ?
Moreover , how can the Commission say that there are alternatives to spring hunting ?
Why was this not said during the negotiations ?
These are the answers we expect from you , Commissioner .
I thoroughly agree with you that this derogation does not give hunters free rein , and I would like to inform you of a few measures that Malta is taking to deal with those who violate the hunting rules .
First of all , only two species are allowed to be hunted in the spring .
Before Malta 's accession , 32 species were allowed to be hunted at that time of year ; so we have reduced the number from thirty-two to two .
Secondly , the spring hunting season has been shortened by 18 days .
The third and most important point is that the penalties for those who break the rules have been increased to a fine of € 14 000 , two years imprisonment and the permanent confiscation of hunting licences for repeat offenders ; in other words , the second time round they are shown the red flag and sent off .
I hope that the Commission acknowledges that these are positive steps forward .
Unfortunately , the Commissioner has made no reference to them .
So let us condemn abuse of the rules , but those who do not break the rules should not be placed in the same camp as offenders .
That is why I am opposed to those who , at the other extreme entirely , would like to ban hunting altogether .
Moreover , and to conclude , the Commission must be careful , despite intense political pressure , not to ignore what was agreed on during the negotiations .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Commissioner , as a Belgian Socialist Member of the European Parliament , taking part in this evening 's debate means a great deal to me , not least because this debate is being held in response to a petition by the Belgian Royal Association for the Protection of Birds , which collected more than 20 000 signatures on the subject of the bird hunt on Malta .
This really is an international problem .
In Malta , thousands of migratory birds are shot dead or captured every year .
This is particularly bad since Malta is one of the few resting places for migratory birds when they cross the Mediterranean .
After all , what is the use of European countries investing money and energy in protective measures in the framework of the Habitat and Bird Directive if those self-same birds are shot dead on their journey in other countries ?
To my Maltese opposite numbers , I should like to say that , although it is true that Malta has acquired , until 2008 , a number of transitional measures in the accession treaty , these measures only pertain to the capture of birds with a view to breeding them for the purpose of preserving the species .
These amount , in other words , to animal protection measures .
Under no circumstances does this transitional measure allow for migratory bird hunting in the spring .
In its notification , the Commission has made it clear that Malta is , in this case , riding roughshod over the Bird Directive , and that exceptions cannot be made for it .
Moreover , Mr Libicki 's report of June 2006 of the inquiry task force of the Committee on Petitions denounces the way in which migratory birds are hunted down on a large scale , and concludes that the derogation from the Bird Directive , which Malta decided on off its own bat , should lapse .
I therefore think that it is of the utmost importance for this House to support the Commission in the procedure and to convince Malta to respect the Birds Directive and therefore not allow migratory bird hunting to take place this spring .
This case could , in fact , prove vital should the Birds Directive be found to be being infringed elsewhere in the European Union .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , we are dealing with an issue that is very important in terms of protecting the environment , but also in terms of ensuring the proper application of Community law .
Today we are practically in the spring and hunting is still going on in Malta .
Illegal hunters have taken over a significant portion of the country 's territory .
The Directive on wild birds is blatantly being violated while the Maltese authorities remain entirely passive .
The hunters , protected by the government , are even resorting to violence .
Three Maltese journalists have been hospitalised after being brutally attacked by hunters while simply doing their jobs alongside people who were protesting against this illegal practice .
However , the majority of Maltese society is opposed to spring hunting .
According to a recent poll , more than 80 % of Maltese people are against this illegal practice .
Even Malta 's hotel and restaurant owners are against it , because they say that it is bad for tourism and bad for the economy .
Why is the Maltese Government determined to protect this illegal and barbaric practice ?
Only the Maltese ' Democratic Alternative ' party - the Greens - is defending Community law in Malta .
The Maltese Government is demonstrating a scandalous lack of adherence to the European Treaty that it signed very recently , before joining the European Union .
How can that be ?
We call upon the Commission to act firmly and decisively in the face of this challenge to Community law .
( MT ) The resolution before us today threatens to set a very serious and dangerous precedent .
It suggests that an agreement already approved by the European Union , this Parliament and the Maltese people in a referendum and general election should be broken .
This resolution has implications beyond support for , or opposition to , hunting because , if it goes through , we will then be sending out the message to all Europeans that the European Union does not keep its word .
Resolutions of this kind undermine the credibility of the European institutions .
What guarantee do we have , as Maltese , that the European Union will keep its word regarding the rest of the negotiations ?
What guarantee does any European have that the European Union will continue to honour the outcome of the negotiations carried out with his or her country ?
Parliament 's political groups have every right to put forward their agendas .
However , this has to take place within the correct parameters , and no agreement can be broken for the simple reason that there are some people with different political agendas .
If there is anyone opposed to illegal hunting , that person is myself .
I am also the first to condemn the violent acts that took place in the protest march in Malta .
However , if we are going to talk about barbaric acts committed in European Union countries , I need only mention what goes on in Spain or Italy , which are examples of countries elsewhere in the European Union in which illegal hunting takes place .
I therefore say , let us fight illegal hunting in the European Union by all means , but let us fight it in the whole of the European Union and not just pick on Malta .
What was promised to us during the negotiations must remain valid , and I urge all my fellow Members , including those who are not members of my political group , to commit themselves to protecting that which , by right , belongs to the European citizen .
I would like to quote my fellow Member , Mr Schultz , Chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament who , this very morning , albeit in a different context , stated that we must honour every agreement that we sign .
This must also apply in Malta 's case .
We must therefore respect what was agreed on .
( MT ) We believe that all the Member States ' governments , including Malta 's , are obliged to ensure that environmental regulations , including those on hunting , conform to the Union 's directives , accession treaties and every other treaty that was signed .
We also agree that the authorities ' duty is to ensure that these directives and laws are observed by everyone , and we cannot in any way condone the practice of illegal hunting .
To this end , one of the amendments proposed by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament requests a more transparent approach and proposes that the Commission and the Maltese Government publish their technical positions on the subject , including the minutes of the decisions taken in meetings that have taken place or that will take place .
This becomes more relevant if one recalls that , before Malta 's accession to the European Union , the Maltese Government had stated that , together with the European Commission , it had negotiated a derogation regarding the issue of spring hunting .
Although other political forces and the civil society sector had expressed serious concerns regarding the Maltese government 's interpretation of the use of this derogation , the European Commission chose , for reasons known only to itself , to keep silent and adopt an ambiguous stance .
Unfortunately , this has only added to further confusion over the matter .
Had there , at the time , been more transparency on both sides , this would have led to less ambivalence and less likelihood of Maltese society being unjustly burdened with financial repercussions .
This is also a credibility issue .
( MT ) It is clearer than ever before that the Maltese Government deceived environmentalists , hunters and trappers when , prior to Malta 's accession to the European Union , it tried to give the impression that it had managed to achieve everything for everyone .
Environmental regulations have to conform to the directives of the European Union and to the terms of the accession treaty .
This is clear and we , for our part , have been stressing this for a long time .
The Maltese Government , I repeat , has misled the people .
However , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , before you nod in agreement , it must be said that the blame is partly yours .
Before the referendum took place , when the Maltese Government went around proclaiming loudly that it had an agreement with you regarding spring hunting , you chose to keep quiet .
When the Labour Party , ourselves and a few environmentalist and hunting associations expressed doubts about this so-called achievement , you remained silent - although many of you had been to Malta .
The least the Maltese government and the Commission can do now is to publish their technical positions because it is not enough simply to claim that everything that was discussed was made public .
There are certain documents that , up to this day , we cannot find , search as we may .
There are references to them , but it is like trying to tackle an enormous maze .
These documents must be made available to everyone , and the minutes of every meeting , past and future , must be published , including those of the recent meeting in Brussels , from which everyone emerged claiming victory .
I simply cannot understand how everybody can emerge victorious from the same meeting .
Ultimately , however , if these minutes are not published , then those who have been misleading people will continue to do so .
( MT ) Undoubtedly , even now , the Commission is clearly stating that there is a breach of European law .
My fellow Members from the other party are claiming that there is a letter stating that the government can make use of a derogation .
It is therefore little wonder that everybody is feeling rather confused , considering that we are only a handful of people in this House and yet we cannot agree on the facts .
As my two colleagues in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament pointed out , there is a need for more transparency and , at the very least , a need to agree on the facts .
The problem is that , in actual fact , there is ambiguity and confusion .
However , this was not caused accidentally .
Rather , I believe that this state of affairs has remained muddled because , although , for hunters and trappers , hunting is a passion and , for BirdLife Malta , it is the subject of a mission , at the end of the day it is a political issue .
It is about who will get the votes from those sectors that could actually decide the outcome of a referendum or a general election .
Like my fellow Members who spoke before me , I therefore ask that the facts of the negotiation agreements between Malta and Europe be set out and explained as clearly as possible and in such a way that all the parties involved are aware of them .
To conclude , I would like to say that , if we cannot even agree on the facts , there is little hope of our agreeing on a solution to the problem .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Madam President , even though votes have wings and fly from one party to another , I am interested in the question of illegal hunting rather than in the question of votes .
I think that it is impossible that the honourable members do not know the answers to the questions they have already asked .
They know that whatever has been agreed for the integration of countries into the European Union is public knowledge .
There are no secret agreements and I am certain that the honourable members know this full well , because they have been in the European Parliament for two years now .
Consequently , I cannot understand exactly what these secret documents are .
There is no mystery here .
Everything that has been agreed is public knowledge .
For Malta it was agreed that there would be a transitional period on the question of bird trapping .
There is no agreement on anything else .
As far as the derogations are concerned , the right to request a derogation is granted in Article 9 to all the Member States .
Malta too can request a derogation under the provisions of Article 9 .
Malta did not request a derogation , it simply made a derogation on its own , we took it to Court and we have been waiting for it to respond since July 2006 .
It has still not sent us a reply .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes the active intervention of Parliament 's Committee on Petitions .
The visit by the members of the Committee on Petitions to Malta in May 2006 was fruitful and the report on the visit confirms that , in this instance , the Commission and the European Parliament are of the same opinion .
The Commission used the infringement procedure because the Maltese authorities are still allowing spring hunting , in breach of Community legislation .
Malta is clearly behaving in breach .
It started with the derogation in the 2004 hunting season and continued in subsequent years and , to all appearances , it is continuing this year .
For the Commission , the priority is to prevent systematic and generalised infringement of Community legislation on birds .
That is why we intend - as I said earlier - to extend the existing infringement proceedings pending for the 2004 case to the general infringing practices of Malta .
In this way , we shall be in a position to address and prevent future infringements ; this will happen at the Commission meeting on 21 March .
As far as the present situation is concerned , on 28 , 29 and 30 March a Commission delegation will travel to Malta to discuss the case in greater detail .
Explanations will be requested from the competent national authorities and it will be made clear to them that they must comply with Community legislation without delay .
If the Maltese authorities stick to their guns , the Commission will proceed to the next state of the procedure , which is to issue a reasoned opinion , and it will be able to take recourse to the Court of Justice straight afterwards .
The procedure which the Commission can follow - for any case , I am not just talking about Malta - is , within the framework of the main referral and , once the reasoned opinion has been issued in accordance with Article 228 , to seek an injunction ordering the Member State to stop its infringing behaviour .
The Court may issue an injunction if it finds that there is an urgent need to prevent irreparable damage as a result of blatant infringement of Community law for which there is prima facie evidence .
In Malta 's case , the Commission would have been unable to seek an injunction before now , without first extending - as I said earlier it was going to do - the subject of the 2004 case so that it also covered subsequent years ( 2005 , 2006 and , possibly , 2007 ) .
The Court would have dismissed the request , given that the risk of irreparable damage would already have passed .
The application for an injunction would have been dead letter , given that it would have only referred to the infringement in 2004 .
It is for precisely this reason - from a legal point of view and in order to prevent future infringements - that we felt it advisable that the current proceedings should be extended at the Commission meeting on 21 March .
I trust that , with the visit by senior officials from the Environment DG , the Maltese authorities will be persuaded to comply fully with the provisions of Community legislation .
I have received seven motions for a resolution in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12.30 p.m.
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was suspended at 11.20 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Reprimand of a Member
Berlin Declaration ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the Berlin Declaration .
I should just like to start by making a brief statement myself , as requested by the Chairman and coordinators of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
The Declaration on the future of Europe to be adopted on 25 March 2007 in Berlin could represent an important milestone on the road to a stronger , forward-looking Europe .
The Conference of Presidents has instructed me to represent the European Parliament in the negotiations on the Berlin Declaration .
Whilst doing so , I have been exchanging views intensively with , and continually informing , the Bureau of Parliament , the Group Chairmen and , in particular , the Chairman and coordinators of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . In addition , I am having my third meeting with the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the coordinators today to discuss these issues .
The aim of today 's plenary debate is to discuss the issue with all the Members of this House , and also with the Council and the Commission .
It is also very important that I take away from today 's debate some suggestions and comments for the coming talks with the German Presidency .
The Berlin Declaration , which is still being negotiated , is to consist of four chapters .
The first of these is to pay tribute briefly to the achievements since 1957 , with particular mention of the key achievements of peace , prosperity and stability , the consolidation of democracy and the rule of law in the course of enlargement , and the ending of the division of the continent .
The second chapter is to be dedicated to the main features of European integration and cooperation : equal rights and obligations in the Member States , and also transparency and subsidiarity as fundamental elements of the Community method .
The third chapter will be of crucial importance as regards the core values on which European integration is founded .
It should be emphasised in particular that human beings , whose dignity is inviolable , are central to all policy-making .
I emphasised this also during the discussions over dinner last Thursday evening at the Summit of Heads of State or Government .
Human beings are the beginning and end of politics .
The principle of solidarity should also feature prominently : this is an essential element of European integration and , from the current perspective , represents a current challenge also in the field of energy .
Finally , the fourth chapter is to set out the challenges for the future , such as energy policy , the fight against climate change , the common foreign and security policy , internal security , civil rights and the preservation - by means of greater economic success - of a societal outlook characterised by social responsibility .
With regard to the Berlin Declaration and the subsequent discussion on the future of the Constitutional Treaty , Parliament must leave no doubt in anybody 's mind that the European Parliament supports the Constitutional Treaty .
We want to see the substance of the Constitutional Treaty , including the section on values , become a legal and political reality .
( Applause )
I should like to conclude by emphasising that the Berlin Summit is not merely a gathering of governments , as was the case 50 years ago , but a conference at which both the European Parliament and the Commission will participate .
All three institutions will be represented by their Presidents , who will sign the Declaration on the future of the Union and each make a speech .
The achievements of the last 50 years have been exceptional ; but , 50 years on , Europe needs a new departure .
Together we must summon up the courage and will to meet the challenges of the 21st century .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a pleasure and a great honour to address you today for the first time as representative of the Presidency at the plenary session of the European Parliament .
As the President has pointed out , on 25 March , the European Union will celebrate the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome . This is a special day , a day on which we should pause for a few hours in our day-to-day political business to look back at the story of European integration - a unique success story , in my opinion - and also to look forward and ask ourselves how we Europeans can find answers to the pressing issues of our time .
We can be proud of what the people of Europe have achieved in the past 50 years , and so 25 March should be a day of confidence , above all .
The European Parliament has made a vital contribution to shaping the process of European integration .
Many successes would not have been possible without the persistence and commitment of the Members of the European Parliament in standing up for more integration , for more democracy and transparency within the EU .
Our Presidency supports constructive cooperation with the European Parliament based on trust .
Thus far , Parliament has supported us to the best of its ability , and for this I should like to express my most particular thanks at this point .
This support also applies to the preparations for the Berlin Declaration to be adopted on 25 March as a joint declaration by the three European institutions : the Council of the European Union , the European Parliament and the European Commission .
Parliament and the Commission have made a committed , active contribution to drawing up this Declaration from the outset .
I am obliged to the President and all the Members of this House for the confidence you have shown in the Presidency in this important matter .
I am also obliged to you for endorsing the procedure we suggested : I know from my talks and discussions in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs how hard it has been for some of you to do so .
I really am , then , most grateful for your confidence in the procedure .
Our Presidency has resolved to strengthen public confidence in and support for Europe .
To this end , we need dialogue , and to this end we have been listening very carefully to the public in recent weeks and months . We invited citizens selected at random to what proved to be highly successful national conferences in Berlin , with the aim of learning what they hope for from the EU .
As I see it , one thing is clear : if we want to win people over to Europe , we must give specific examples showing how they stand to benefit from European integration .
We must work to ensure that the EU takes up the challenges of the future , and we must offer convincing solutions .
As the President has just pointed out , the European Council on 8 and 9 March showed that the EU is capable of action even with 27 Member States , including in the fields in which the public particularly expects it to ; for example energy and the fight against climate change .
The success of the Spring Summit gives us confidence as we continue our Presidency .
We wish to take advantage of this tailwind for the Berlin Declaration , too .
The Summit rightly sent out the message that , if we Europeans find the strength to act together , we can actively shape the future .
At the dinner for the Heads of State or Government on 8 March - which Commission President Barroso and you , Mr President , also attended - Chancellor Merkel described our ideas , as developed in the course of detailed discussions with representatives of Parliament , the Commission and the national governments .
The text of the Declaration is yet to be finalised , of course , and I can assure you that what I have heard in today 's debate here will of course be included in our deliberations on the final version .
As I have already told the committees , we want the text of our Declaration marking the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome to be brief and coherent , using language accessible to citizens .
What should the key points be ?
We want to start the Declaration by paying tribute to the common achievements of the past 50 years in Europe ; which include , of course , peace , stability , prosperity and the ending of the division of the continent .
These would not have been possible were it not for the desire for freedom of the people of Central and Eastern Europe , to which we should like to pay tribute specifically in the Declaration .
( Applause )
As I see it , the successes of European integration also include the forms and principles of our cooperation in Europe : democracy and the rule of law , equality of rights and obligations in the Member States , transparency and subsidiarity .
These principles are a model for regional cooperation in other parts of the world - in this , too , we can take a little pride .
The subsequent part of the Declaration will contain a joint declaration of commitment to the key values : human dignity , freedom and responsibility , mutual solidarity , diversity , and tolerance and respect in our dealings with each other .
After all , we know that the EU is more than just a common economic space .
It is also a community of values , and this basis in common values , possibly along with a common outlook on life , is an important precondition for Europe 's remaining capable of action as a political entity .
The challenges that we in Europe will have to take up and overcome together in the 21st century will of course lie at the heart of the Declaration .
These include energy and the fight against climate change , they include a functioning common foreign and security policy , and they also , of course , entail our countering the threats posed by terrorism and organised crime effectively without restricting human and civil rights in the process .
Of course , these also entail our finding common solutions to deal with illegal immigration .
One message strikes me as particularly important , however , if we wish to reinforce the confidence of the people of Europe once again : Europe stands for a social model that marries economic competitiveness with social and environmental responsibility .
Freedom to conduct a business and worker rights and participation are equally part of the European experience .
The EU has a social side , and we feel that the European social dimension , too , should be highlighted in the Declaration .
The European Heads of State or Government made an express declaration of commitment to this also in last Friday 's conclusions .
We all know that the EU must continue its process of reform and renewal .
In some two years ' time , the next elections to the European Parliament will be taking place , and the electorate is entitled to know what instruments and means of action the EU will have at its disposal .
Consequently , we should like to see the Declaration include a common commitment to working on the necessary preconditions for this .
Allow me to say a few words by way of conclusion .
The 50th anniversary represents an opportunity for us all to build up strength for the challenges that lie ahead .
On this day , let us emphasise the things that unify us .
Let us take advantage of the symbolism of this day to send out a signal of unity .
Our Presidency 's motto is ' Europe - succeeding together ' .
The people of Europe expect European politicians to show the will , courage and resolve to act together .
This is the spirit in which we intend to proceed to the second half of our Presidency ; and for this I ask your continued support .
( Applause )
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , President-in-Office , honourable Members , the meeting in Berlin on 25 March is an important occasion .
Fifty years of European integration is certainly worth a celebration .
It is an occasion to highlight all that unites us and to emphasise our common values and principles .
But we can make it even more important by looking forward as much as we look back .
This is an opportunity to put forward our shared objectives and ambitions , to underline our mutual respect and solidarity , and to reiterate our determination to build a better and stronger Union for the benefit of all Europeans .
That is why the Commission took the initiative in May last year to suggest an Interinstitutional Declaration on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the signature of the Treaty of Rome .
The German Presidency has been working hard to find a text which meets a number of different goals .
We all agree that the text should be short and accessible , and that it should be an easy read with a shelf-life of more than a few days or weeks .
We all agree that it should celebrate the achievements of 50 years of European integration , but also look ahead to inspire Europeans for the future .
We all want to see reflected in the text what it is that makes Europe special for us , in what we value and in how we work .
This is not an easy task , but we are in excellent hands with Chancellor Merkel , Foreign Minister Steinmeier and their competent staff .
I think that the decision to directly involve both the European Parliament and the European Commission has proved fully justified .
The discussions that we have had between the Parliament and the Commission and with civil society representatives have provided valuable food for thought that can contribute to the overall reflection and to the essential work of the Presidency .
The bilateral discussions and the exchange at the European Council last week have pointed to a broad consensus on the purpose , scope and flavour of the Declaration .
The end result will be a truly European commitment to move forward .
Much of the discussion in these final days will be centring on how to give the right flavour to the text on the Union 's future ambitions .
In January President Barroso set out in this House our thinking on some key points .
Last week 's European Council should give us renewed confidence that we need not be shy .
We can be both ambitious and credible .
The European Union can and will continue to be a motor for positive change in Europe and across the world .
We believe that the text should be concrete without being too specific .
It should reflect the genius of the European Union in striking the right balance between the general and the particular , the common and the individual .
We promote growth and economic development within a strong social framework .
We enhance security and we promote individual rights .
We work hard to support the interests of Europeans , but with a keen sense of responsibility to the global community , as Minister Steinmeier also just explained .
This is sometimes misunderstood as recipe for a lowest-common-denominator Europe .
This is wrong .
It is rather a practical recognition of the fact that in a complex , fast-moving world we have to be light on our feet and we have to find new solutions to deep-seated challenges .
This is exactly what we are now doing on climate change and energy .
It is also important to give a sense that the European Union is defined not only by what Europe does , but how the Union works .
Democracy , transparency and accountability are important guiding principles for the Union of today .
It would be an important signal for the Member States and the institutions to underline the Union 's commitment to a democratic way of working .
The Berlin meeting comes exactly half way through the German Presidency and represents an important stepping stone on the path to a relaunch of the treaty review to strengthen the institutions of the European Union .
It follows an exceptionally successful European Council meeting last week , a European Council which has proven doomsayers wrong and has demonstrated that a European Union of 27 is just as strong and bold as its earlier incarnations .
Enlargement has added purpose and dynamism to our work and I am convinced that it can continue to do so .
As we look ahead , the June European Council will provide the other key test .
Can we agree an outline on the way forward for the constitutional and institutional debate ?
Last week 's work will certainly help .
It has surely helped to put to rest the myth that the European Union is in some way obsessed with navel-gazing and detached from citizens ' real concerns .
The message should come out loud and clear that , if we are concerned about our institutions , it is because we want them to work well so that we can deliver on our citizens ' expectations and meet high standards of democracy .
To conclude , I believe we are on track for a Declaration in Berlin on 25 March which meets the goals sketched out by the Commission last May , endorsed by the European Council and backed by this House .
It will bring a momentum and urgency to the efforts to settle the constitutional and institutional debate . It will mobilise the efforts of all-round core priorities , it will show a European Union united in its commitment to meet the aspirations of our citizens and to bring to the future work of the Union the same dynamism and achievement that we have enjoyed for 50 years of the European adventure .
( Applause )
Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has discussed the Berlin Declaration three times .
We have sent you a written copy of the results for your negotiations with the German Presidency .
I believe it is quite possible to reach agreement on three of the five chapters .
The successes and achievements of the past speak for themselves .
The EU is a major project for peace , a major project for freedom and a recipe for prosperity and security for citizens - and this should be expressed in the Declaration .
It should also be easy to agree on our values ; after all , they are laid down in the Constitutional Treaty .
Besides the classic values of democracy , human rights and the rule of law , we consider solidarity and equality particularly important .
In this connection , the Berlin Declaration should not talk of a ' European way of life ' , but of the European social model , which we wish to retain and continue applying in future .
This particular model of individual freedom coupled with collective security is the specific aspect that defines the social models in Europe .
I think that the challenges for the future are also obvious .
These have been mentioned , and there is no need to specify them all .
We are confronted with a handful of huge problems of significance ; and indeed an excellent response was given at last week 's Summit to the issue of climate change .
It is more difficult when it comes to describing the EU 's distinguishing features .
In this regard , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the European Parliament would like to see the Berlin Declaration contain a declaration of commitment to the Community method .
The Community method distinguishes the EU from all other international organisations , as it gives Parliament , the directly elected representative body of 500 million citizens , the same right of codecision as the Council of Ministers whenever we make laws , standards or rules for the people of our Member States .
We should like the Community method to become the standard method , including in the second and third pillars , so that laws are no longer made by governments without the involvement of the citizens ' representative body .
The litmus test of the Berlin Declaration will be the fifth part of government commitments .
This part will show whether everything that has been set down in writing previously was meant seriously , and the public will be paying particular attention to this .
I believe that we need an affirmation that the previous Treaties are insufficient , and that the EU needs a new basis , putting new means at its disposal .
We must declare our commitment to the new Treaty .
Anything less than this global compromise would be insufficient .
The Council President showed courage at last week 's Summit on climate change .
I hope she will show the same courage when it comes to the Berlin Declaration , as this courage in March will pay off at the Summit in June .
I wish the German Presidency every success .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , ever since it was formed , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has always advocated a more integrated , more united Europe .
We have always worked to strengthen Europe and to create a political , ambitious Europe .
What has always united us is the safeguarding of values and the promotion of freedoms , not least the freedom to do business , to work and to benefit from the fruits of one 's work , as well as the guarantee of security .
The Treaty of Rome is the foundation for the European structure .
It is what has ensured that war between our countries is from now on not only impossible , but also unthinkable .
For me , as a child , war was simply a reality .
I am pleased and proud that , in our part of the world , and because we wanted it to be so , war has become an abstract concept .
As I say to our young people , nothing is ever won forever , just as nothing is ever lost forever .
However , we are not all equal where this success is concerned .
While all the nations of Europe fought for freedom , peace and prosperity , a number of them had to endure 50 years of dictatorship , loss of freedom and insecurity under the yoke of Communism .
The countries of central and eastern Europe did not rest until they had bridged this artificial gap , their aim being to re-integrate their birth families and to allow Europe finally to operate at full strength .
I should like to pay an admiring and affectionate tribute in this House to the nations and citizens of these countries .
Without them , without the 1956 , 1968 and 1980 revolutions , Europe would never have been able to experience that ' velvet revolution ' of the end of the 1980s .
And the Berlin Wall would no doubt still be the disgrace of our continent .
We should also remember that the year 2007 marks not only the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome , but also the 60th anniversary of the Marshall Plan .
Without the help of the Americans , without their decisive commitment to help Europeans , the Schuman Declaration and the Treaty of Rome would have encountered further obstacles .
The last 50 years have been a success , and this story has had a happy ending with the reunification of the continent .
Nevertheless , I believe that , if we so wish , this century can also be a largely European century .
As the foundation of the European Union , the Treaty of Rome is history 's most successful undertaking in terms of encouraging people to live together .
Our continent has thus become a place not of division , but of similarities and reconciliations .
Indeed , the European Union involves more than just the export of goods and services .
It also conveys our values .
We act as a stabilising force .
Was it not the prospect of closer cooperation that led to peace being restored in South-East Europe ?
The next 50 years will , however , be full of fresh challenges for all our countries .
We are not starting from scratch , far from it .
The first condition of success is to restore our confidence , to be aware of our strengths and to draw on our resources .
The second condition of success , in an unstable , globalised world , is to be realistic , to make firm , enthusiastic efforts to adapt and to do so without delay .
However , adapting does not mean grovelling and giving up on who we are .
Reforming does not mean grovelling and letting ourselves be deprived of our identity .
Europeans have a highly developed sense of human dignity and of respect for the individual .
Moreover , with the social market economy , Europe is presenting an idea for organising society that is very far removed from the ' every man for himself ' approach and from the excesses of a consumer society .
The decision adopted during last week 's European Council is to set common and ambitious objectives in the field of energy and climate change .
The current context is characterised by five key challenges : demographics , globalisation , multipolarity , energy and global warming , without forgetting the fight against terrorism .
In a globalised world in which new focal points are emerging rapidly - I am thinking of Asia , and also of Brazil - Europe must react by means of economic and social reforms .
Europe must make the most of its history and develop its social model .
In an uncertain world , in which terrorism has become an everyday reality , Europe must show both firmness and determination ; it cannot be held hostage by terror .
Ladies and gentlemen , those are the values that we are handing down after 50 years of European integration .
Those are the challenges that we have to address from a fresh perspective .
As far as we , the PPE-DE Group , are concerned , it is only by having faith in their abilities to create and adapt that future generations will be able to develop and thrive in this new world .
Our role is modest , admittedly , but it is demanding too .
In this period of transition , let us avoid standstills , let us take the right path and , together , let us lay solid foundations .
A task such as this requires not only clear thinking , but also political courage .
( Applause )

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we do not yet know the text of the Berlin Declaration , and so it makes sense to discuss not the text , but the context of this Declaration .
Listening to the speeches by the President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Wallström and even Mr Daul or Mr Leinen , we can all tell that a degree of uncertainty surrounds this text , as expectations of it are very high .
Why is this the case ?
Why are so many expectations vested in a text that may just be one among many ?
The answer is quite simple : because we all have the feeling that we are at a crossroads .
European integration may continue as successfully as it has in the last 50 years , or we may take a different path leading away from European integration and into an uncertain future of renationalisation and the risks this entails .
We all have a feeling of uncertainty , and so this Berlin Declaration needs to do something that may be possible with a very short text , namely send out a message of hope , that what we have tackled successfully in the last 50 years will continue to be possible in future .
One thing is certain , however , and that is that we shall no longer be able to content ourselves with describing the successes of the last 50 years .
That is regrettable but true .
I shall illustrate why I think this is regrettable with reference to the words of Jean-Claude Juncker , Prime Minister of Luxembourg . In his acceptance speech for the Charlemagne Prize in Aachen , he said that Adolf Hitler was as remote to his children as William II was to him .
This is the danger .
As history marches on , the risks increasingly fade : the risks of intolerance , hatred , ethnic exclusion , all the dangers of territorial aspirations that we believed had been overcome but have not been - they are all still there .
They are even here in this House : those propagandists of this demon .
Nevertheless , we must ask ourselves why the younger generation is not fighting as enthusiastically for the integration responsible for overcoming this hatred as is Joseph Daul .
The reason is that it is history .
If we want to prevent history repeating itself we must say to the younger generation , in particular , that these are our achievements , and it is all right to make the demands they are making of us and to take peace for granted - but we need new methods if we are to guarantee it over the long term .
Guaranteeing it over the long term will mean protecting the earth 's climate .
If ever more areas of this earth become uninhabitable , there will be ever increasing migration flows , which will increasingly destabilise peace .
In the past , securing peace meant integration .
In the future , securing peace will mean reversing climate change .
Social stability entails young people being safe in the knowledge that they have a real chance of finding decent work with a decent income , enabling them to live a decent life .
The members of the younger generation are like the older in that they do not entertain hopes of becoming millionaires .
Whilst that is a nice dream , what people really want is to be able to marry or cohabit in a long-term relationship and have children in the knowledge that they will grow up in peace and have social prospects as we do .
They want Europe to offer them this in our globalised world .
There is a third thing they want , and that is education and qualifications , as we all know that whereas , in the past , securing a decent pension and decent health insurance were seen as essentials in life that needed to be safeguarded , the access to education and qualifications will take on this role in the future .
If Europe wants to become the most competitive knowledge-based continent , it cannot succeed in this without well-educated people who undergo lifelong learning .
Thus , education and qualifications become the building blocks of a secure social future .
This means that what integration - territorial and geographic , economic and social - has been in the last 50 years , climate change , education , qualifications and decent work must be in the next 50 .
This can be summed up in a short text .
The shorter and more concise the text , the easier it will be to convey the message .
The success of the last 50 years came about in its own way ; the success of the next 50 will require new methods .
If , supported by the desire for integration of 27 countries , we succeed in expressing this in the Declaration , we shall be taking the right direction at the crossroads at which we are now standing .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , a significant birthday is always a good occasion to take stock .
Fifty years ago at the signing of the Treaty of Rome , what was in the minds of Europeans ?
Well , hope , undoubtedly ; optimism , perhaps ; but the certainty of success - far from it .
And yet the European Union is at the base of the security , prosperity and opportunity which our people now enjoy .
We live in a Europe of freedom and security , of prosperity and opportunity and of societies and economies more open than ever before .
Our generation has aspired to , and achieved , more than our parents could ever have dreamt of .
But the Berlin Declaration must reflect less our pride in the past , more our determination for the future .
President-in-Office , the process is depressingly opaque .
Everybody likes a surprise on their birthday , but to debate a declaration without even a draft is bizarre !
You hinted at what it might contain , President-in-Office .
You assure us that the spin doctors in the Bundeskanzleramt are still hard at work , and yet the chance to debate the text will be limited at best , so do not be surprised if many of us feel we are being bounced .
We want a declaration that looks ahead to the challenges we face , that gives us an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to the values , the aims , the future of the European Union - one which will bring our citizens back on board the European project at a time when more than ever our nations must act together .
An enlarged and open Europe needs greater solidarity between its nations and its citizens ; economic reform , as recognised at the European Council ; and a wider mission to project our values in the world .
Faced with the global challenges of world population growth and migration , of climate change , of internationally-organised crime and terrorism , the Declaration gives Member States the opportunity to explain to citizens why now , more than ever , the EU is so important , why we have to engage with countries beyond our borders and cultures beyond our ken .
Europeans should not be afraid of this .
What has made Europe strong is its openness .
A retreat into fortress Europe , the anachronistic idea of nation states and protected economies , or Christian fundamentalism , would only catapult us back in time : a time when Europeans had only one citizenship , only one national identity .
Our advice to the German Presidency is : keep it short and simple - the kind of text one might nail on to the door of a church in Wittenberg .
Or if the Chancellor is too busy to go that far , at least on the Wittenbergplatz !
I hear that the draft is currently running to two pages .
If that is true , it is already one page too long .
My Liberal and Democrat colleagues in the Committee of the Regions have produced a one-page mission statement for the European Union , which I commend to you .
Nine points says all that needs to be said : that European integration has been a success and that we must continue .
( Applause )

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 9 May 1950 , in his historic declaration to the press in the Salon de l 'Horloge in Paris , Robert Schuman said : ' Europe will not be made all at once , or according to a single plan . It will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity ' .
The fifty years since the signing of the treaties have witnessed many achievements and common policies .
Political Europe is lacking , however , despite the ever more evident need to create it , whilst respecting the national States .
Without a foreign and defence policy the Union will remain weakened : its negotiating power in international relations does not correspond to the size and importance of our economy .
Today , our first objective remains the relaunch of the debate for a new treaty - for the new treaty - without forgetting the refusal by two founding States and the ratification achieved by the majority of the Member States .
A Union of 27 cannot operate with rules that were already restricting for the Fifteen .
We must improve the legislative function , resolve the gridlock on decision-making and the excessive complexity of the laws , and clarify roles .
In addition , the issue of our values and their historical and cultural roots , from Greco-Roman history to Judeo-Christian traditions , to the establishment of the secular and liberal State , must be re-examined and reaffirmed .
Guarantees for the future can only grow from dialogue between cultures , but in order to dialogue with others we must first know and recognise ourselves .
The future of Europe cannot escape the realisation that the present is different from that of fifty years ago .
The problem of immigration , particularly illegal immigration , reaches dangerous limits and has changed the face of our cities .
The presence of different cultures requires that we make additional efforts to ensure dialogue and to demand respect for the rules .
A common policy is needed , together with willingness on the part of the Member States to guarantee borders , internal order and respect for human rights .
The problem of immigration must be tackled in the context of democracy and legality , in respect of human dignity and with common rules : without the recognition of human dignity there is no true civilisation .
Another aspect of our future is that of mutual respect for trade rules .
Problems of forgery and dumping , the question of origin marking and mutual respect for the rules are issues that must be tackled and resolved decisively , if we want to prevent an unfair market from destroying the Union 's production sectors and doing long-term damage to emerging or developing countries also , with disastrous consequences in terms of unemployment and social policies .
The liberalisation of world trade must go hand in hand with the guarantee that welfare policies , acquired by European workers , will be maintained and may be applied gradually but inevitably even in those countries that lack them today .
' The contribution that an organised and living Europe can bring to civilisation is indispensable to the maintenance of peaceful relations ' , Schuman declared in 1950 , saying : ' world peace cannot be safeguarded without the making of creative efforts proportionate to the dangers that threaten it ' .
The threat of terrorism , fed by jihadist fundamentalism , hangs over the whole world : more than ever , our efforts must be courageous and creative .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I do not know the basis for your confidence , Mr President-in-Office , but I do know that it is possible to talk of confidence without having any .
We are discussing Europe 's successes , yes , but , if we talk about wealth and stability , we must also talk about poverty - which does exist in Europe .
I have heard nothing about that so far today .
Also , when we talk about the rule of law , we must also talk about those citizens who have no rights in Europe .
This is often forgotten , and I shall come back to it .
On the subject of confidence in the procedure , well , I belong to the political group of those who have no confidence in the procedure .
Secretiveness does not square with dialogue and democratic openness - it is impossible .
I tell you : I do not believe in these sherpas , or in confessionals , or in all these antics , as it must ultimately be revealed to the public where the contradictions between individuals in Europe lie .
We have seen it with the French referendum ; we have seen it in the Netherlands .
If we do not carry the European people with us - that is , hold public discussions about problem areas - they will not come on board .
I tell you : the text should be short and simple , but without being banal .
That is the danger of your strategy : the banality that will result from it .
This is my advice . You have talked about the climate , so be bold about it .
Formulate the objectives quite clearly so we can understand them .
The objectives are as follows .
A climate target of no more than two degrees of warming must be included for the next 50 years , as must a more efficient use of resources - not just energy but also water , paper , copper and aluminium - and , in 50 years ' time , the EU should be generating 100 % of its energy from renewable sources .
These are objectives that would make people say : Aha !
You really have plans .
I am eager to see what is in your text .
Furthermore , when you talk about the climate , you must say that we need a stability pact .
We must enable the Commission to intervene when countries fail to abide by the rules - as with the Stability and Growth Pact for the single currency .
Binding targets without sanctions do not exist even in my educational theory - and that is really liberal .
These are the only way of ensuring compliance .
There was one thing that made me wince , Mr President-in-Office .
You said that one of the points was the fight against illegal immigration .
Before saying a word about the 50 million legal immigrants living in Europe , who need the same rights as all Europeans , you went straight to the illegal immigrants .
That is Europe 's problem - we do not recognise these people , we always subsume them under the heading ' illegal ' .
Do not think that this is a minor problem .
There is a small European country that is so proud of the French Revolution , yet one of the leading presidential candidates has just proposed the creation of a ministry for immigration and national identity .
That is the danger threatening Europe , namely our viewing immigrants as a threat to our European identity .
You are shaking your head - but rather than just travelling to ministries , you should listen to the discussions on this subject in Europe 's cafés and bars for once .
That is where the people of Europe are to be found .
We are wrong if we only ever speak about illegal immigration rather than about the people who can be integrated into European life .
I winced at this , as I thought , ' Oh là là , what is he going to say now ? '
I should like to conclude by making one thing quite clear . Let us take pride in the fundamental values we have set down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This includes taking pride in those values : freedom of sexual orientation , freedom for minorities , freedom for human beings .
These are the things I want to see in the Berlin Declaration , rather than some reference to God or anyone else who does not concern us here .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , the fact that the Union has decided to commemorate the 50th anniversary of its construction is not only normal , in my opinion , but may also prove useful , since we are seizing this opportunity to look clearly at the progress made and are learning inevitably contradictory lessons from this experience .
On the other hand , if this anniversary were to take the form of a simple celebration of a jubilee designed to extol all the decisions that governed the EU 's construction and to glorify all of its results , without distinction , then , as far as historical analyses are concerned , it would be of very little importance and , in terms of political effectiveness , it would be a complete waste of time .
Well , all the signs are that the famous Berlin Declaration , in the spirit of its initiators , opts for the latter , starting with the method used to draft it : where there should have been a consultation that was largely open to the citizens , it was decided that leaders would debate more or less behind closed doors .
In my view , this is a mistake .
A second element concerns the very substance of the declaration .
It would seem , in actual fact , that what is in store for us is a very general text , focusing on an inevitably brilliant and exemplary review of 50 years of European integration , on naturally very generous common values and on inevitably ambitious objectives , particularly in the social sphere .
Do you really believe that the reality experienced by our fellow citizens is as flawless as that ?
For my part , I firmly believe that no debate whatsoever on Europe will have a real impact today if it is not accompanied by a good dose of criticism regarding the causes of the crisis of confidence that has been raging for some years now in virtually all circles of public opinion and throughout the European institutions .
It is no longer just my group that is finding this .
It is eminent political officials involved in overseeing the Union 's affairs who , in private or in small groups , recognise that a problem exists , between Europe as it is developing today and Europeans .
The last such person to recognise this was none other than your colleague , Mr President , the President-in-Office of the ECOFIN Council , Mr Steinbrück , who recently referred to the risk - I quote - ' of a crisis of legitimacy of the European economic and social model ' , and he is right .
We therefore need to talk about this if we are to restore meaning to the great European adventure .
Thus , because I want the Union to provide itself with the means to come out of this crisis on top , I , together with my group , call for a shake-up , so that , when we come to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome , talk will turn to the changes needed to pave the way for a genuine revival of the European project .
( Applause )

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , it is a fairly typical morning in Euroland : everybody is busy slapping themselves on the back and saying what a fantastic success the last 50 years have been .
There is almost a religious belief that these institutions can deal with the world 's problems , so much so that one or two speakers here think that the Berlin Declaration may even be able to control the weather in the future !
However , I have noticed a slight change of emphasis : you are all talking much more now about freedom , democracy , rights and values , as if it was the European Union that had invented these very things .
I suspect you are doing that because you do not want to do the real critical analysis of whether this project is working .
Just think of the economics .
The United States of America reached the EU 's current level of GDP per capita in 1985 .
Perhaps , more significantly , the USA reached current EU levels for per capita research and development investment in 1978 .
We are an entire economic generation behind the United States of America .
The social model is not working and yet the solution seems to be that we want more of it - more regulation , more rules - and , I am afraid , economically this project is falling even further behind .
On the politics , I grant you : you have your big shiny buildings in Brussels , Strasbourg and Luxembourg , and you have managed to take over more than 75 % of the nation states ' ability to make the laws .
However , you have forgotten something : you have forgotten about the people , you have forgotten about public opinion .
You have been losing referendums and you have chosen to ignore the results .
This deceitful attempt of the German Presidency behind closed doors to put together a package that can be rammed through the Member States without a referendum is a recipe for failure .
If you go on with this , you will breed the very intolerance and extremism that you say you want to stop .
I urge you , please , to ask the peoples of Europe whether or not they want this project .
( Applause from the IND / DEM Group )
Mr President , 50 years ago , the Treaty between the six founding EU Member States was signed in Rome with near universal enthusiasm .
It is true that we were coming out of a world war , a veritable European civil war , and that the people were longing for peace and prosperity .
However , 50 years on , what are we finding ?
It emerges from a book of meetings between Mr Rocard and Commissioner Bolkestein - an extremely interesting book , I might add - that Mr Rocard no longer wants the Union to call itself European .
This Union has in fact betrayed Europe : free movement of capital , goods and persons within Europe implied that a reasonable border existed around it .
The sacrifices made by the people of the Member States required , in return , the Community preference system - the preference of every EU Member State for the production of every other EU Member State - to work .
The opposite has happened , because Europe as a whole has been left to the mercy of internationalist interests , with all too familiar consequences .
We must have the courage to say so .
Either we trade freely worldwide , or we create a regional bloc within Europe ; we cannot do both .
The consequences are well known : our industries are being ruined one after the other , our farming is doomed to die out by 2013 , and even our services are living on borrowed time .
Europe has created unemployment , insecurity and poverty by thoughtlessly opening up its borders .
It is very significant that Mr Schulz has set Europe the objective of ensuring that young people have a job that allows them to have a family and to acquire a minimum amount of wealth .
However , if Mr Schulz has reached the stage of saying that and of setting that as an objective for Europe , then it is a good thing that Europe has not achieved that minimum objective in the last 50 years , as it is being achieved much more successfully everywhere else in the world , where there are far more important developments than in the Union .
So , let us regain pride in our roots , our traditions and our sovereign nations !
This has nothing to do with hate , Mr Schulz .
Let us restore healthy , fruitful cooperation at all levels and within all sectors .
Our group 's name - Tradition , Identity and Sovereignty - is , in this respect , the sign that a new political spring for Europe is approaching .
Mr President , this Berlin Declaration fails to recognise that the EU is making us poorer and less democratic and less free .
It seeks to dodge the one huge issue that is really exercising heads of government across the EU : this is the elephant in the room , and it is called the European Constitution .
In 2005 the peoples of France and Holland voted decisively against the EU Constitution and in its own terms , it should now be dead , finished , kaput .
But , like Dracula or Frankenstein , it refuses to lie down .
Our President-in-Office , the German Chancellor Angela Merkel , without a backward glance at the voters of France and Holland , is determined to bring it back in all its essentials .
We know what the plan is and we will make sure that the people know .
First , the Council will take out all the elements which cause offence but are merely restatements of the status quo .
Why upset the voters with talk of the supremacy of EU law when that supremacy already exists de facto ?
The very word ' constitution ' has caused alarm in itself , so they will say it is merely a treaty , or even a mini-treaty .
They will use every possible device of procedure and national constitutional law and timing to ensure that no referendums take place , or that they take place only in small countries when all the large countries have ratified .
Already we see the Labour Government in Britain softening up the public before it breaks its solemn pledge to hold a referendum .
' It is only about administrative details , ' it will say , ' it does not justify a referendum ' .
We boast about being a Union of values based on democracy and the rule of law , yet in this process we show breathtaking contempt for the people and their views .
We are trampling on their identity and their aspirations . We are defying the rule of law and democracy , but you cannot fool all of the people , all of the time .
When the backlash comes - as it surely will come - it will sweep away this failing European project .

Mr Helmer , we wish you a long life , and your experience in the European Parliament will certainly be a contribution for a long life , so all the best .
Mr President , I am sorry for interrupting at this point , but before the Commission and the Council reply to this morning 's debate , I want to draw attention to the fact that not a single speaker referred to the non-sectarian nature of the European Union and how important it is that the declaration make clear that the European Union respects all religions , that it is a secular organisation , and that it must maintain its democratic and secular nature if it is to maintain its cohesion .
Mr De Rossa , that was not a point of order , but it will be noted nonetheless .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , many thanks for the opportunity to join this debate again briefly .
I do not want to comment on it at great length , but primarily to express my thanks for the contributions .
At the same time , however , Mr Leinen , the debate has made clear that it is really not easy to agree on the substance of the values to be included in this Berlin Declaration .
The range of expectations - from those relating more to procedure such as the Community method on the one hand , to those concerning ambitious climate targets and freedom of sexual orientation , Mr Cohn-Bendit , on the other - revealed by this debate just goes to show the difficulty of incorporating everything in a two-page Berlin Declaration .
I can assure you , however , that , if we endeavour to reflect the range of expectations expressed in this debate reasonably fairly whilst taking account of the history of the EU , there will be a little something for everyone .
We have drawn up documents together in the last 50 years that we can refer to .
After all , discussions between Parliament , the Commission and the Member States are held not only for the purposes of drawing up a Berlin Declaration , but also so that we can draw on what we have learned in our ambitious attempt to take stock of the EU and the challenges for the future .
I should like to set one thing straight for the benefit of Mr Cohn-Bendit , who showed us a small example of demagogy .
Of course I would not be quite so naive as to discuss the fight against illegal migration in my speech .
I understand that you needed this as a model , as it were , to orient your speech around , but I had in fact been speaking about the freedom of human beings and civil rights , and mentioned the need for a common approach to illegal migration in this context - which is no small difference .
I would ask you to bear this in mind in future .
You can be assured that someone who lives in Berlin not by chance but because his heart lies there also understands a little of the problems that migration and immigration entail and has some sense of the duty we nation states have to gear our policies towards them .
( Applause )
To the rest of the House I would say that what I have heard here today is really not so far removed from the discussion that you , Mr President , had with the Heads of State or Government of the Member States at last week 's dinner .
I have the impression that 90 % of the desires and expectations expressed here match the key words and calls expressed in the discussion last Thursday evening , and so there is no need to fear our omitting any significant points in our ambitious attempt to form these desires and expectations into a Berlin Declaration .
Of course , we do have the job of putting this in a form that meets the expectation that it be generally comprehensible .
Mr Leinen , this also goes for the Community method .
Although I am well aware that ' Community method ' is a set phrase with connotations that mean something in circles of Euro-experts , phrases like this cannot feature as such in the text , but must be ' translated ' .
Nevertheless , we shall ensure that the spirit of such expectations is included .
( Applause )
I am much obliged to the President-in-Office .
If he is talking about the strength of the European institutions , it will reflect that .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to make two brief additional remarks on this interesting contribution to the debate about the content of the Berlin Declaration .
The first has to do with the fact that European construction , or the European project , is not ' ready ' - and will never be fully ready .
It is a construction that we are working on constantly , and I think this is an example of that .
With all its successes and shortcomings , this is what we are still doing .
We are adding another piece to the puzzle or to this architecture of Europe , and I think it is very important , as several of you have underlined , that we have not only to look back but rather to concentrate on what we want for the future .
What about the 20-year-olds of today and their dreams for the future ?
How can we describe those ?
How can we illustrate a vision for the future ?
You are the directly-elected representatives of the peoples of Europe .
You have to have your ears to the ground , and that is what you have reported here today : what you have heard , your impression of what is important to put into this declaration .
Secondly , we will not be able to continue to construct a European project , European cooperation , if we do not have people behind us , if we are not working in a democratic , open and transparent way .
This is absolutely clear and , as much as you criticise it , this is exactly that , is it not ?
It is open , it is public , it is reported to the media - what you are saying here is heard .
We understand that you cannot negotiate the content of a two-page text with 450 million people , but we can make sure that what you have heard and what we think is most important , from different political points of view , is put into the hands of those who are now drafting the text .
This is what the debate is all about .
So , to continue to fight for democracy must be one of our basic tasks , and to find modern ways of engaging with citizens has to be a very important part of the declaration , to show that this is possible .
As much as we all feel our national identities to be extremely important , we do not see that in contradiction to also feeling that we are European , or international , or globetrotters , or what have you .
We consider it possible to open our eyes and to open up our perspectives , and that is why we believe in this cooperation in the European project .
I hope that is the idea of us meeting here and both putting together what we are proud of in the history of the European Union , and formulating our hopes for the next 50 years of European cooperation and integration .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . ( HU ) We must be able to provide the citizens of Europe with prospects for the future .
The Berlin Declaration must bear huge political weight .
It is no longer enough these days to talk about the great successes of the past 50 years , but we have to look ahead , and we must be able to show the citizens of Europe a direction for the future .
The integration of the EU must go on .
Hungary stands to gain from a more integrated Europe , one that is capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century and of guaranteeing the continent 's lasting peace , development and security .
Europe is facing increasingly difficult challenges , internal as well as external , which threaten our future and that of our children .
Poverty , demographic problems , global climate change , international terrorism , organised crime , energy questions : these are all dangers requiring adequate and complex answers and solutions .
We can achieve this only if we Europeans are also stronger , more united .
Finally , it is important for the Declaration to reflect the resolve of the Member States for a common future , to strengthen the Union 's internal cohesion and , above all , to bear in mind the security and welfare of its citizens .
in writing . - ( EL ) The decisions taken by the European Council in March are yet further irrefutable proof of the role of the ΕU as a mechanism for promoting the choices of capital .
Instead of taking measures to protect the environment , measures are being taken to protect companies and strengthen the monopolies .
The plundering exploitation of natural resources by capital is the basic cause of the significant climate changes and of the real danger of the ecological destruction of the planet .
However , instead of taking bold measures to at least limit the unaccountability of the monopolies , decisions are being taken to strengthen competition on the electricity and natural gas markets , liberalise the energy market and hand the entire strategic sector of the production , transmission and distribution of energy over to the private sector .
Centre-right and centre-left governments have unanimously committed to speeding up the implementation of the anti-grassroots Lisbon Strategy , setting as their primary objectives the commercialisation of education and health and the attack on insurance funds and the pension , wage and social rights of the workers .
At the same time , the promotion of harsher anti-labour measures , the ' adaptability ' of the labour market and ' flexurity ' are being speeded up in the aim of holding down labour costs , in order to increase the profitability of Euro-unifying capital .
The Greek Communist Party is fighting against these choices , highlighting fair demands and fighting with the workers for the satisfaction of the modern needs of the grassroots classes .
European Council meeting ( 8-9 March 2007 ) ( debate )
The next item is a report by the European Council and a statement by the Commission ( European Council meeting , 8-9 March 2007 ) .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , following our debate on the Berlin Declaration , I should like to inform the House of the results of the Spring Summit .
I shall do so gladly , and may I say at once - although it has just been remarked that we are too ready to sing our own praises - that , from the point of view of the Presidency - from my point of view - this was indeed a successful Council meeting . It provided answers in fields in which citizens - rightly , in my opinion - expect determined action at European level ; it showed that , in defiance of all prophecies of doom , the EU is capable of action even following enlargement , and that the Member States - with the support and encouragement of the Commission and Parliament - are in a position to resolve their differences and set ambitious common targets - even if , of course , the individual decisions may not always be easy .
The Summit also showed that the Union is prepared to take up the pressing tasks of the future , and it gave us momentum and the courage to believe we can succeed also in reviving the flagging process of EU reform and renewal in the coming months .
This is the message conveyed by our latest Summit , which also produced the specific internal results I am just about to discuss , and we want to continue to send out this signal in two weeks ' time - as we have just been discussing - at the celebrations in Berlin and throughout Europe for the 50th anniversary of the Union .
This is the impetus we wish to take with us into the second half of our Presidency .
As you know , the Spring Summit focused on energy and climate policy .
Both issues are rightly very high on the list of concerns of the European people . Recent years and months , in particular - most recently the oil dispute between Belarus and Russia - have demonstrated vividly once more the extent of our dependence on energy imports and the vulnerability of the European economy in matters such as this .
Just as evident , as has also just been remarked , are the effects of climate change .
Environmental disasters , melting glaciers , sea-level rise , drought - these are no longer abstract terms , but are now very real threats .
International studies have demonstrated the price we shall pay - the price we shall force our children and grandchildren to pay - if we fail to act now .
You are familiar with the outcome of the discussions at the Summit , and I hope you agree with my conclusion that the decisions by the Heads of State or Government have pushed open the door to an ambitious and - in my opinion - responsible European climate and energy policy , a policy that no longer glosses over the scale of the problems we face , but rather seeks effective strategies to respond to these problems .
We have taken a major step towards an integrated climate and energy policy - integrated because the one is not possible without the other ; because the greatest risk by far to the climate today is the generation and consumption of energy by human beings .
This is particularly applicable , of course , to emissions of greenhouse gases .
Thanks to the decisions taken in Brussels , the EU remains the forerunner in international climate protection .
The decisions enable us to make a credible entry into the forthcoming negotiations on the successor agreement to the Kyoto Protocol .
The EU has committed itself unilaterally and independently to reducing its emissions of greenhouse gases by 20 % compared to 1990 by 2020 .
This is an ambitious target , and reaching it will require major efforts on the part of all Member States .
The Heads of State or Government have gone even further , however .
We have promised to reduce these emissions by as much as 30 % over the same period , provided that we are joined by other industrialised countries and economically advanced developing countries .
These targets can only be reached if we are forward-looking in our energy policy , too , and so a comprehensive energy Action Plan was adopted in Brussels along with the climate targets .
Two targets are at the heart of this Action Plan . Energy consumption within the EU is to be reduced by 20 % compared to projections for 2020 through greater energy efficiency ; and , crucially , the share of renewable energy in overall energy consumption is to be increased to at least 20 % .
As you will remember , we did battle over whether to make the latter target binding .
A number of Member States had had reservations that this target might be too ambitious .
I am delighted that we could agree to make it binding in the end , as the three aforementioned targets , in particular , make clear the close interconnection of climate and energy policy .
Without the efforts in the fields of renewable energy and energy efficiency , the EU would quite clearly be unable to meet its own climate target .
We shall adopt the same joint , fair approach when it comes to dividing up the European target into national targets as we did when we agreed on making the target for renewable energy binding .
In so doing we shall have to take into account the different starting positions and potentials of the Member States , and the Commission has been called on - and has agreed - to present a proposal for this division by the end of the year .
This is not the place to describe all aspects of the energy Action Plan .
As I see it , it is more important to pay tribute to the Action Plan as a whole in this House , and also to emphasise - besides the targets I have just presented - above all the strategic decisions that have been taken in the following fields , for example : the structure of the internal energy market , security of supply , international energy policy , energy research , and new energy technologies .
I should like to select one of these five examples .
It will be possible to ensure security of supply in the medium and long term only if we succeed in diversifying energy sources and transport routes .
This means , in specific terms , strengthening relations with the important producer countries , developing lasting external relations with regard to energy - including with the countries of Central Asia and the countries bordering on the Black and Caspian Seas - and of course also fostering our energy relations with the Gulf States and North Africa .
It also means reliable , transparent energy relations , including with Russia .
Consequently , our Presidency is continuing to work towards ensuring that negotiations on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Russia can begin shortly .
The results concerning energy policy and the fight against climate change are indeed particularly important ; but , as you can see from the conclusions , the European Council did not just confine itself to these .
The Spring Summit traditionally takes stock of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs , and the most important thing is that the renewed Lisbon Strategy is taking effect .
There has been noticeable success , which has found expression throughout Europe in improved growth and falling unemployment rates . However , the message is also that now is not the time to sit back and relax ; the contrary is the case .
We want to use the positive momentum ; as I see it , there is no alternative to continuing structural reforms and consistently consolidating public finances .
The European internal market must be developed and completed in important fields : once again , I give the examples of gas and electricity , postal services - and also financial markets .
Last Friday 's conclusions also include the elimination of the deficit in the transposition of Community law .
We have indeed made good progress on this in recent years : I would remind the House that the transposition deficit was 3 % as recently as 2000 , whereas it is now just 1.2 % - and we know that these efforts must be continued .
For this reason , the European Council decided last Friday to further reduce this deficit to 1 % by 2009 .
The Lisbon Strategy will only be successful in the eyes of the public , however , if the social dimension can be successfully developed - this is particularly valid in view of positive developments on the labour markets .
In this connection , the Heads of State or Government have emphasised the importance of fair working conditions , worker rights and participation , health and safety at work , and a family-friendly organisation of work .
I should like to emphasise briefly one further element of the decisions : better lawmaking and cutting red tape .
In this field , too , we have made some progress in the past - albeit with difficulty . Of course , however , here too - or here in particular - our efforts must not lapse in future .
In particular , we want to see a 25 % reduction in the administrative burdens - red tape - arising from EU legislation by 2012 , and the Member States have been invited to set similarly ambitious national targets over the next year .
At the final press conference on Friday , Commission President Barroso had some - in my opinion - very kind , almost flattering words to say about the Council meeting that had just ended .
He said that , in terms of the results and the objectives set , it was the most important summit he had attended in his term of office .
I would also say before this House , Commissioner , that this success would not have been possible without the Commission 's excellent groundwork , nor without the support of the European Parliament - on whose behalf you , Mr Poettering , as the newly elected President , participated in your first Council meeting .
The EU is on its way to developing a modern , sustainable climate and energy policy .
The Heads of State or Government have shown that Europe can assume a leading role in important global issues .
As I see it , the signal the Summit sends out is that , if we Europeans join forces , if we act together , we can shape the future successfully .
This is entirely in keeping with the motto of the German Presidency , the guiding principle we used as a heading for our conclusions , which I also mentioned in the earlier debate : ' Europe - succeeding together ' !
( Applause )
Vice-President of the Commission . ( DE ) Mr President of the European Parliament , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen .
The Commission is obliged to the Council and the German Presidency for the far-reaching , bold objectives set at last week 's European Council .
We are also obliged to you for the unambiguous signal you have given the rest of the world , which has received great attention worldwide : namely the signal that we in Europe are serious about the fight against climate change , the development of a common energy policy and the preservation of our competitiveness .
A particularly important result of this Council was the fact that it proved those people wrong who said that a Union of 27 Member States would no longer be capable of action .
This was the first great test for the Union of 27 , and I believe we have passed it .
The Summit was a good one from the point of view of the European policy of partnership for growth and jobs within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy .
The Heads of State or Government noted that the new Strategy is delivering the desired results and has made an important contribution to the economic recovery , a recovery that is reflected in an upward trend in GDP , with a growth rate of 2.9 % in 2006 .
It is now expected that , in the next two years alone , seven million new jobs will be created in the EU and we shall come very close to achieving the original Lisbon objectives of 2000 .
The Heads of State or Government made it clear that we must not content ourselves with the initial signs of stronger economic dynamics .
I agree with what Mr Steinmeier has just said : Europe now has a great opportunity to further increase the pace of reform .
We have not yet succeeded in reversing the trend .
The downward trend has indeed slowed , but we are not there yet .
All we can say is that we are on the right track .
This is also demonstrated by the European Council 's support for the country-specific recommendations issued by the Commission for the first time .
The significance of the fact that the Member States accepted country-specific recommendations from the Commission for their national agendas in a field in which they have sole competence , and that the European Council adopted these unanimously without argument , should not be underestimated .
This shows that , for the first time , we have a functioning mechanism for economic-policy coordination in Europe .
This year will see preparations for the second three-year cycle of the policy for growth and jobs , and the Commission already sees three clear necessities .
First of all , we shall have to integrate climate and energy policy fully into the European policy for growth and jobs .
This must be a coherent policy .
Secondly , it will be essential to strengthen the third pillar of this strategy , namely employment and the social dimension , with particular emphasis on improving the employability of European citizens .
After all , what we see before us is a brand-new development .
We shall be seeing increasing shortages of adequately trained workers in certain regions and sectors .
Employability must be improved , particularly by strengthening education and training .
The third major task in relation to the review of the Lisbon Strategy will be increasing its visibility .
As the saying goes , ' don 't hide your light under a bushel ' .
It could be that we are speaking rather too little about having a European answer to the global economic challenge . The fact that European integration and a common European economic policy are the answer we have been looking for to the question of how to preserve our competitiveness at global level should feature much more prominently in national policy debate .
I should like to say just a few brief words on the subject of better regulation and bureaucracy reduction - a particular concern of mine .
The call made by the European Council for Parliament and the Council to make even greater use of impact assessments in the future is important .
The quality of legislation is the be-all and end-all of the whole project .
A prerequisite for this is good cost assessments .
All parts of the project of better regulation and bureaucracy reduction are now really under way .
I am very much obliged to the Council for supporting the Commission 's objective of a 25 % reduction in the administrative burdens on European enterprises arising from European legislation by 2012 .
What is just as important , however , is the commitment made by the Member States to doing the same within their own spheres of competence .
This had been in dispute , and the fact that it has been achieved represents a great success .
The goal of achieving an overall reduction in the administrative burdens on enterprises of 25 % by 2012 now seems tangibly close .
I should like to make it clear once more in this House that , when we talk about reducing administrative burdens , we simply mean less paperwork for enterprises .
We are talking about requirements on reporting , keeping statistics , information and documentation .
Under no circumstances will standards relating to consumer protection , quality , the environment , safety or social aspects be so much as touched .
The aim is not to alter the substance of requirements but to make them such that they free up energy within enterprises rather than placing an unnecessary burden on them .
( Applause )
When Tony Blair said some time ago that , if the EU did not exist , it would have to be invented , he was probably referring to the kind of decisions taken by the European Council just a few weeks after the alarming facts in the latest UN report on climate change became known .
With the support of Parliament , and on the basis of the Commission proposals from January , the European Council has managed to make climate change and the switch to sustainable energy structures a priority of European policy , and to adopt an Action Plan for the coming three years .
The strength of the decisions lies in the fact that we have succeeded in closely interlinking climate and energy policy .
The reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases goes hand in hand with a competitive , secure , sustainable energy policy .
The strength of the decisions lies also in their credibility , as they will not exist in a vacuum , but are linked with a tangible package of measures .
Binding targets for renewable energy , as well as the targeted promotion of energy saving and the new technology of carbon capture and storage , will adapt the European economy to the global challenges of the 21st century in terms of climate policy .
We shall continue to dismantle the remaining barriers to renewable energy and to energy efficiency in all industrial sectors , with a view to achieving a 20 % share of renewable energy in overall EU energy consumption and also a share of biofuels of at least 10 % by 2020 .
I heard what the President-in-Office of the Council has just said about the Commission 's task of presenting a proposal by the end of the year .
I can assure you that the Commission will present a fair , well-balanced proposal for sharing out the burden throughout the EU , one that will take into account the prior achievements of the individual Member States , their starting positions and what they need in order to meet this target .
I am certain that we can do this .
What is important is that we are making the internal market for gas and electricity work once and for all to the benefit of consumers , which will encourage investment and create a genuine European grid .
These measures will open up new , global markets for us , reducing the energy bills of all citizens and all enterprises .
We in Europe are currently paying too much for our energy - and this is a result not only of the global situation , but of poor organisation of our own energy supply .
For this reason , the fulfilment of the Lisbon Agenda also requires consistent implementation of the new EU climate policy .
We have proposed that the highly developed countries agree to collectively reduce their CO2 emissions by 30 % compared to 1990 by 2020 .
In addition , the EU has already committed itself to reducing its CO2 emissions by at least 20 % by 2020 .
This puts us in an excellent position ahead of the forthcoming climate negotiations .
I believe that this dual decision in relation to the climate will lead to a new global dynamic - which we urgently need .
We can no longer stand by and watch countries such as the USA and China both pointing the finger at each other and demanding the other make the first move .
One of them has to make a move at long last !
This is undoubtedly an important point for discussion also at the EU-US Summit on 30 April of this year . This point was mentioned by the Heads of State or Government along with the other external issues .
I should like to say a few words to European industry .
The Council 's targets give our industry a clear framework , and also investment security for years to come .
It can now plan its investments ; it knows what politicians are demanding of it and can develop its strategies .
We want to see Europe exporting the best , cleanest products ; not its jobs .
I do not want to hear only what European industry cannot do and what it considers impossible ; I should like to finally hear what it can do and what is possible .
We shall see that a great deal more is possible than the industrial community itself would have thought .
For all our contentment , we should not forget that we have seen only the starting signal so far .
This strategy must be taken forward - by means of specific Community projects and individual legal projects - by the end of this parliamentary term .
In addition , we have the support of the European public .
We know from the latest Eurobarometer survey that European citizens are well aware that a change of course is essential .
I am sure that they are also aware of the fact that resolute action will not come for free .
To summarise , the Lisbon Strategy is an open , dynamic process .
We need a marketplace of ideas , which will then lead to specific policy decisions .
As a report by the Centre for European Reform put it : there is hardly a single European country that is not scrutinising the Danish model of ' flexicurity ' , the Finnish university system or the British liberalisation strategy .
I could add more examples , such as the French ' Pôles de Compétitivité ' , the Dutch Standard Cost Model or tax reforms in some of the new Member States .
Learning from one another is a key element of this reform process .
It is now a matter of making clear together that the European partnership for growth and jobs is Europe 's answer to the two great questions of our time , namely the great social question as to how to make available sufficient good jobs in the age of globalisation , and the great environmental question as to how to keep our planet habitable .
After all , we know that people are asking questions such as : Will I keep my job ?
Will I continue to receive benefits if I am ill ?
Will I be able to put my children through college ?
Will I be provided for in my old age ?
We also know they are asking : What will living conditions be like for my children and grandchildren in the future ?
This is the answer to these questions - and it is important to point out to Europe 's citizens that it can only be a European answer .
If there were ever the need to demonstrate why we need European integration , these are the two issues that show that this integration is essential in the 21st century , too .
Thank you .
( Applause )

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mr Steinmeier , Commissioner Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , a summit is usually followed by long-winded conclusions in which we have to dig deep to find ambitions that are supported by the 27 Member States .
This time , though , the conclusions are relatively short and definitely represent major steps forward .
The European spring summit has exceeded our wildest expectations .
Vision has been coupled with political courage , ambition with feasibility , credibility and - no small feat - decisiveness .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats would first of all like to pay tribute to the President of the Council , the German Federal Chancellor Mrs Merkel , and her team , and also to the Commission under its President , Mr Barroso , particularly Commissioner Dimas and Commissioner Piebalgs , who have launched the energy and climate package and have done everything in their power to achieve sound results .
We are actually proud , I have to say , that our own group 's combined efforts at the top of our institutions , in harness with other partners of course , has yielded pleasant prospects .
We are still waiting for the rich rewards , though .
The commitments have been made , but we still need to divide up the joys and the burdens , and I should like to wish the Commission much success in this arduous task .
I hope that all Member States and all sections of society will be prepared to do their bit in making the tireless efforts that are needed .
As the world is watching Europe , it can see that Europe is facing up to its responsibility and that it is choosing to fulfil a credible pioneering role .
As European partners , we have a duty , in unison , to bring maximum pressure to bear on our global partners in order for them to join us in this ambitious , but above all necessary , chapter .
Comparing our group 's points of departure prior to the spring summit with the results , I come to the conclusion that we would have preferred to see feasible , binding agreements rather than unrealistic , high-flown pie in the sky , and those , as a result of 20-20-20 decision , are what we have got , so that is a great success .


Research and development in the area of renewable energy and the fight against climate change go hand in hand with the Lisbon goals in terms of growth and employment .
These , Commissioner Verheugen , should definitely be included .
For the majority of our group , there is room for nuclear energy in the energy mix , even though we , just like the European Council , fully respect the principle of subsidiarity in this respect .
Since we do not want Parliament to stand on the sidelines in the climate change issue , we want to give the setting up of an effectively-run temporary parliamentary committee on climate change our full backing .
During this spring summit , the emphasis was on energy and climate , although there is more to it than that , of course , for , after all , there is still a great need to keep the kettle of socio-economic reforms on the boil .
We believe that the Lisbon process is starting to bear fruit , but there is no reason whatever to rest on our laurels at this stage , certainly not in those Member States that have run up government debts , experience low labour participation or have pension schemes that are not fully safeguarded .
We in the PPE-DE Group seek to steer clear of any form of complacency .
Since economic prospects have improved somewhat , national reforms should not be delayed but should , if anything , be speeded up .
We expect that the Commission will continue to display leadership and will , if necessary , confront the Member States with their trickery and shortcomings openly and without qualms .
We very much welcome the decisions surrounding the measurable reduction in the administrative burden and the prospect of an independent impact study in the case of fresh legislation .
Vision and ambition with regard to sound policy is one thing , convincing people thereof and getting them on board is another .
The crucial question , as Commissioner Verheugen was also right to point out , remains how we can get Europeans more involved in this whole Lisbon process .
Whilst it is to be applauded that the summit conclusions call for further efforts in a bid to improve communication , this does not , of course , get us anywhere .
It simply needs to happen and in this area , a huge number of opportunities have been missed in recent years .
I would therefore urge the Presidents of our three political institutions to give those 500 million Europeans , who hope for a prosperous and social future in a pleasant living climate for their children and their grandchildren , a place in the Berlin Declaration , to give them renewed confidence and faith in the added value of our common European project .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this Summit has been a success - a fact that must be emphasised , as it cannot be said of all our summits in recent years .
The Vice-President of the Commission was right when he said of last weekend 's events that Europe has proved itself capable of action .
We can do it if we try .
The 27 Heads of State or Government who managed to work together successfully at the weekend took a decision that points the way ahead , but I shall leave the detailed description of this up to our group 's experts in their speeches .
This allows me to concentrate on noting that what we need - namely to make the public understand that this is not just a club of layabouts - is really feasible ; and that the EU not only describes the great challenges , but defines and decides on the necessary answers and hopefully also implements them in practice .
Standing here speaking about European Councils , I have often reflected on how one could best describe the situation of the European Council of Heads of State or Government .
One day a passage from the Book of Matthew sprang to mind - and I am sure the President , too , is very familiar with this - chapter 6 , verse 26 : ' Behold the fowls of the air : for they sow not , neither do they reap , nor gather into barns ; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them . '
I do not need to go on : you sow , I hope you will reap , I hope you will gather into barns ; and what the heavenly Father does with you remains to be seen .
In any case , it is true that this progress has been achieved .
Mrs Thyssen , it is in everyone 's interests to call this a joint effort by the European institutions .
I did not have the impression that Angela Merkel was acting as a representative of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ; I had been told she was there as the President of the Council .
It was not my impression that the President of this House took part as a representative of the PPE-DE Group - this would mean he had misunderstood his office - and Mr Barroso is not officially allowed to know anything about the PPE-DE Group .
Kindly refrain from claiming this success for any particular group , therefore .
( Applause )
What is this all about ?
Europe has described and addressed itself to a huge challenge .
Besides , we have learnt something we did not know before - or perhaps Mr Steinmeier did - namely that nuclear energy now counts as renewable energy .
This is Chirac 's Theorem , as it were , to mark the end of his term of office .
At least we have learnt something !
At all events , taking up the challenge and exerting pressure to ensure that these decisions are implemented in practice is of prime importance .
Praise is also due to Tony Blair for once .
Directly after the Council , the British Government said : 20 % is good , but we want something even more ambitious .
We need more of this in Europe .
( Applause )
I should like to add that the G8 Summit will be dealing with the situation in Africa .
In this connection , we must also understand that climate change is another significant example of injustice in the world .
The continent that contributes least to the pollution of our environment - Africa - is the one that suffers most as a result of climate change .
This means that when we say , for instance , that we want to ensure that justice and solidarity reign in the world , it is a moral obligation for us Europeans to really tackle the problem of climate change and - as has been rightly said - to exert pressure on other regions of the world .
Protecting the existence of the human race , the survival of life on this earth , is the great goal to which we are all committed - every one of us , including the USA , Japan , Australia and China .
Yet we cannot make demands of them unless we set a good example ourselves ; and that is the historic step that was taken at the weekend .
I am obliged also to Mr Steinmeier , who played a significant part in bringing this about : Angela Merkel undoubtedly also played a decisive part , but Mr Steinmeier deserves a mention for the persistence with which he has carried out his work as President-in-Office of the Council .
( Applause from the left )
Mr Schulz , I am delighted to see that you are much better versed in the Bible than I am .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I was not quite sure when Matthew ( Matthäus ) was mentioned whether it was not perhaps a reference to Lothar Matthäus .
I am pleased that this was not the case .
Mr Schulz is quite right : it was a successful Council summit .
You want to make progress on the internal market for energy , you want to slow down global warming , reduce CO2 emissions and extend the use of renewable energies , and you want to strengthen solidarity on energy matters .
This is in line with this Parliament 's demands .
Some of these demands were even more ambitious , but nevertheless you deserve applause , and this is what you will get from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
However , there is no cause for complacency just yet , because you still have the much more arduous part ahead of you .
Whether the Summit really was a success will depend on whether the projects are implemented quickly and hopefully deliver tangible results before the year is out .
That is also my group 's central message : we want the objectives that have been agreed to be acted on quickly .
In this respect the Commission is already making the right noises .
The Council is asked to nail its colours to the mast once the Commission proposals are on the table .
Allow me to comment more specifically on one or two individual issues , and firstly on climate protection .
You are quite right .
Climate protection works at European level or not at all .
On closer examination it is also true , however , that climate protection does not actually work at European level either but at global level .
Only if we can get the other major CO2 emitters on board will we bring about the global change that is necessary to actually slow down climate change .
Basking here in the glory of the role of forerunner will not achieve a great deal .
A forerunner without anyone following reminds me a little of Don Quixote , whom we should not be emulating .
Climate policy in Europe must now therefore be followed by climate diplomacy from Europe , because on its success the overall success of the enterprise ultimately depends .
Some see the G8 as the appropriate forum for this and think a solution could be found if the issue were taken to the G8 .
Take it with you to Heiligendamm , but we must also recognise one thing : the G8 may quite conceivably not be appropriate .
It does not include China and India .
That may also be a reason to reflect on the architecture of the global institutions .
On the issue of the internal market for energy : for us this is not an end in itself but something that we really need .
As Commissioner Verheugen said , market failure is something that directly affects the Union 's citizens .
I am delighted that the Commission 's action plan has been adopted and should like to offer my congratulations to Mr Verheugen and in particular also to his colleagues Mrs Kroes and Mr Piebalgs , who have spared no effort here .

It is now a question of building on this , and my group would expressly encourage the Commission to do so quickly .
Bureaucracy requires better legislation .
The proposals that Commissioner Verheugen has made are right and it is also right that they have been adopted .
We therefore welcome the progress that has been made here , but believe that the Member States are obliged to follow suit .
It is a myth that all bureaucracy comes from Brussels .
The Council has shown that it can agree on a really important subject .
Congratulations on this !
Now it also needs to be successful on the Presidency 's second important issue .
The Berlin Declaration and the June Summit await us .
You have our support for them .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , to start with , it gives me real pleasure to bring together the two points of view presented here .
I will be delighted to reconcile the views of our friends from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
We are grateful to the German Presidency for the success of this summit .
I have in mind both those of its members who are from the SPD , and those of its members from the CDU .
This positive outcome raises hopes of success for Germany and for the German Presidency , and we are pleased with it .
We are glad that the businesslike and pragmatic approach adopted by the German Presidency has yielded results .
I would also like to thank the President of this House for the positive , hands-on role he played at the summit - our thanks , Mr President .
This is a fine example of the major role the House wants to play in the process of European integration , and it arouses hope .
The summit has been a success and sends an important signal to the rest of the world in two respects : it is a signal of our unity , and a signal of our organisation 's pragmatic , forward-looking approach .
All the countries around the European Union have now seen that we are able to unite on energy issues .
The Union is sending out a clear signal that we want solidarity , and that we want the future of our organisation to be based on a unified approach to the question of the security of energy resources .
I believe that the events of the last year or so have helped everyone in the European Union to grasp the importance of energy security not just to our economies , but ultimately to individual citizens ' standard of living .
The summit has also sent out a clear signal on climate change .
It has demonstrated our ability to come to an agreement on this matter , and it gives me real pleasure to endorse the results of this summit .
It is right that the European Union has set itself ambitious targets on an issue of such paramount importance to the future of Europe .
To finish , I would like to highlight the fact that the first summit of the now further enlarged European Union has also shown that enlargement is not a problem .
In my view , our friends from the old Member States tend to over emphasise the problems of enlargement .
As a Pole , I would like to point out that recent enlargements of the European Union , both that of two-and-a half years ago , and the latest one , are a common success for us all .
That is how the citizens of the new Member States see it .
I would like us all to feel this way .
European enlargement is a success , and we would do well to remember that .
This summit has shown that if we work together , we will succeed .
Thank you , Mr Kamiński , and thank you for your kind words to me .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is an obvious connection between the preceding debate on the Berlin Declaration and this one , since the Europe of results must be able to act and it will not be able to do so very effectively without a constitution .
Mr President , we acknowledge the fact that the German Presidency led the Council to adopt quite clear , visible commitments on emissions cuts and renewable energies and to reject the pro-nuclear offensive from President Chirac . Mr Chirac is on the way out and you can be sure that we are not going to miss him at all .
Although we welcome the outcome reached at the summit - because things could have gone far worse - we believe that the difficulties are only just beginning , because when the time comes to translate our words into actions there will certainly be problem grey areas in meeting the targets .
We should be aware straight away , for example , that cutting emissions unilaterally by 20 % between now and 2020 will not enable us to meet the target of keeping the temperature rise down to less than 2 ° C. Mr Verheugen , I do not think that that constitutes a big , bold effort because , if we kept to our commitments on fair energy efficiency and renewables , that would already cut emissions by 24 % .
Thus a unilateral target of cutting emissions by 30 % would have been perfectly feasible and would radically have raised our credibility on the international stage .
What is more , Commissioner , if I think of the role you have played in the issue of emissions cuts , renewables and cars , as well as the tremendous struggles that have taken place within the Commission on all these topics , your speech today sounded frankly like a bit of ' greenwash ' .
Achieving these targets means overcoming a great many adversaries , primarily many of our national government administrations , which are the real bureaucratic burden of the European Union , together with the Commission staff .
Next , of course , are the major European industrial lobbies which , despite their fine words , are absolutely opposed to any real development of environmentally efficient renewable energies , because Enel , E.ON and EdF are all too well aware that reducing our dependency on fossil fuels means making European consumers much freer of them as well .
We await the Commission 's proposals with interest , of course , but also with some trepidation , because we are convinced that now is the time to be revolutionary and radical .
That is why we shall be meeting in Berlin - and I hope , Mr Steinmeier , that you will be able to join us - in order to draw up a sound plan based on ten ideas that we have often put forward .
The most important of them is a climate pact with the same features as the Stability and Growth Pact , setting out clear rules , firm and rapid sanctions and highly realistic incentives .
To conclude , Mr President , I should like to add that we are extremely concerned at the rumours circulating in the Council and the Commission that the new rules deriving from the commitments made by the Council of Brussels could be adopted under the procedure of Article 175 ( 2 ) , which excludes the European Parliament and requires unanimity in the Council .
If that happened , it would be a slap in the face for all the European citizens who are so enthusiastic today .
I hope that does not happen .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone is talking first and foremost about the recent Summit 's historic significance in terms of protecting the climate and the environment , but in so doing they overlook the fact that in other important fields , such as employment policy and the European social model , no initiatives have been agreed at all and that as a result opportunities have been missed .
The Lisbon Strategy with its focus on the global competitiveness of the European Union and other global players prevents us , in my view , from adopting an effective approach both to the fight for climate protection and to the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
However , I certainly appreciate that on climate protection steps have been taken in the right direction .
Nevertheless , it is obvious that these steps are limited and that they are still in danger of being slowed down and brought to a halt .
The EU is once again its own worst enemy , pushing to one side its own studies which conclude that a 30 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions is needed to actually prevent irreversible global warming and with it up to 86 000 additional climate-related deaths per year in the EU .
The difference between 30 % and 20 % can be summed up as whether we are going to use the opportunity to avert a climate catastrophe or whether we are going to carry on regardless .
The problem is not that the left-wing opposition believes in principle that those in power are not doing enough of the right thing .
The problem is that the wrong political course has been adopted and that the decisive initiatives are not actually being taken .
It is not surprising either that the fight against poverty , social exclusion and social divisions continued to be marginalised at the Summit and was not linked at all with consistent action to tackle global warming and the destruction of the environment .
Mr Verheugen , it is precisely this close interlinkage of social and ecological issues that the Summit failed to identify , despite what you have said today .
For years , the European Commission has presented reports showing the potential jobs that could be created by using renewable energies , showing the external costs , but also clarifying the impact of ecotaxes .
Levying these taxes could increase the European Union 's revenue , money which is needed for imperative social and environmental measures .
This market logic explains why , for example , in the Action Plan ' An Energy Policy for Europe ' tackling climate change is only included at the bottom of the list of major objectives .
It also explains why the European Council is calling for rapid progress to be made in the EPA negotiations , despite the Summit 's complaint about the increasing share of greenhouse gas emissions from developing countries .
These free-trade agreements are , in my opinion , a brutal form of neo-colonialism , which are socially and environmentally destructive .
There are at least three conclusions : firstly , we need to make it a priority to have an up-to-date policy to tackle poverty and social exclusion and global warming , then we need to stop the EPAs and finally we need the passages in the draft constitution that promote economic deregulation , privatisation and armament to be deleted .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , greenhouse gas emissions are a source of concern and appear to lead to rapid changes to the earth 's climate .
It is difficult to form a judgment on what the EU might do about this matter by itself .
By taking the lead , we should increase our ability to put pressure on China , India , the United States and Russia , and Europe would gain the advantage in terms of environmental technology .
However , we must not proceed too quickly and so undermine our competitiveness .
The Council agreed on a well-balanced view of this issue - rare progress in an EU in which the vast majority of decisions undermine freedom , weaken democracy , compromise countries ' independence and make our lives more bureaucratic .
It should also be noted , however , that such progress destroys the official argument in favour of the Constitutional Treaty . According to that argument , democracy must give way to efficiency and it must be possible for individual Member States to be ridden roughshod over in the EU 's decision-making ; otherwise , the EU will become impotent .
That is apparently untrue .
Nor was it true of the Services Directive .
The hidden argument in favour of the Constitutional Treaty is that it is necessary in order to create an EU state - a power base for a new European elite .
Political power has to be taken away from the nation states , which are the source and basis of European democracy .
Now , the Council has again shown that it is possible to take major decisions even when all the Member States have the veto .
Thank you for demonstrating that .
Praeterea censeo constitutionum esse repudiendam [ Moreover , I believe that the Constitution should be rejected . ]
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we too regard the EU Summit as positive , but more in terms of its desires than its results .
On the one hand it is good and important for the future of all of us that climate protection targets were agreed at the EU Summit , but on the other hand it is , alas , the case that such declarations are unfortunately often not even worth the paper they are written on .
What is the point of agreeing to reduce CO2 emissions by a fifth by 2020 if the practical and problematic details are , in usual EU style , put off until later .
Moreover , I do not think that we have made any progress at all on nuclear power .
The question of how to dispose of radioactive waste remains unresolved , the safety of nuclear power stations is not guaranteed and the effects of nuclear radiation are not at all fully understood .
Nevertheless , the EU Summit did not manage to send out a clear signal by reducing nuclear energy .
Instead the danger of global warming is supposed to be countered with a nuclear risk , which I believe is a perilous business .
It is of course all well and good if the EU wishes to play a leading role in climate protection .
However , it is only responsible for 15 % of global carbon dioxide emissions , which is just the tip of the iceberg .
On our own , without the major climate culprits , India , China , South Korea , Japan , Australia and the United States which are responsible for almost half of global greenhouse gas production , we will hardly be able to make progress in the battle against climate change .
On the contrary , we will pay a hefty price for all our efforts .
You do not need a prophet to tell you that .
The fact that the developing countries , but also and above all the energy-squandering USA , could not care less about the environment , is well known .
Even on US Army bases in Europe no respect is shown for the environment and abandoned US bases are almost akin to hazardous waste depots .
This is a scandal , not only for the Americans , whom it seems really do need to be taken in hand in this respect , but above all for the EU Member States , who have not prescribed any technical environmental conditions .
This is another context in which critical questions need to be asked about transatlantic relations , just as they do in respect of CIA overflights and our overall tendency , all too blind with euphoria , to be the Americans ' vassals .
As early as 1997 the industrialised countries committed themselves to reducing the quantity of greenhouse gases that they produce .
At the 2005 UN Climate Change Conference there was once again praise for moves to invest more in solar , wind and hydroelectric energy from then on .
Of course once again these noble words have been followed by scant action .
The EU imposed its own target to increase the share of renewable energy to 12 % but has achieved only 8 % .
That is why there is no need to celebrate renewed verbal declarations , like the ones we have just heard again , as such a great success .
Instead we are reminded of other EU initiatives that have failed thus far such as the Lisbon objectives , which we are also still light years away from achieving , quite apart from the barely implemented Alpine Convention , which is a further act in this tragedy .
If we are to slow down climate change and mitigate its impending serious consequences we must all direct our efforts towards achieving the objectives that we have set .
Mr President , ever since I came to this House , I have heard repeated promises of cutting red tape , be it from the Commission , the Council or indeed from Parliament itself .
From this summit , we have now yet another war declared on bureaucracy .
That is good .
Indeed , one wishes that famed German efficiency would drive it forward . However , I fear that will not happen , because , as in the past , I suspect that these promises will not be delivered .
This is because we are dealing with EU edifices which are veritable factories of regulation .
Indeed , at the same summit , a whole new front of regulation was opened up under the guise of tackling climate change - even down to the point of dictating the type of light bulbs that nation states and citizens can use !
Where , one might ask , are these bulbs likely to be manufactured ?
Probably in China , thanks , in part , to over-regulation driving our manufacturers to take flight eastwards , where the uncontrolled factories manufacturing them will belch out even greater CO2 emissions .
Frankly , we never enforce restrictions about such matters in our trade agreements with China .
Rather , we seem to reserve such punitive measures for our own industry .
Such is the self-defeating merry-go-round that is this regulation-crazed European Union .
Speaking of merry-go-rounds brings me to the manoeuvrings at the summit over the rejected Constitution .
So , Chancellor Merkel thinks EU citizens can be bypassed and hoodwinked : if the title ' Constitution ' is dropped , then we can avoid even asking the electorate .
What a coup for democracy !
What a cowardly farce !
What a commentary on the EU elite and their arrogant contempt for the people whose interests they claim to serve .
The fact that the EU is running away from its own citizens tells us all we need to know about its worth and value as we approach the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome , which , of course , spawned this insatiable lust for Brussels domination and control .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his report .
It is true that it was a successful summit , and as always success has many fathers , while failure is a foundling .
In this case the success was primarily due to Germany 's Chancellor , Mrs Merkel , who was after all Environment Minister for four years many years ago and is familiar with the European Environment Council .
The focus was on energy and climate policy . Unfortunately , the public debate following this successful summit has only described the internal discussions about renewable energies .
In fact , as the Council Conclusions attest , much more was decided on the issues of security of energy supply and climate impact .
The impact on society of the proposals made is also important and if we set targets , for example 20 % or 30 % , then these targets have to be realistic .
Mr Schulz praised Mr Blair for his 60 % target .
Mr Blair will not have to implement that , as we all know , and I am sure that his Conservative challengers will be demanding 70 % by tomorrow at the latest .
These targets must therefore be realistic ; otherwise they are of no real value .
Secondly , despite all of this success there are still some outstanding issues , such as the question of burden-sharing .
I hope that the Commission and the German Presidency will comment on this before the middle of the year .
What is the role of nuclear energy ?
We cannot proceed as was stated in the internal German discussion .
It is a fact that generating one kilowatt-hour from nuclear energy produces 15 grams of CO2 whereas generating one kilowatt-hour from brown coal produces 970 grams .
We must therefore be open-minded when debating this .
I certainly believe that at the end of the day the success of the German Presidency will be judged on whether it is possible , in international negotiations with the United States , Russia , India and China , to convert this European benchmark into an international standard .
If so , the German Presidency will leave a lasting legacy .
Mr President , a few months ago , I met some young people in my constituency and they asked me what the EU is doing about climate change .
I have to say that I gave a list of the bits of legislation and how we were tackling it , but it sounded a bit thin to me and I could see on their faces that they thought it was a bit thin as well .
Asked again today , I would be much more confident about what I was saying to them .
Europe now has a story to tell on climate change .
We have a policy fit for purpose , up to the challenge .
I want to add my congratulations to the Council for its success last week and to the Commission - Commissioners Verheugen and Dimas - for putting together a comprehensive package .
Now we have got to live up to that package and that is not going to be easy .
The targets we agreed are tough .
There are a lot of issues to be resolved .
Burden-sharing has just been mentioned .
I understand that there is some issue about the legal base of the renewables targets .
I want to say that this Parliament would want to be fully involved in any talks about those targets .
As regards biofuels , we want them , but not at the expense of the developing world .
Tackling climate change must be part of the fight against poverty , not exacerbate that fight .
R [ amp ] D investment needs to be tackled as well .
So , we have to be coherent , we have to cooperate and we also have to stay committed to this challenge .
I think that last week the EU found a renewed sense of common purpose .
It showed it could act decisively on a key issue that our citizens care about .
I think in that sense that it began to make the elusive connection with citizens that people are always talking about .
We are celebrating our fiftieth birthday this year .
I hope that , when we come to celebrate our hundredth birthday , future generations will look back at last week 's summit and see it as a turning point , when the EU began to work together , tackle the big issues of our times and regain the confidence of its citizens .
Mrs McAvan , you of course may well live to see our hundredth birthday .
( DA ) Mr President , the result of last week 's summit was an historic breakthrough .
We are now on the way to a greener Europe .
Only a few weeks ago , however , it seemed quite unrealistic to believe in binding targets for the increased use of sustainable energy sources for a fifth of the EU countries ' total energy consumption by 2020 .
Real progress has been made .
Now , the political framework is in place and is to be given practical content . However , this is when the problems will arise and when we need to fight for what we believe in .
Everyone is required to play a constructive role - both industry and ourselves as legislators .
We also need , however , to go further and make increased environmental demands of , for example , cars and aircraft .
The Commission needs to take the lead in this area and to be sure of its own stance .
Is that not the case , Mr Verheugen ?
We also need to be very ambitious in order to ensure full liberalisation of the European energy market .
We need to have a genuine internal market for energy , and this is where the German Presidency must really come into its own .
There is good cause for being very pleased that Europe is showing leadership in the world , and we are heading up the work aimed at obtaining a replacement for the Kyoto Agreement .
If we stand shoulder to shoulder in Europe , we shall also have the opportunity to achieve a worldwide agreement on climate policy embracing hesitant countries such as the United States and the rapidly developing countries in Asia such as China and India .
With the summit breakthrough , the EU is coming seriously into its own following a number of sluggish years . These began with the French and Dutch rejections of the Constitutional Treaty , which led to the EU being characterised by a lack of resolve .
That is something that is now , fortunately , in the past .
The EU is now demonstrating that we are capable of taking political action .
We can again find common denominators that bind us together , even in areas in which strong national interests are at stake , and this is in no small measure due to a proficient German Presidency .
The EU has got its optimism back , and that is crucial if we are to get the Constitutional Treaty back on track .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to congratulate the presidency on the successful result of the Council 's work , for having set a clearly ambitious work programme and having achieved almost all of it .
First of all I will talk about what was not achieved .
It is a great shame that the Commission 's proposal for vertically integrated businesses to be split up was blocked .
The large energy companies , which dictate terms to national governments , have to date shown little interest in cross-border connections .
Seemingly , the creation of a genuine European energy market has once again been put off .
Now I would like to talk about the decisions that were taken .
Ambitious targets for increasing the share of renewable sources of energy and for reducing emissions volumes are a brave and welcome step .
What is most important now is for the government representatives to understand what they have undertaken .
This will prevent the same thing happening as occurred with the Lisbon tasks .
The decision was not taken on the basis of calculations about the availability of renewable sources of energy or their location in Member States or the accessibility of technology , and was taken regardless of their cost .
This will require highly responsible action by the Member States , close cooperation and mutual solidarity .
This is one of those decisions which the European public has confidence in and which it supports .
This undertaking , as for the Lisbon plans , must be fulfilled , and politicians must not go astray when they lay down tasks designed to achieve this target .
Thank you .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Steinmeier , this euphoria is to some extent justified , but at the same time here and now is exactly the right time and place to consider whether there is anything underpinning these noble aims .
This weekend in Berlin under the aegis of the European Green Party , we will be proposing a ten-point list of measures to make Europe more climate friendly .
We will do this with greater enthusiasm than Mr Verheugen , who this morning has once again shown that he regards climate protection as a burden for the EU economy and not as a driving force of innovation .
Security of supply is important , particularly as far as natural gas is concerned .
However , building new pipelines is not the best measure that we in Europe can take . It would be best to adopt the successful model of the German Bank for Reconstruction and transfer the funds to the European Investment Bank for modernising our housing stock !
More than 40 % of European energy is frittered away in badly insulated buildings , and more than 70 % of Russian natural gas is used in European buildings .
A measure to improve the efficiency of our housing stock is therefore much more important than anything that we can do on the supply side .
It is exactly the same with oil .
It is not pipelines that will help us to make progress but more modern cars .
I do not know whether Mr Juncker has any children .
Mr Schulz seems to be better informed .
What I do know is that he is getting a new official car and that as a convinced European he told the Luxembourg press on Monday that he would soon be buying a Japanese hybrid car if the European automotive industry did not build more environmentally friendly cars .
We therefore need efficiency standards for 2020 , because the cars in which we will travel in 2020 are already being designed now .
We also need a speed limit in Germany because the many hundreds of kilometres of ' free travel for free citizens ' are not only a German problem but a global one , because as a result cars are over-engineered the world over and are not efficient enough .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the commitment to cut carbon emissions unilaterally by 20 % is a step in the right direction , but we should have set our sights on the more ambitious target of a mandatory 30 % by 2020 .
Renewables today represent only 7 % of the EU 's energy mix and the voluntary 12 % target by 2010 clearly has not worked .
That is why it is important to aim at mandatory targets and definite rules for implementing them .
We must tell those who complain at the cost of developing non-polluting technologies that this investment will grant Europe leadership in the sector and will create new and better jobs under the Lisbon Strategy .
Fifty years after the Treaty of Rome , it is now time to launch a common energy policy , not least to reduce Europe 's dependence on other countries .
We have made a decision : now we have to be prepared to keep to it , even though we know it will be a difficult journey .
The cost of doing nothing would be much higher , however , for both Europe and the rest of the world , and it would be paid above all by the weakest sections of society .

( NL ) Mr President , the fact that the European Council organised a spring summit in the winter demonstrates that climate change is something that the Council acknowledges , and I am delighted that the Council is taking on board the Commission proposals concerning the fight against it .
It does mean , though , that the Council is prepared to reduce by 30 % only if the other developed countries pull their weight in achieving this goal , yet a 30 % reduction in greenhouse gases worldwide by 2020 is necessary in order to be able to ensure that the increase in temperature does not exceed 2 ° C.
This is why , a few weeks ago , it was for this 30 % that Parliament opted , and that is a first step .
I am acutely aware of the fact that a 30 % reduction is not straightforward .
In the Netherlands , the Environmental and Nature Plan Bureau has indicated that this is impossible unless major changes take place in technology and in the way members of the public and companies behave .
Despite this , the Dutch Government has taken on this ambition , and rightly so .
In order to achieve these ambitious goals , the many available opportunities will need to be seized all at once , for we cannot be fixated on one single solution .
The Council conclusions are not clear about which sources of energy are to be used to guarantee certainty of supply .
There is therefore the risk that people will still only consider the energy needs in terms of gas , oil and coal .
Holding onto fossil energy sources will stand in the way of the development of renewable ones .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate all concerned on a successful summit .
It is quite rare for the leader of the British Conservative delegation to offer full praise after a European Council , but this time it is justified and I am delighted to do it .
In reaching agreement on cutting EU greenhouse gases in this way , the Council has shown leadership on probably the most important issue facing our planet , that of the threat of climate change .
I sincerely hope that the leadership displayed on this issue by Member States will result in broader international action .
The leader of my party , who has done much to put this issue at the centre of the political debate in the United Kingdom , also welcomes this agreement and is delighted to see the new-found enthusiasm of Mr Blair and Mr Brown .
Europe , in taking a lead on this matter , not only sends a strong signal to the global community but also sends a message to our own people that the EU can make a difference .
The news from Brussels so often concerns arcane institutional issues that do not relate to the lives of people .
This agreement on climate change is a good one and I hope Members of Parliament will take note of it when we next have a debate on institutional machinery .
I should like to ask , in this regard , what proposals there are to improve the EU emissions scheme , as well as for confirmation that this will not require major institutional reform .
When might we see a breakdown of country-by-country allocations on the targets for renewable energy as a share of energy consumption ?
With regard to the conclusions , I also welcome the progress made on better regulation .
I simply add that I would like to see more action on deregulation in particular .
The President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , is to be congratulated on taking a lead on this vital matter for European competitiveness .
Finally , I express my support for the emphasis in the conclusions on the transatlantic economic and political relationship and , in particular , Chancellor Merkel 's personal commitment to a new transatlantic economic relationship .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , first of all I would like to say ' well done ' for what was not an easy task .
This was commendable work by Mr Steinmeier , a man with a reputation for persistence and determination .
I welcome this achievement which , I think , is a very strong landmark for the European Union , making Europe a front-runner in tackling climate change worldwide .
My hope is now of course that this is not only a text adopted by the European Council , but something that will be implemented in the Member States .
I therefore take it for granted that , as the UK Conservative Member said , it will be implemented in the UK too , together with UK businesses and the Conservatives under Tony Blair 's leadership - thanks a lot for that one !
( Laughter )
My second point is that climate and energy policy is not a cost , but a new competitive parameter and a new opportunity to create more and better jobs , as called for in the Lisbon Agenda .
I want to underline that new , smart , green growth could and should be a new dynamo in the Lisbon process , as Commissioner Verheugen said himself , and as you also underlined , President-in-Office .
I agree with the points made by Commissioner Verheugen , but there was one little word missing , and that is ' coordination ' : coordination of economic investments in these areas , to enable us to take on the enormous investment task we face .
One thousand million euros is the estimate of the total investment needed in the coming years and this needs coordination in order to provide the extra synergy the European Union can generate .
So , you have our best wishes for this endeavour .
We in the Party of European Socialists are here to help you .
Mr President , the decisions of the Council were ambitious and the unanimity quite remarkable .
The devil is going to be in the detail and I suspect there will not be anything like so much agreement when the burden-sharing proposals are announced , and some of the specific targets are open to challenge , not least by environmentalists .
The biofuels target , for example , has got to be a mistake when there is so much evidence that it makes better use to use biocrops in generating electricity than in powering cars .
Let us not pretend that our demand for biofuels is not going to have an effect on tropical rainforests .
We cannot even prevent the import into this country of illegally cropped wood , let alone stop the expansion of palm oil plantations .
It is going to have an effect and I hope that all the energy proposals in this package will be put through the codecision procedure to ensure that parliamentarians have a chance to influence them in some way .
Carping aside , the overall direction is good and the objectives are noble .
The European Union has taken on the mantle here of an evangelist seeking to alert the rest of the world to the dangers of climate change and to bring about a post-2012 international agreement involving at the very least China , India and the United States .
At the latest we have to try to forge this post-2012 agreement by the Conference of Parties in 2009 , and quite a transformation in attitudes in these other countries is going to be needed if we are to achieve that .
We are going to have to try and influence every opinion-former , the media , every parliamentarian , business leaders as well as government ministers if that is to be secured .
I do not believe these resources exist , certainly not in DG Environment , perhaps not in the entire Commission .
They do exist in Europe , however , if we pool our resources across all 27 Member States , our diplomats and our politicians and our businesses in a concerted campaign to change minds and secure success .
We should think of it like this and try and put it in these dramatic terms to concentrate the mind .
We have less than 1000 days in which to save the world and secure an international agreement of this kind .
That is our task and it is going to need all our resources .
We need to build on the Council 's decision and inject a sense of zeal , passion and urgency into our work , if it is to be achieved .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe is not only asking the right questions but also beginning to provide practical answers and to commit itself to energy savings and the adoption of alternative sources of energy , as well as considering how to address the climate change emergency .
Meanwhile , however , a huge , technologically advanced area in the middle of Europe that is of decisive importance for the social and economic future of one of the Member States - I am referring to the Po Valley - has for a long time been calling in vain for infrastructure measures to solve the pollution problem caused by the choked transport network , a situation that has now reached critical proportions .
During the morning and evening rush hours , satellite images show the Po Valley to be a vast queue of cars and lorries pouring out tonnes and tonnes of polluting exhaust fumes and consuming absurd amounts of fuel .
That has been happening and we have been calling for these measures for decades , but thieving Rome - not that its inhabitants are thieves , because they are exceptional , honest people , but the old State 's centralising halls of power are - expatiates as if in Byzantium on reforming the electoral system and allows this situation to deteriorate even further .
Then there is the second aspect of the climate crisis : water .
It is not just southern Italy that is in danger of dying of thirst , but the Po Valley as well .
I want to draw Europe 's attention to the water situation in the Po Valley because of the extremely serious consequences that that might have for Europe 's granary , as this macroregion is called , which is so important for the future of production in our country .
Mr President , the summit concluded that the renewed Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs is ' beginning to deliver results ' .
It is about time , because the fanfare surrounding the launch of that strategy has not exactly been matched by spectacular results to date .
Most businesses , in particular smaller enterprises , which make up the majority of employers , quite rightly complain that excessive red tape hampers their operation and development .
I therefore welcome the summit 's commitment to a 25 % reduction in EU-imposed red tape by 2012 , and I hope that will be met .
But it is a pity that the Member States did not commit themselves to similar reductions in red tape through domestic legislation .
Most attention has been given to the summit commitments on energy efficiency and renewable energy ; admirable targets for energy saving have been set .
However , I hope that any new legislation will be sensitive to local circumstances .
For example , in transport , due account must be taken of the fact that , where I come from and in most of rural Scotland , there exists no realistic alternative to road transport for goods .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the solution to the problem of global warming is inextricably linked not only to the use of renewable energy sources but also to the approach we will take to established sources .
I , for one , am pleased that the EU summit made a breakthrough regarding the Union 's position on nuclear energy .
The attitude to nuclear energy under the German Presidency has thus far been equivocal ; it is trying to avoid the issue for fear of getting its fingers burned , although it knows that sooner or later it will have to bow to economic necessity and take action .
The longer we wait , however , the more serious it becomes .
The shift can be seen in the fact that the delegates at the summit ultimately recognised that , in the interests of energy security and cutting emissions , the Member States can make use of nuclear energy .
I am convinced , however , that the energy mix should be not just well-balanced but also democratically open to all available energy sources , whilst making every effort , of course , to ensure the highest safety levels .
( EL ) Mr President , of course the European Council did not only address the subject of the climate .
That was in the right direction .
We Europeans will bear the agony and the cost .
In other words , with these measures that we are taking , unless we bring the United States , China and India into line , it is like making our own car and paying a great deal of money , while our next-door neighbour drives round with a broken exhaust .
What are we trying to do ?
Dig a hole in a pond ?
We therefore need a new Kyoto which will be signed by these three countries , which together account for half the population and 65 % of the energy .
It is an issue which we need to measure in this way .
On the other hand , we talk of developments in the economic , labour and social sector .
I do not understand .
Which social class are we talking about ?
About those who , after Lisbon , traded in their BMWs for a Mercedes ?
There are 100 million Europeans living below the poverty line .
What are we doing for them ?
What will we do ?
They are the unemployed citizens .
It is they who will block any referendum we may need at a later date on the Constitution .
So let us look at the poor and not just stick to wishful thinking and words that ultimately convince no one .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this was a positive European Council , because it went to the heart of the problems affecting our citizens .
In this era of globalisation , our peoples increasingly need a Europe that can satisfactorily address the questions to which the Member States are no longer able to provide answers .
Indeed , only the European Union can address major issues like climate change , the fight against terrorism and organised crime , immigration , energy security , including the revitalisation of nuclear energy , unemployment , and how to deal with the major new economic and trading powers of East Asia , not to mention peace in the Mediterranean region and the Middle East .
That is why we need a new Constitutional Treaty to set out competences and action capabilities .
Therefore , Mr President , I endorse the proposal to produce a text preserving the substance and embodying the values of the document that was signed in Rome and then rejected in France and the Netherlands , a text that refers to the Judaeo-Christian roots that nourish the Union 's actions centring on the rights of the individual and of the citizen .
Mr Steinmeier , I should like to put a concrete proposal to the German Presidency , and I appeal to it with conviction . In the coming months I propose that the Member States , together with Parliament and the Commission , launch a major campaign in the media to tell people what the European Union really is , to make them realise that the Union is not the expensive , oppressive Brussels bureaucracy but , as emerged during the summit on 8-9 March , an institution representing the certainty of a better future for half a billion people .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in Office of the Council , Commissioner , in its debates and conclusions on the Lisbon Strategy , the Council has reoriented its approach to social issues , too .
I welcome this , and , in line with what you both said , I believe that the Heads of State or Government are becoming aware of the fact that we will not be able to win back the citizens ' trust if we do not demonstrate that Europe is endeavouring to protect the European social model .
The conclusions therefore mention the need not only to create more jobs and to sustain growth , but also to safeguard the quality of jobs , working conditions , worker participation and the reconciling of professional and family life .
Quite simply , this calls for two remarks to be made .
The first is that , if we do not want this new social approach to go unheeded , it must be accompanied by an action plan , by the re-launch of the European social agenda , and perhaps even by a Council that is dedicated - as the last one was to energy- and renewable energy-related objectives - to the implementation of these social objectives .
Quantified objectives should be set , for example in the areas targeted by the Lisbon Strategy : youth employment , over 50s ' employment and access to lifelong learning .
The Member States should be made to provide themselves with the resources to get results , for example by exchanging best practices and by making sure to penalise those who do not follow things through .
Furthermore , we should release a number of texts that are being held up by the very Council that is responsible for strengthening the Union 's social dimension : the Working Time Directive , the revision of the European Works Councils Directive and the Temporary Work Directive .
My second remark is that there must be consistency between this new focus on the Union 's social dimension and all of the policies conducted in other areas .
Is the protection of the social model entirely consistent with our desire to completely liberalise the postal sector , together with the electricity and gas sectors ?
Can these public service sectors be tackled solely from an internal market perspective ?
Does liberalisation provide us with guarantees regarding public services , the servicing of all territories and the controlling of tariffs ?
I believe that , on this issue , too , we need to propose a new balance .
That is why , as you know , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has requested that a draft framework directive on services of general interest be looked into .
- ( PL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , allow me to point out that the recent meeting under German Presidency is not just an example of effective action , but an example of how to combine axiology , or adherence to values , with a pragmatic policy .
Europe means freedom , solidarity and innovation , aims which our energy policy should also pursue .
Solidarity regarding energy will and can serve freedom .
How may innovation be combined with solidarity in energy policy ?
I would like to point out that the countries that recently re-joined Europe after a long period of separation are poor countries which do not have the capacity for the 3 x 20 programme .
As a result , the implementation of that programme may soon increase internal divisions .
I call upon Commissioner Verheugen not to forget that Community policy should serve Community goals .
( PL ) Mr President , the summit represents another step forwards in the building of Europe .
To avoid becoming over-confident , however , let us take a more critical look at the status quo in selected areas .
The 3 % GDP for science in the Lisbon Strategy , although an improvement , will not be enough to put us on a par with the USA .
There is still a long way to go before Europe 's intellectual potential is put to its full use .
Regarding energy policy , the target of meeting 20 % of our needs using renewable sources , and resorting to mining including coal mining , should not blind us to our current energy problems .
The annex speaks of a common European policy coordinating the Member States .
The latter should not , however , act to the detriment of European cohesion as we have recently observed them doing .
The current situation regarding gas supplies from Russia - the gas crises in Belarus and Ukraine -is a further test of our energy policy and security as a whole , and we should regard it as an object lesson , and not just a glitch that will go away .
Russia 's challenge is not an easy one , but Europe can avoid being the fall-guy provided that it speaks with one voice , which is rarely the case .
Hopefully this summit will change things .
The Commission 's recent actions on protecting the environment in the Rospuda River Valley , when no such vote took place concerning building a gas pipeline under the Baltic Sea , shows how selective , how non-cohesive and inconsistent these actions are .
There are floods of tears when a rose dries out or when our forests burn , while strategic events are passed over in silence and we focus instead on niceties .
Finally I would like to mention Europe 's greatest weakness , namely the continuing lack of solidarity at government and national level .
This is a matter not so much of formal provisions , as of recognising our common fate rooted in tradition , particularly Christian tradition , and based on common aims , which need to be constantly defined .
At the moment , the energy issue is a test of European solidarity , and this solidarity will energise Europe 's future development .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after this latest European Council we can fairly say that this is the Europe that we like : the Europe of choices , the Europe of farsightedness , the Europe that takes care of its interests and projects its role onto the world .
This was a much-needed , albeit unexpected final spurt , but a really welcome one .
It is not the first time that we have been on the point of rolling back down but have made it up the slope again by giving it our best effort : we did so with the customs union , the single market and the euro .
Today we are doing it with energy and the fight against climate change .
We must not stop now : that would be an unforgivable own-goal .
The Commission must do its part by translating the Council 's decisions into legislative proposals on which Parliament can work in depth .
The Council should assess national plans on a majority basis .
Above all , we must not stop on the road to a political Europe .
As the President of the Italian Republic , Giorgio Napolitano , said in this Chamber during the last part-session , the Constitution is not a caprice , a whim or mere ornament .
Without new rules , a legal personality , a political and social soul and the Charter of Rights , Europe is in danger of declining again .
That is why we anxiously await the declaration of 25 March .
Mrs Merkel said yesterday that the declaration will not talk about God , and that is all right , because God holds anyone who is sincerely Catholic and Christian in His heart .
However , the declaration must not fail to talk about the Constitution .
After last week 's successes , it would be disappointing if we came up with a vague declaration that did not talk about Europe 's successes or mention the great advances of the last 50 years or , most of all , did not sketch out this great goal of the European Constitution .
( FI ) Mr President , I will use the time allotted to me discussing the Berlin Declaration .
First of all the 50-year partnership between the European states is a reason to celebrate .
The partnership has brought results , although of course there are areas of dissatisfaction .
Germany has drawn up a special declaration in honour of the occasion .
Unfortunately , it was drafted behind closed doors .
When the chairmen of our groups spoke this morning , they had to admit that they had not seen the text .
This says a lot about the current state of the EU , openness and EU interinstitutional cooperation .
The Declaration must have just one aim : it must clearly and briefly state why we will need European cooperation this millennium .
In other words , it must clearly define what our common European goals are .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to say how surprised I am at the intensity and high level of many of the discussions on achieving real CO2-emission reductions .
In my Member State I am given the impression that the climate catastrophe could be brought under control if we drove a little more slowly , replaced our light bulbs and planted three trees every time we went on holiday to Africa .
Giving people this impression is to deceive them .
We certainly need to consider very carefully when most CO2 is emitted .
It is when electricity is generated .
That is why it is important for us also to reflect on how reductions can be achieved where the greatest amount of CO2 is emitted .
It is interesting to see that the Chairman of the German SPD is now also travelling round the country as a scientific expert calculating how much CO2 is emitted by nuclear generation .
He should leave this to a physicist like the German Chancellor .
Then we would be on the right track .
The first matter that we will have to consider is therefore how we can also set targets for energy production in car transport .
How many grams of CO2 should be allowed to be emitted per kilowatt-hour ?
Then we will be on the right track and only then can consideration be given to further measures .
I stress that we will have to reflect on the role that nuclear energy should play in the next years and decades .
Here it is important for us as Europeans to debate nuclear energy objectively and free of ideology , bearing in mind the responsibility that we have to bear here , and in so doing also to help to enable this debate to be conducted objectively in the Member States .
Mr President , energy security and coping with climate change are the two most dramatic challenges of our time .
By addressing these topics in a bold and comprehensive way , the European Council recognised that global challenges require global answers ; that cross-border threats require cross-border action .
These are issues which concern ordinary people and by addressing them the Council sends out the message that the European Union is responsive to European citizens ' expectations , thus motivating their loyalty towards the European institutions .
However , this is only the tip of the iceberg .
A common energy market requires the Communitarisation of energy policy , which should include , or be associated with , a joint effort for technological development , as well as coordinated investment , employment and growth policies .
The political will expressed this spring will be neither sustainable nor effective without a European legal basis .
A common policy also requires a special budget , and one has to secure the means to finance that budget , possibly by taxing certain energy transactions and by creating European Union financial own-resources .
The shaping of the European Union 's enlargement , neighbourhood and development strategies should follow the measure and the manner in which our foreign partners - neighbours or not - cooperate in the promotion of European energy and environmental strategies .
On the other hand , the bilateral agreements between the European Union Member States and third states in the field of energy should be conceived in such a way as to work in favour of the enhancement of our common energy strategy .
This spring , the European Council has proven that there is a light at the end of the tunnel .
The Berlin Summit has yet to prove that there is a tunnel leading to that light .
Mr President , I am delighted the Council agreed that the administrative burden arising from EU legislation should be reduced by 25 % by 2012 , as another speaker mentioned .
I also welcome the fact that the Council has called for a group of independent experts to advise on better regulation .
This is vital .
However , I would like to go even further and have independent impact assessments as a matter of course for all legislation .
In the employment field , legislation should be brought forward at EU level only if it cannot be done successfully at local or national level .
An average small business owner already spends roughly 28 hours per month filling in forms as a result of legislation .
Health and safety legislation should be brought forward only if medical and scientific evidence demonstrates the need for it , as is the case for an amendment to Directive 2000 / 54 / EC on biological agents , to protect health workers from needlestick injuries .

( DE ) Presidents , ladies and gentlemen , the first step has been taken in the right direction towards a common energy and climate protection policy and no hot air has been produced : we welcome this .
The context for political decisions has improved , but we are still a long way from our objective .
Most of the hurdles are still to come .
The first is fully integrating the agreed targets into the growth , employment and competition policy programmes and if necessary amending them .
Climate and energy policy must strengthen the Lisbon Strategy ; they should not detract from it .
Secondly , it will take time for the specific European programmes , projects and measures to be tabled and for the necessary action plans , which should be open to scrutiny , to be drafted .
Everyone needs to know who is doing what by when and how so that we can achieve our joint targets .
This is crucial because , although targets set at summits raise hopes , it is only tangible results that build confidence .
I would therefore call for a report to be produced annually by the Member States to the national parliaments and by the Commission to the European Parliament about the results of implementation .
Thirdly , when will we receive the necessary research programme , the necessary support initiatives and the energy savings road map from the Commission and the national governments ?
We still have to prove ourselves both internally and internationally .
We have not yet done so .
As St Catherine of Siena once said , it is not the starting out that is rewarded but solely the persevering .
( FI ) Mr President , we should be pleased that the European Union has taken an important step to protect life on earth and has confirmed its global leadership in the fight against climate change .
Now that we agree on the objective and the commitment , we need to look closely at how to implement the aims .
It was vital to commit to the use of renewable energy sources in order to satisfy our future energy needs .
Many renewables , however , are still in the development phase , and at the same time a good deal of energy-efficient practices are only waiting to be introduced .
The Member States now have a job to do .
Now we need to invest heavily in energy efficiency .
Biofuels and bioenergy also need developing , though at the same time we have to ensure that the environmental friendliness of the entire life cycle of such energy sources is also taken into consideration at global level , as has been said here .
For this we need a system of certification to serve as a guide to the right production methods .
All in all , we , as Europeans , have the opportunity to emerge as a leader in energy technology .
As Commissioner Verheugen said , we need answers from industry to the question of what is possible .
For much is possible .

( FR ) Mr President , the Commissioner for the Environment , Mr Dimas , spoke at the end of this Summit about revolutionary decisions .
I should like to share his enthusiasm but , amid this chorus of praise , I must voice my scepticism .
True , the policy on climate change has finally been integrated into EU economic policy .
That is a good thing .
I remember , however , the Lisbon Summit of March 2000 , at which the European Union set itself the target of becoming the world 's most competitive knowledge-based economy by 2010 .
Five years on , we have seen the mediocre results of that .
I should not like to see this Summit turn into yet another farce and a big disappointment .
I welcome the development of renewable energy sources , but they are just one part of the solution to the problem of global warming .
True , we must think in terms of energy efficiency and of the insulation of buildings .
Wind energy must be developed , but its impact is very limited ; we cannot rely on it : there is no electricity when the wind is too weak , or when it is too strong .
Solar energy should be promoted , but we do not have a sufficient number of tradesmen who are trained in these new technologies .
I regret the overcautiousness of the Council , which reluctantly acknowledges that nuclear power is one effective solution regarding the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .
Mrs Merkel wants the European Union to pioneer the fight against global warming .
Everyone agrees , but this is plainly hypocritical when we know that some Member States , which are today opposing nuclear energy , buy energy from this source when the survival of their economies depends on it .
Hypocritical , too , is the fact that Mrs Merkel wants to combat CO2 emissions while at the same time enhancing her policy of having electricity generated by coal-burning thermal power stations , when we know the disastrous effects that this has on the environment .
Hypocritical , yet again , is the fact that Germany , which no longer wants nuclear power on its territory , sells its nuclear power station technology to China .
Hypocritical , lastly , Commissioner , is the fact that you expect industry to make an effort when the German Presidency protects big-engined cars that consume too much energy and emit too much CO2 .
So , yes , I agree with the conclusions of this Summit , but the words must be turned into deeds , because it will be thirty years before today 's actions have an effect .
The European Union must regain its influence and impose green diplomacy .
- ( PL ) Mr President , it has been a long time since there has been such agreement about a European Union summit .
It has been praised by national leaders and also in this House .
But an innate caution begs the question : what has happened politically ?
How has it been possible , after so many long months , to eventually achieve a success we can all rejoice in ?
The answer is that there was a great longing for success , and a great need to demonstrate unity .
It must be stated clearly , however , that the summit held on 8 March actually precedes a very important debate on the Constitution .
In the shadow of the summit 's success lurks an unfinished debate .
The outstanding dilemma from the previous summit as to what the European Union should be , remained unresolved despite the success achieved .
We should therefore ask ourselves whether the agreement reached in the field energy has given energy and courage to all those who want to take the difficult decisions about the future of Europe , or whether in fact the opposite has happened .
Or could it be the case , as some of Europe 's leaders say , that if we managed to achieve agreement using the old mechanisms , that they do not need to be replaced ?
I warn all those who are preparing the Berlin Declaration and who are preparing constitutional solutions , not to allow a situation to arise in which whilst everyone says the same thing and praises success , in reality each country , or the majority of countries , thinks differently .
If it turns out that this summit was the European Union 's last success because it is followed by nothing but problems , then sadly all the grand words been spoken in this House will be proved meaningless .
Mr President , there has been a lot of praise for the Council , particularly on the energy package , but I want to note another significant landmark , which for me personally is a very important one .
Since I came to this House in 1999 , I have been making speeches regularly following the Brussels summit , asking for the internal market and its completion to be given top priority .
Thank you , President-in-Office , for making it the first action on the first page of your communiqué .
More importantly , I am really pleased that the Council has affirmed the importance of completing the internal market in the context of Europe3s response to globalisation .
Why do I say this is of such great importance ?
President-in-Office , I was privileged to be rapporteur when we held the meeting of national parliamentarians , which you attended , on the whole of the Lisbon Agenda .
Those parliamentarians were telling us that this is the message we need to get across to our electors .
Our governments and our prime ministers , however , are not giving us a great deal of help in communicating this message about the fundamental importance of the internal market .
They said the same thing about the four freedoms in the internal market , and that has been mentioned here as well .
President-in-Office , I would like you to go back to the Ministers and say , ' help your parliamentarians to communicate this important message to their electors ' .
Let me link that also to two important proposals that are mentioned here .
One is a proposal I know a lot about - the Services Directive .
The second one is the really important proposal from Mr Verheugen about dealing with issues relating to product markets .
President-in-Office , I just want to say to you that the prime ministers should go back from this Council and ask for the files of all the cases pending before the Court of Justice where individual countries are infringing the Treaties in respect of the free movement of goods and services .
All they need to do is to deal with all of those cases .
This could be done between now and the next summit and it would make the biggest single improvement to the internal market , without us having to do any more legislative work .
Let us have action , not words in this case .
Thank you very much , Mr Harbour .
It is nice to see your engagement and emotion .
( ET ) Last week an epoch-making Council session took place .
The European energy system has fallen behind the times .
More than 20 % of generators are over 30 years old and must be replaced .
This is a historical opportunity for Europe to rid itself of the obsolete attitudes that have shaped our energy policy up to now .
Instead of replacing that physically obsolete fifth with outmoded but new generators , we had the courage , under Germany 's presidency , to fulfil the obligation to replace it with renewable energy .
Even more than that , however , I like the idea of replacing energy-wasting with energy-saving consumption .
Energy and security go hand in hand .
Each kilowatt for which we do not need to purchase energy from undemocratic regimes is a contribution to global security .
Unfortunately , however , the continued political support for the planned gas pipeline under the Baltic Sea shows that the lessons of history have not been heeded .
We must not encourage Russia to continue its Stalinist policy of zones of influence .
It may sound like a harsh assessment , but the Baltic Sea gas pipeline is like a slap in the face for Estonia , like a 21st century Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact .
Europe urgently needs a common energy policy and constitutional treaty .
The institution of the Foreign Minister of the European Union will ensure that ' backroom deals ' will forever become a thing of the past in this union .
For that reason , I believe that Germany , which now holds the presidency of the EU and has successfully conducted this Council , will bring this critical treaty to life .
And the citizens of the European Union will see that it is good , that it is in the spirit of the third millennium .
( CS ) Mr President , it is a good thing for Europe that the Council has adopted the energy action plan for 2007-2009 .
In so doing , it has taken the first step towards establishing a common European energy policy - albeit in a watered-down form .
Although the summit recognised that Europe has a long way to go if it is to achieve a competitive and unified internal market for energy , it failed to support the complete unbundling of energy company ownership , which is a vital factor in achieving this .
Completely unrestricted integration in the sector will lead to the emergence of huge energy conglomerates , which will wield enormous economic and political influence in all countries .
This will enable them effectively to influence political affairs at both national and - as we have recently become aware - international level .
The energy sector is also less competitive and therefore less efficient than it ought to be .
The risk to security is a similarly dangerous consequence of this situation .
If Russian state-controlled ownership were to make inroads into these large and powerful firms it would be an economic and above all a political disaster , especially for the new Member States from Central and Eastern Europe
The unbundling of energy company ownership and the adoption of transparent Europe-wide market rules for all , along with a common approach among European countries to external energy policy , would improve the functioning of the energy market , improve the transparency of internal policy in the individual EU Member States and significantly reduce foreign policy and security risks not only for the individual Member States but also for the Union as a whole .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , thank you very much for your predominantly positive assessment of the Spring Summit of the Heads of State or Government .
Mr Lambsdorff , I wish to say to you that for me and for the German Government neither the Summit nor the positive comments are cause for complacency .
However , I remain convinced that , nonetheless , a degree of confidence is necessary for the remainder , the second half , of our Presidency , or at least it will do no harm .
Or to put it another way : at a time when Europe is after all not in the best of health , or let us say is stagnating - now that the renewal process has come to a standstill - anyone who does this job without ambition , without desire , without faith in the ability of Europe to reform and change should not in my view even bother starting such a job at all .
I can assure you that even before our Council Presidency had begun and certainly once it had started I was repeatedly asked many times , particularly by journalists : how do you actually intend to achieve this programme ?
With a view to the first Summit they also asked : how can you actually succeed in brokering an agreement when the positions of the Member States are so far apart ?
I do not believe that it is such a great secret .
You are all familiar with this from your work .
You need a great deal of patience , particularly with those partners who have doubts , who are hesitant about certain outcomes .
You need the necessary ambition and above all you need to be fair , particularly towards those who will find it much more difficult than others to reach the targets agreed .
This worked at the last Summit .
Now of course the same questions are being asked about 25 March .
How is it actually supposed to work when there are such varied interpretations of the history of the European Union , when expectations about the content of the Berlin Declaration differ so greatly ?
I tell you , it will happen in just the same way .
In the past we have listened patiently and I think we know more or less what people 's expectations are .
I am only saying this because earlier someone said that the outcome would then of course necessarily be very general .
If we succeed in having a Berlin Declaration then this success does not necessarily have to be a reason for banality .
The result that emerges can also be a good Berlin Declaration .
If we succeed in taking this step it still will not be the solution , but it will not be the end of our Presidency either , and neither will it be the end of our ambition .
But it is an important second step towards the solution that will hopefully be achieved at the June Summit , when we will try to untangle the knot that is at present still stopping the European renewal process from moving forward .
I can assure you that when we prepare for the June Summit we will do whatever we can to achieve this .
I should like to make a few final comments on energy and climate .
Many Members have rightly pointed out that this Summit does not of course mean that our work is complete .
All I can do is confirm this and say : yes , further work is needed in many areas .
I have mentioned energy research ; I have mentioned strengthening our energy relationships with third countries , and of course this also applies , Mr Verheugen , to the ambitious target for renewable energies .
The 20 % is now our European target and we have always said , even to the outside world , that it is now a question of converting this European target into national targets .
Apart from the fact that I am convinced , Mr Verheugen , that we will achieve this together , all I want to say to you here is that the Commission and the Presidency obviously discussed whether we should have gone down the opposite route , first agreeing national targets and then deriving a European target from these .
However , both of us - the Commission and the Presidency - were sure that we would probably have discussed this for another five years and still would not have identified a common target .
That is why we agreed on this approach .
It was pointed out that we Europeans ultimately cannot rescue the world 's climate on our own .
We need to keep an eye on how energy and climate policy develops in important countries such as the United States , China and India .
Someone voiced the suspicion that this was precisely what we would not be concerned about .
I simply want to say that the opposite is true , and I am saying this for Europe , I am saying it for our national German policy , and I am saying it in particular for our G8 Presidency .
On Monday I will be in Washington and by arrangement with my American colleague I will be opening a major , joint event there involving German and American companies , with whom we will be discussing how we can strengthen the transatlantic technology partnership , particularly in the field of the energy economy .
In the context of the efforts being made in the United States , I would point out that below the federal level exemplary work is already being done on climate and energy policy in many US states .
On China I wish to say only that we have it firmly in our sights .
In the context of the G8 , both at summit level and at foreign ministers ' level , ' outreach ' meetings are going to be held , to which not only China and India are invited but also Mexico , South Africa and Brazil , and at both meetings - both at the foreign ministers ' level and at summit level - the issues of energy and climate will play a central role .
As you see , we are also concerned about those who do not belong to the European Union .
We need to show - as we did at the last Summit , and there I agree with Mr Verheugen - that the European Union is not a historical seminar but a workshop for the future .
We have provided an example of this .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
After the successful Brussels Summit we now need a successful result in the form of the Berlin Declaration .
The European Parliament will do all it can to ensure that we are successful together .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to express just one single thought , indeed more of a request .
There is a tension between economic competitiveness , high social standards and protecting our environment and in this area we should stop regarding the past in such a confrontational and polarising manner , playing the economy off against ecology and ecology off against the economy .
It is simply not true that people are against protecting the climate and the environment if they say that we also have a responsibility for jobs .
It is simply not true that if people say we need to do more to protect our environment they are also saying that they are not interested in jobs .
The truth is that we have surely learnt by now that we can link the two together .
The truth is that a European industry that is a world leader in this field - not only in environmental technology , but also as far as environmentally friendly products and services are concerned - will be most likely to create jobs for people and give them a future .
That is what this is all about - and that is the belief on which this Commission 's policy is based : solidarity with the generation that is alive today , which wants to live today and have jobs today , and solidarity with the generations that will follow , which want to find a planet on which they can live , is not contradictory .
This is precisely what we want to demonstrate with this policy !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a few minutes .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PT ) This European Council reaffirmed the positions of the so-called Lisbon Strategy , with liberalisations and privatisations , labour flexibility and the planned attack on workers ' rights , in connection with which I should like to highlight the announced communication on flexicurity .
The conclusions of the Council clearly state : ' To enable the next three year cycle of the renewed Lisbon Strategy to be prepared , the European Council invites the Commission to present an interim report in Autumn 2007 with a view to its proposal for the Integrated Guidelines for Growth and Jobs ( 2008-2011 ) .
Furthermore , the European Council invites Member States to present on time their national reports on the implementation of the National Reform Programmes . '
In other words , the pressure to continue with privatisations and attacks on labour rights is maintained .
There is no information on the so-called European Constitution , although we know that the pressure is still on for there to be an Intergovernmental Conference during the Portuguese Presidency . The Council has thus reiterated its tacit support for the plan for the constitutional consolidation of this neoliberalism , which is accompanied by the centralisation of power , federalism and militarism .
in writing . - ( HU ) In the past few months , more and more people in Hungary too have been worrying about global climate change .
Many still do not grasp the essence of the phenomenon ; others are denying that it could be the result of human activity .
More and more people are realising , however , that the current practices of our civilisation , our transport and our consumption are unhealthy .
Progress is not sustainable because there are not enough natural resources to satisfy our current demands , while gas emissions and waste lead to the pollution of the environment beyond recovery .
The German presidency has rightly recognised the need for action in order to slow down the rate of climate change .
Increasing the proportion of sustainable energy sources within the overall European energy mix is commendable .
It would be a grave error , however , to forget that global climate change is not the only source of environmental threats .
Atmospheric pollution , the presence of carcinogenic substances in our daily life , overuse of insecticides and pesticides , the extinction of certain animal and plant species , the accumulation of waste , are all threats to our future and to sustainable development .
If we want a more humane future for ourselves and for our offspring , we must take action for an environmentally friendly , healthy and sustainable future .
We , the members of the Socialist delegation , are happy to acknowledge that at their March session the Heads of State or Government gave recognition to the first achievements of the renewed Lisbon Strategy .
Its main results were economic growth in conjunction with reduced unemployment .
We are especially pleased that nine Member States , among them Hungary , provided great momentum for this positive trend by signing the declaration advocating further development of a social Europe and promoting its role .
Reforms are crucial for making the most of the positive aspects of globalisation , for innovation , for economic restructuring as well as for the further advancement of EU policies .
Our common goal is the welfare of Europe 's citizens and deepening their trust .
The path towards this goal runs through increased employment , improved workmanship and protection of social rights .
These unique European traditions do not mean , however , the conservation of existing legal structures but the preservation of European principles .
As to the subject of employment , it is important for flexibility to be accompanied by security .
The relevant regulations have to be modified so that we may be able to provide prospective employees not only with suitable wages , but with useful knowledge .
At the same time we have to abolish barriers that needlessly hamper businesses in their efforts to meet the demands of globalisation .
In the course of putting into practice the notion of flexicurity , we have to make sure this will truly bring practical benefits and guarantees to employees .
We socialists have to be especially watchful of this at every stage during the reform of labour rights .
in writing . - I welcome the statement made by the Commission setting ambitious targets for reduction in carbon emissions by 20 % by 2020 and for the increasing use of renewable energy forms .
Climate change is a global issue and we will need to work together to reduce global warming , not only within Europe , but with North America and Asia .
I believe that these targets are achievable , but they need to be regularly monitored .
I believe that the best way to do that is through strict monitoring and annual reporting .
Member States must also be responsible for providing detailed action plans of how they will meet these targets .
in writing . - ( EL ) The decisions taken by the European Council in March are yet further irrefutable proof of the role of the ΕU as a mechanism for promoting the choices of capital .
Instead of taking measures to protect the environment , measures are being taken to protect companies and strengthen the monopolies .
The plundering exploitation of natural resources by capital is the basic cause of the significant climate changes and of the real danger of the ecological destruction of the planet .
However , instead of taking bold measures to at least limit the unaccountability of the monopolies , decisions are being taken to strengthen competition on the electricity and natural gas markets , liberalise the energy market and hand the entire strategic sector of the production , transmission and distribution of energy over to the private sector .
Centre-right and centre-left governments have unanimously committed to speeding up the implementation of the anti-grassroots Lisbon Strategy , setting as their primary objectives the commercialisation of education and health and the attack on insurance funds and the pension , wage and social rights of the workers .
At the same time , the promotion of harsher anti-labour measures , the ' adaptability ' of the labour market and ' flexurity ' are being speeded up in the aim of holding down labour costs , in order to increase the profitability of Euro-unifying capital .
The Greek Communist Party is fighting against these choices , highlighting fair demands and fighting with the workers for the satisfaction of the modern needs of the grassroots classes .
in writing . - ( DE ) It is certainly right to describe the outcome of the EU Summit as an important step in the right direction .
For our future and particularly for that of our children it is of the greatest importance that we vehemently counteract an average temperature increase of more than two degrees Celsius .
For this reason I consider the decision to set targets of generating 20 % of our energy from renewable sources and achieving a 20 % -reduction in CO2 emissions in the EU by 2020 as imperative .
I therefore particularly welcome the fact that our Heads of State or Government have now also finally managed to reach such a decision .
I am aware , and I think that my colleagues will agree with me , that these steps are just a beginning and that further efforts will need to follow to guarantee lasting and sustainable climate protection .
Obviously in so doing care needs to be taken to ensure that the overall approach adopted is a balanced one .
I am , however , convinced that new and strict environmental standards will not put Europe at an economic disadvantage , but that on the contrary Europe will be a world leader in new technologies .
In this way we will both help our environment and secure high-quality jobs in Europe for the long term .
Furthermore , I would call for renewed efforts to be made to convince the major polluters , such as for example the United States and China , of the importance of protecting the climate , because it is only together that sustainable success is attainable .
1 .
Statistics on migration and international protection ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ever since 1999 , this House has been debating legislative proposals relating to migration without any figures on which to base its decisions , while the scope of immigration policy has become considerably wider .
What we need , then , is more and better information if we are to be able to effectively plan , implement , evaluate and monitor political measures .
Led by Commissioner Frattini , the Commission has responded to pressure from this House and has submitted a draft regulation on the statistical monitoring of migratory movements , something that is made necessary by the Member States ' failure to supply all the relevant statistical material , or indeed any at all , on the previously voluntary basis .
Data are also collected in different ways , with the consequence that they have , hitherto , not been comparable .
This regulation obliges our Member States to provide any and all figures that may be required ; it also brings about harmonisation and makes it possible to compare the figures .
It was relatively difficult to get the Council to come round to this , whilst all the parties in this House agreed in principle on the need for the regulation .
The general agreement prevailing among the groups meant that this House was able to get its position accepted through the comitology procedure , and the outstanding cooperation of all the shadow rapporteurs , to whom I would like to take this opportunity of expressing my thanks , played a considerable part in enabling us to bring this dossier to a satisfactory conclusion , so thank you all , once more , for that .

Mr President , I beg the indulgence of the House .
I wish to draw the attention of the House to the appalling situation in Zimbabwe .
We look with horror and enormous frustration at the images of how a peaceful assembly is brutally dealt with in Mugabe 's country .
I understand the opposition leader , Morgan Tsvangirai , has been released from detention , but he has a fractured skull .
Grace Kwinjeh , the opposition representative in Brussels , has had part of her ear cut off while in custody .
I know that the President-in-Office of the Council has expressed condemnation of what has happened , but can we take more concrete action ?
In particular , I call upon the Presidency to use its influence to persuade the South African Government and the other SADC governments to take a more principled position and act to bring about urgent change for the better in Zimbabwe .
Wringing our hands is not enough .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Van Orden , we take good note of your comments .
2 .
Number and numerical strength of the interparliamentary delegations ( vote )
3 .
European Aviation Safety Agency ( vote )
- Before the vote :

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I just wanted to say something about the translation of Amendment 10 , which has to do with Article 1 , point 5 of Article 6b , paragraph 4 , and where it appears that an error crept into the final report for voting in plenary through the transmission of the committee 's vote .

In the original document , the amendment reads - and I shall quote it in English :
' those involved in commercial operations shall hold an attestation as referred to in '
( DE ) but the text adopted by the committee reads :
' those involved in commercial operations shall hold an attestation as initially described in '
( DE ) and so on , and I ask that this be taken into account .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
- Before the vote on Annex II :
( CS ) Mr President , on transcription , one line appears to have been mistakenly omitted from paragraph E of Annex II , namely part 7 , and I quote , ' 600 kg for ultralight aircraft for non-commercial use ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
4 .
Marketing of the meat of bovine animals aged 12 months or less ( vote )
5 .
Ratification of the ILO 's 2006 Consolidated Maritime Labour Convention ( vote )
6 .
Social services of general interest ( vote )
7 .
EC-US Air Transport Agreement ( vote )
8 .
Nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament ( vote )
- Before the vote :
( IT ) Mr President , my group made a mistake in not asking in time for two votes to be taken by roll call .
If there are no objections , I should like to ask you kindly to authorise us to do so now , even though we have missed the deadline .
In the original text , it would affect paragraph 1 , second part of the split vote that is on the voting list , and paragraph 9 , again in the original text , where voting on separate parts is provided for : we request a vote by roll call in this case as well , if you agree and will kindly forgive us for the mistake we have made .

( Parliament agreed to the request )
- Before the vote on paragraph 2 :
Mr President , we can improve paragraph 2 by adding only a few words .
It concerns our ' call on all States not part of the NPT to accede to that Treaty ' .
That is regular and routine .
However , we could call on them first to ' comply voluntarily with ' , and then to accede to , the Treaty , thus introducing fresh encouragement .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Given the way in which Community policy and legislation on migration and asylum has developed , it is necessary to obtain statistical information of a far higher quality than that currently available .
I therefore support this initiative , which follows on from the Thessaloniki European Council of 2003 , which recognised the need to set up more effective mechanisms for collecting and analysing information on migration and asylum in the EU .
I welcome Mrs Klamt 's report , which is aimed at setting up a common framework for collecting and compiling Community statistics in this field . This should enable the Member States to make better use of the available data for drawing up statistics that , as far as possible , comply with harmonised definitions .
It should accordingly enhance the exchange of statistics and lead to common analysis , which will in turn help us to draw up fair and effective Community policies on migration and the free movement of persons .
in writing . ( SV ) The report is to be seen as a further step towards the total harmonisation of Community legislation .
To set up an authority designed to monitor migratory flows and transfer data about them to and from the EU is quite unnecessary , in our opinion , and places a further burden on the EU budget .
The rapporteur has shown no respect for existing national legislation in defining legal concepts such as ' citizenship ' and ' illegal immigrants ' .
The fact is that there is now already careful and reliable expert analysis of , and data concerning , migration , not only within the EU but also throughout the world represented by the UN .
Citizenship , refugee status and immigrants are other concepts well defined in the UN Charter on Human Rights .
The June List does not want to help develop a surveillance society in which people 's freedom of movement can be affected by decisions taken at supranational level , and we are therefore voting against the report as a whole .
in writing . - ( FR ) The implementation of a European asylum and immigration policy means having global and comparable European statistics on a series of migration-related issues .
This proposal establishing common rules on the gathering and generating of statistics in this field should provide us with comparable figures , giving us an image of the migratory flows in Europe .
I was particularly keen to see the figures linked to the so-called accelerated procedures included in this proposal .
Indeed , Europe must make sure that accelerated procedures are not systematically implemented across the board and that the need for international protection , the right of asylum and the principle of non-refoulement are safeguarded .
Finally , we wanted separate statistics for transferred persons , in accordance with the Dublin II regulation on the determination of the Member State responsible for an asylum application .
Indeed , it would seem that this regulation is placing a disproportionate amount of responsibility on the Member States located at the Union 's external borders .
In the absence of the Commission assessment , initially planned for the end of 2006 , statistical data will enable us to confirm this development .
in writing .
( SV ) A directive is not the best way of regulating the complicated process of collecting statistics . This is better taken care of through agreements between responsible authorities with the competence required .
I am therefore abstaining in the vote on this report .
in writing - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Community statistics on migration and international protection .
Mrs Klamt has made an excellent report that raises important questions regarding effective mechanisms for collecting and analysing migration and asylum data in the European Union .
The enlargement of the Union has made harmonised and comparable statistics all the more necessary .
Accurate information is essential to ensure the development and monitoring of Community legislation and immigration and asylum policy .

( DE ) Mr President , although I voted in favour of the report , I would like to take this opportunity to draw attention to the situation as regards the agencies , of which the European Union now possesses 33 , with a 34th having just been announced by the Commission , and the costs of which are now running at over a billion euros per annum .

They employ 2 700 staff , and between 60 and 70 % of their costs relate solely to administration .
Something seems to be going wrong here , and it is to that that I wish to draw attention .
I demand that the work actually done by all the agencies , their efficiency and their usefulness , be reviewed , and that consideration then be given to closing down those that yield no added value for the services of the European Union .
Only then can consideration be given to the opening of another agency , should it appear that there is a need for one .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Leichtfried report on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency .
I believe that the proposal to extend the role of the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) with the aim of establishing common rules on civil aviation to be applied by all airlines operating in Europe , whether or not they are based in the European Union , is a step forward .
Europeans are very concerned today to see rules guaranteeing their maximum security being complied with .
In this respect , EASA has been granted powers to impose fines and periodic financial penalties when security rules are not applied properly .
Furthermore , I supported the proposals designed to extend the European Aviation Safety Agency 's sphere of competence over pilots ' licences , enabling it to check that pilots fulfil criteria in relation to training and vocational and linguistic skills .
I also endorsed a similar amendment calling for cabin crew to hold an identical qualification .
in writing . ( SV ) Common rules governing air transport are necessary and desirable , especially from a safety point of view .
There are thus good reasons for debating how current cooperation on aviation issues should continue and be developed .
As usual , the European Parliament is trying , however , to import other proposals aimed at increasing the EU 's power in areas that should be reserved for the individual Member States .
We believe , however , that the current report proposes too far-reaching a mandate for the European Aviation Safety Agency .
We are confident that competent national authorities are capable of ensuring that pilots have satisfactory professional skills and adequate language knowledge .
Nor do we share the view that the EU countries should have a common representative within the UN body for global aviation issues ( the International Civil Aviation Organisation ) .
We have thus voted against this report .
The competences of the Member States in the area of civil aviation have gradually been transferred to the ' Community ' , and the proposed amendment to Regulation ( EC ) 1592 / 2002 is a further step in that direction .
That process of transferring and diverting competences is all the more detrimental when it is done within a framework whose limits have not been clearly defined .
In this case , the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) would also become responsible for certifying aircraft and pilots , a competence that currently falls to each of the national authorities .
The national authorities currently comply with , and ensure compliance with , the requirements in force on civil aviation arising from international agreements .
Cooperation between Member States and third countries is already happening . It could even be encouraged and developed further , whilst ensuring respect for the sovereignty of each country , for workers and their rights - guaranteeing social harmonisation by delivering more favourable working conditions - and for the rights of the user .
At its core , this initiative means another ' step forward ' towards the effective implementation of what is referred to as the ' single European sky ' - something to which we are opposed .
With the negotiating process on amending this regulation now under way , we shall continue to monitor this issue in order to ensure that national sovereignty is always safeguarded .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is true that we still all too often witness air disasters that are due not only to the poor state of some aircraft but also to the violation of security requirements .
The virtue of this proposal by Parliament and by the Council is that it increases the Member States ' obligations regarding inspections not only of third-country aircraft , but of EU aircraft , too .
What is more , if an inspection of airlines or of the activities of civil aviation authorities reveals any anomalies or a violation of standard security rules , the European Aviation Safety Agency will have the power to set a penalty mechanism in motion and to ban the airlines at fault from transporting passengers within the Union .
I believe that this is a significant step forward in terms of averting the risk of aircraft accidents .
Finally , the work and remit of this Agency will make it possible to complete - usefully , I hope - the European blacklist of bad airlines .
Although not all of the issues in the field of aviation security have been settled , it would seem that prevention and repression have at last been usefully brought together in this text .
We shall vote in favour .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Leichtfried report aims at expanding the powers of the European Aviation Safety Agency by giving it control not only over aviation but also over the actions of carriers .
The Agency will be responsible for renewing and issuing certificates and licences and for monitoring the implementation of uniform safety standards .
It will also be able to impose fines if safety is not properly implemented .
The report also pays particular attention to the recruitment experience that the EASA has gained since 2002 ; in this respect , it has found it difficult to recruit the skilled , experienced staff it needs for a number of reasons , including language skills .
The rapporteur therefore quite reasonably calls for the problem to be tackled by means of novel solutions , such as taking advantage of the possibilities offered by the EU Staff Regulations .
Today , however , I was very surprised to learn that there are only four Italians in the EASA , while there are 45 French people and 37 Germans .
I call on the EASA and the Commission to address and solve this problem of representation as well , since there is an unjustifiable imbalance against Italy .
in writing . Today I voted in favour of amendment 12 of the above report to exempt 8 to 12 month old meat marketed as beef from the rules set out in this piece of legislation .
Such an exemption should be granted to benefit UK meat producers in terms of cost reduction and alleviation from burdensome procedures by removing the need for separate batching at each stage of the production process .
I see no justification for this added requirement and therefore hope to see an exemption granted .
I have voted against the report by Mrs Bourzai on the marketing of the meat of bovine animals aged twelve months or less .
The eventual consumer must not only be enabled to find out from the label the age at which an animal was slaughtered and the customary details such as the product , weight , price and best-before date , but must also be informed as to the number of kilometres the animals travelled while still alive and on their way to be slaughtered .
When shopping , European consumers need to be enabled to see , simply and quickly , how long the meat they are interested in was transported prior to slaughter , in order then to be able to take their own decision as to whether or not to buy it .
The adoption of this report is an important step towards ensuring respect for the rights of workers in the maritime sector .
The 2006 Maritime Labour Convention of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) is aimed at guaranteeing decent living and working conditions on board vessels . The Convention incorporates all existing conventions and recommendations on maritime labour adopted by the ILO since 1919 into a single text to serve as a basis for the first universal Maritime Labour Code .
It is vital that the Member States ratify the Convention in order that every effort might be made to ensure that it is complied with effectively .
Given the strategic importance of the sector , which carries 90 % of world trade and 40 % of intra-Community trade , and the number of workers involved , this measure is long overdue .
We therefore voted in favour of the report and hope that the Convention will be ratified and complied with by the Member States .
in writing . I voted for this report , which simplifies all the existing ILO conventions and recommendations since 1919 into a single text .
I am pleased that a possible deadline of 2010 has been set for the ratification by Member States , as the European Community is not a party to the ILO or this convention and it is important that each Member State ratifies the ILO recommendations .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Maritime Labour Convention of the International Labour Organisation sets the labour rights of seafarers at the lowest possible level .
It is far below the standard of their actual rights and the demands of the seafaring community .
We have reservations about some of its provisions , such as those which recognise the right to exist and trade of the slave shops which allegedly find work for seafarers .
The report by the European Parliament and the Commission proposal allowing the Convention to be ratified by the Member States reflect the contradictions and stiff competition between the various factions of shipowning capital .
The Convention is hotly opposed by Greek shipowners , who are reacting to the safeguarding even of what are inadequate conditions of work and pay , so that they can keep the neo-colonial legislative framework shaped by the New Democracy and PASOK governments for shipping ' intact ' and can continue unimpeded with their miserable exploitation of Greek and foreign seafarers and to increase their profits .
The Greek Communist Party calls on seafarers to strengthen the class fighting forces of the seafaring community , to step up their fight and to counterattack to safeguard and acquire their rights and satisfy their contemporary needs in the face of the anti-grassroots policy of the EU , the New Democracy and PASOK parties which speak for capital and the forces of the European one-way street .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree that there is a need to draw up a first Universal Maritime Labour Code .
With the adoption of the ILO 's 2006 Convention , there will be minimum standards on the health , training , working conditions and social security of workers in the maritime sector , which will ensure decent working and living conditions on board international vessels .
It is now up to the Member States to ratify this Convention .
I therefore call on the Portuguese authorities to ratify this ILO Convention , in order to ensure more homogenous minimum employment conditions .
I welcome the innovative mechanisms introduced by the Convention , such as the maritime labour certificate issued by the State to vessels flying its flag , after verification that the on-board working conditions conform to national laws and the regulations arising from the Convention .
I hope this Convention will help stabilise the maritime transport sector , which is faced with the pressure of international competition from operators with the least stringent social legislation and with the threat of relocation of recruitment of seafarers to the detriment of European jobs , including in intra-Community transport .
( SK ) The ageing of our population , in other words the growing proportion of elderly people , and the resolution of issues of social deprivation are key challenges which the European Union will have to face in the coming years .
I welcome the pro-active report by Hasse Ferreira , which strives to define clear rules for social services across the EU , all the more so since they were excluded by their specific nature from the purview of the recently approved Services Directive .
I fully support the application of the subsidiarity principle .
Taking into account the 27 different models and concepts applied in social service provision and financing , we have to leave to the Member States the right of defining the tasks of social services in line with standard practice in each Member State , and of matching them as closely as possible to each citizen .
Our citizens are waiting for a clear message from us confirming that the Union will provide each and every European , and particularly those who are vulnerable and weak , with the opportunity to live their lives in adequate comfort and financial security .
I believe that Parliament will also contribute through this report to the establishment of a sustainable European social model .

( DE ) Mr President , my reason for voting against the Hasse Ferreira report is that we are about to go through a social crash landing , for , while less and less money is being used to top up social security funds , the number of those who are dependent on the state despite being in work is on the increase .
When we degrade mothers by making them permanent recipients of welfare , when it is not possible to live from honest labour , and when having children is a sure-fire way to end up poor , we need not be surprised at dwindling enthusiasm for the EU or at the looming spectre of a dearth of children .
I believe that it is very long overdue that we should find out and make public the actual costs arising within the EU as a consequence of economic migration , those economic migrants who have come here ostensibly as asylum-seekers , and those who are here illegally , especially as regards the burdens they impose on our social security systems .
Multiculturalist dreamers must once and for all throw overboard the illusory hope that foreign immigrants would compensate for our failure to produce children and would look after our old people , or else there will be an explosion in social costs , triggering a flood in which the indigenous European population will slowly , but surely , go under .
in writing . ( SV ) We supported the report .
Social services have a character of their own and differ from commercial services .
How such services are to be funded and provided is up to the Member States themselves to decide , but it is important for them to be of high quality and accessible to everyone .
In order to protect social services from internal market regulations , it is desirable to have a sector-specific directive in which social and commercial services are defined clearly and in such a way as to distinguish them from one another .
We are puzzled , however , by the concept of ' female employment ' , which is a term we do not know .
We presume that , in the rapporteur 's view , there are many women working within the social services sector and it is important to promote their participation in the labour market , at the same time as combating insecure employment conditions .
Where ' part-time work ' is concerned , we believe that there should be a right to full-time work and that the opportunity of part-time work should also exist .
We also wish to make it clear that ' unpaid voluntary work ' does not exist within the public sector but that it can exist in a supplementary social economy .
Unpaid work at home does not , however , come within the category of social services .
We interpret the concept of ' public-private partnership ' as referring to the existence within the social services sector of a variety of services that are publicly funded and that are provided by a number of different actors such as public limited companies , non-profit-making organisations , cooperatives and private companies .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) About time too !
It was about time that we had a report that takes into consideration the specific features of social services of general interest .
SSGIs , which are to be distinguished from the other services of general economic interest , warranted this clarification of the definition of their tasks and organisational principles .
On the other hand , SSGIs are a key component of the European social model that we are very keen not just to protect , but above all to promote .
It is therefore a good thing that the European Parliament has taken up this major issue .
The compromise that we have managed to reach in this House is satisfactory , so I have therefore voted in favour of the Hasse Ferreira report .
This decision would appear consistent with the way in which the European Parliament has voted since the Gerbhardt / Harbour compromise on the Services Directive and , more recently , since the Rapkay / Hokmark compromise on the Rapkay report .
I should like to make it clear once again in this House that this decision does not commit us in any way to a framework directive on services of general economic interest .
However , this report is not enough .
I am referring here to the necessary sectoral directive on health services .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report on social services of general interest .
I welcome the continuity and consistency of Parliament 's vote , in the sense that it demands legal certainty and clarification of the Community framework to be applied to social services of general interest .
I believe that this report enables a balance to be struck between the application of Community law in the strictest sense of the word and the accomplishment of tasks in the field of social services of general interest .
This is in fact a preliminary step needed in order to establish a sectoral directive on social services of general interest , which Parliament clearly requested in the Rapkay report on the White Paper on services of general interest .
Furthermore , I welcome the proposal to convene a forum on social services of general interest initiated by Parliament and call for it to be implemented in practice under the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union .
I voted in favour of this report because it deals with an issue that is important to European citizens and because I share the rapporteur 's opinion . Social Services of General Interest ( SSGIs ) constitute one of the essential pillars on which the European social model is based and an appropriate means of strengthening the social dimension of the Lisbon Strategy and of addressing challenges such as globalisation , industrial change , technological progress , demographic change , migration and changing social and employment patterns .
The can of worms opened up by the directive on creating the internal market for services ( the notorious Bolkestein Directive ) , paving the way for attacks on public services , is developed further in this report on social services of general interest ( SSGIs ) .
Evidence of this comes straight away in the division of services of general interest into services of general economic interest and social services of general interest .
The report then fails to defend clearly the right of all Member States to define , organise and fund public services as they see fit .
It also allows private companies to provide SSGIs , thereby paving the way for the privatisation of essential public services . This will have the effect of undermining the principles of equality , universality and social cohesion and , most importantly , the possibility of upholding fundamental human rights in practice .
Lastly , I wish to point out that all of the proposals we put forward were rejected , for example our call for Member States , firstly , to reverse the so-called ' reforms ' that have institutionalised their social protection models that are market based , subject to competition and obliged to compete , and , secondly , to stop promoting public-private partnerships or outsourcing social services to the private sector , because these strategies are misleading .
Paragraph 6 of this report on social services of general interest points out ' the Member State authorities ' freedom to define , organise and finance social services of general interest as they see fit ' , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
This one sentence , notwithstanding the so-called ' joint responsibility ' of the Union , renders the rest of the text meaningless : public services fall within and must continue to fall within the Member States ' prerogative , and theirs alone .
It is up to each Member State to decide whether these services depend on the market , or on national solidarity as the guarantor of the common good , or indeed on a fair balance between these two elements .
In other words , it is not the responsibility of either the Commission or the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg to define , and even less to rule over , public services .
We know only too well what happens if they do act in that way : the privatisation of profits , in the name of ultra-liberalism and of competition , and this , to the great advantage of international capital ; and the ' nationalisation ' of losses , without any concern for the general interest or for that of the citizens , especially the poorest among them .
It can never be said enough how responsible these policies are for the social disintegration that our countries are now experiencing .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr Hasse Ferreira is right when he states that social services of general interest are a key component of the European social model , based as it is on the protection of the most vulnerable members of society : children , the elderly , the sick , disabled people , the unemployed and so on .
Three developments are today undermining this social model .
Firstly , the uncontrolled immigration that is in the process of ruining our social security systems .
Thus , in France , the granting of free State medical aid to illegal immigrants costs EUR 600 million per year .
Secondly , the destruction of borders which , by leaving our businesses to the mercy of international competition and social dumping , especially in China , is destroying the economic substructure of this social model .
Thirdly , the gradual abolition of public services , as decided in 2000 during the Lisbon European Summit .
The report by our fellow Member , Mr Hasse Ferreira , does not propose any solutions because these developments are the result of the ultra-liberal ideology implemented by the Europe of Brussels .
Only another Europe , the Europe of nations , based on respect for national sovereignties , Community preference and borders protecting it from uncontrolled immigration and unfair international competition , will enable our nations to re-build a European social model .
in writing . I voted for this report , which calls on the Commission to consider the proposal for a sector-specific directive in the field of social services of general interest , given that they can 't be associated with the rules governing commercial services in the EU .
Social services need to remain of high quality and accessible for all and the rules governing provision need to be set in legislation .
in writing . Despite our reservations about certain aspects of the report , on balance we decided to vote in favour .
While we are not convinced of the need for a legal framework , nor are we happy about the way in which certain social services have been designated as services of general economic interest , we are pleased that the report strongly supports the values of equality and solidarity , and the principles of accessibility and universal service .
Our vote in favour of this report should in no way be seen as an endorsement of public-private partnerships .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report , apart from its gratuitous pronouncements about the ' particular character ' of services of general interest , paves the way for their privatisation and integration into the directive on the liberalisation of services ( Bolkestein directive ) .
Within the framework of capitalist restructurings , crucial social protection service sectors are being handed over to the ' free market ' and to ' free competition ' , in other words to the unaccountability of big business , so that now they hardly even operate with the current limited social criteria , instead generating profits for the plutocracy .
Both the communication by the European Commission and the report by the European Parliament on social services are predicated on strengthening anti-grassroots changes .
They drastically limit the concept of services of general interest .
They are promoting the allocation of duties from the public to the private sector ( so that the public authorities are turning into the ' waiters ' of ' free competition ' ) and the development of public private partnerships which constitute the ' battering ram ' for the penetration of monopoly business groups into the social services of general interest sector .
The workers must combat this nightmarish future by strengthening the class working and grassroots movement and stepping up their fight , so that they help to change the political interplay of forces in our country and in Europe in order to overturn this reactionary and highly anti-grassroots policy .
The EU stands to gain nothing from a rigid model for defining economic activities and for determining their public or private nature .
The modern economy - and Europe 's in particular - needs flexibility .
That being said , the best model for European integration is one that leaves room for each Member State to choose the paths that their citizens would like to follow and for the Member States themselves to be given room to make mistakes .
The possibility of making mistakes is part and parcel of freedom of choice .
I therefore accept that there needs to be a clear definition , in legal terms , of what is meant by services of general economic interest ( SGEIs ) and social services of general interest ( SSGIs ) .
Their correct identification is important so that when the EU adopts standards it does not impose or prohibit anything that does not fall within its scope .
Accordingly , I am in favour of much of what the report before us contains . I also agree with the rapporteur that SSGIs should be given adequate funding .
This is unquestionable even if we differ over the means of funding and even if each Member State has a different understanding of its duty towards its citizens .
in writing . - ( FR ) Social services of general interest are a key component of the European social model .
The European Commission communication on these services includes the prospect of clarification of the place occupied by SSGIs within the European Union with regard to social aspects , concepts applicable to these services and the legal certainty that should be granted to them .
The models of organising and managing SSGIs do in fact vary greatly across the various Member States .
One of the aspects on which the Commission must focus is that of the creation of a legal instrument and , more specifically , of a sectoral directive , in order to ensure that the procedures are politically clear and to guarantee legal certainty for the social organisations concerned .
Holding a forum led by Parliament under the Portuguese Presidency , in cooperation with all of the social partners , will enable this objective to be achieved .
SSGIs have a major part to play in turning the social dimension of the Lisbon Strategy into something concrete , by the volume of jobs that they create and by the social cohesion that they help to provide in various ways throughout the European Union .
For all these reasons , I have voted in favour of the report by Mr Hasse Ferreira .
President , my UK Labour colleagues and I did not support some items in this resolution and we voted against it in the final vote because we believe that the draft agreement is far too imbalanced in favour of the United States of America .
If this draft is accepted by the Council in its present form , the US airlines will have virtually complete access to the EU internal market , whilst European airlines will still not be able to fly internally in the US .
In addition , US interests will be able to own up to 49 % voting stock in EU airlines , whilst the reciprocal agreement allows just 25 % voting stock for EU interests in US airlines . So the draft agreement , to my mind , is little better than the one from November 2005 , which both Council and Commission said was imbalanced .
As the Americans achieved their prime negotiating goals in this draft agreement , there will , I suggest , be little incentive for them to liberalise further in the future .
I am afraid that it is the UK that pays the price for this deal .
It grants hard traffic rights to the US airlines with full access to Heathrow , which is already 40 % of the transatlantic market , and despite the fact that four airlines - not just American - fly across the Atlantic from Heathrow already .
So I think that , for the UK and for the whole of the European Union , this is a very poor deal .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List accepts that the EU represents the Member States on issues relating to trade policy .
The current aviation agreement with the United States , aimed at enabling airlines in the EU to fly wherever they like in the United States , falls within this area .
We are unhappy about the European Parliament having views about the ownership structure of US airlines .
This is an issue for the competent US authorities .
We do , however , share the general positions put forward in the resolution .
Moreover , the aviation agreement is good for the internal market , which is an area that we safeguard and that we want to develop .
We have thus voted in favour of this resolution in the final vote .
One of the objectives of concluding this pre-agreement on air transport between the European Community and the United States is to minimise the current inequalities , at different levels , between companies in EU countries and in the United States .
We view the conclusion of this pre-agreement with concern .
The assumption that the competence to conclude agreements of this kind rests with the Community , and not with the Member States , undermines the sovereignty of each Member State on a matter of huge strategic importance , particularly given that the guiding principal of this agreement is to ' serve as a model for further liberalisation and regulatory convergence worldwide ' , which we find unacceptable .
The advantages of concluding multilateral agreements are well documented . They are advantageous provided that they help improve the conditions under which the service is provided - in particular for passengers - available routes and the price charged and that they simplify the procedures and minimise the environmental impact ; provided too that they safeguard and promote the rights of workers in the sector and ensure respect for the law and sovereignty of each country .
The European Court of Justice 's rulings ordering the revision of aviation agreements between the European Union and third countries posed completely new challenges for us , particularly in the case of countries like Russia and the USA , notably the latter .
We should also remember that the ECJ rulings are binding on one party , namely the European Union .
The EU is therefore required to negotiate a new agreement .
We are obliged to do so , which puts the EU negotiators in a more difficult situation from the outset .
It is therefore all the more fortunate that two weeks ago , after another difficult round of negotiations , the European Commission managed to achieve a partial - albeit not fully satisfactory - understanding .
This should be regarded as an important first step forward .
But in moving forwards , it is important not to set ourselves unrealistic goals .
In my view , the provisions aimed at harmonising social policy in the aviation sector on both sides of the Atlantic , which de facto would constitute an attempt to impose the European social model on the United States , is an example of such an unrealistic approach .
Would this not be a sin of conceit ?
On the other hand , I am decidedly in support of pressure to exchange best practice in environmental protection .
After all , even if global warming proved a global myth , the environment itself is an invaluable good .
in writing . UK Conservatives are in favour of opening the aviation market to further competition and to agreeing an open skies policy with the United States .
However , the proposals being discussed from the recent negotiations perpetuate an imbalance favouring the United States .
Agreements of this kind should be totally reciprocal giving European airlines the same rights across the Atlantic as those given to US carriers in the European Union .
The Commission has made progress but we need more - and soon .
For this reason , the British Conservative Delegation has abstained .
in writing . I voted for this resolution in which safety and sustainability are emphasised as two important goals for the agreement between the EU and the USA .
I think it will be important to restore a proper balance of interests between the EU and the US following the decision of the Department of Transportation to withdraw its rulemaking on actual control of US carriers .

( DE ) Mr President , I have supported the resolution on the grounds that the preparatory work on the review conference is urgently necessary and that now is the right time to do it , but , since it is by their successes that the quality of the Nuclear Weapons Non-Proliferation Treaty and its additional protocols will be judged , we should seize the opportunity that has now emerged with the resumption of the six-party talks to work towards the nuclear disarmament of North Korea .
The European Union - and we in this House in particular - have made an essential contribution to getting these talks off the ground again and to getting what is termed the Peking Agreement with concrete measures put in place .
Now , though , we have to give practical support to the implementation of the measures that have been decided on in order to denuclearise North Korea , and my expectation is that the European Union will give its full backing to measures aimed at food security - in other words , agricultural development aid , to regional security - which means the improvement of diplomatic relations in the region , and measures towards making human rights a reality .
Our goal has to be that North Korea , without nuclear weapons , should have enough to live on and , in general terms , that there should be regime change in North Korea in the interests of peace and stability across the region as a whole .
in writing . ( SV ) Nuclear weapons constitute a global threat to the world 's population .
The development we now see , with more countries acquiring nuclear weapons technology , is very worrying .
Every sovereign state is naturally entitled to defend itself and its citizens . Purely on principle , however , we do not believe that nuclear weapons are justified .
History has shown the devastation to which these weapons can lead .
The resolution before us contains both good and bad wordings .
We believe , for example , that all references to the European security strategy should be deleted .
The fact is that this issue is an excellent example of why we should not have a Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) in the EU .
More than one Member State has a significant arsenal of nuclear weapons , while others put their territories at the disposal of non-European countries with nuclear weapons .
In a future EU with a common security policy , Member States without nuclear weapons could unintentionally be drawn into conflicts involving such weapons .
What is more , the world is bigger than the EU , and a global problem needs to be solved at a global level .
It is the UN that has the required knowledge and experience and that is the institution competent to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons in the world .
We believe that underlying the resolution is an intention to strengthen the CFSP and Parliament 's influence on these issues .
We are therefore voting against the resolution .
Non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament are among the most important issues of our time , in an international framework characterised by instability and insecurity arising from the increasing aggressiveness and interventionism of imperialism led by the USA , with assistance from the major capitalist powers .
It is the USA that promotes the arms race , a country that is developing its nuclear weapons and seeking to install new systems in Europe that are , by nature , aggressive , examples of which include the new anti-missile systems in Poland and the Czech Republic .
As the USA becomes ever more military in its focus , it threatens other sovereign countries with its interference and military aggression .
Against this backdrop , the rejection by the majority in Parliament of proposals tabled by our parliamentary group is most revealing . Those proposals were as follows :
insists ' on a peaceful political settlement to the dispute over Iran 's nuclear programmes ' and ' reaffirms its opposition to any military action or threat of use of force ' ;
' expresses its opposition to the deployment of new ballistic and anti-ballistic missile systems on the territory of the Member States of the European Union ' ;
and calls on ' States with nuclear weapons to pull their arsenals back from a state of high alert and to undertake not to attack non-nuclear countries with nuclear weapons ' .
in writing . I voted for this resolution as there are serious concerns about the risk of proliferation and it is important to revive and strengthen the Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) .
The EU has adopted a Common Position on non-proliferation that constitutes a positive platform for a stronger effort in this field , notably by pursuing an effective multilateralism .
in writing . Sinn Féin is unreservedly opposed to nuclear proliferation and welcomes the European Parliament 's stated opposition today .
Ireland is a nuclear-free country and must remain so .
The nuclear industry however still affects our environment and health as foreign nuclear power plants have affected our seas and countryside causing health problems for our population .
All countries , regardless of their size , influence or form of government should begin a process of decommissioning their nuclear arsenals as soon as possible .
We are opposed to any other countries joining the nuclear club or the extension of the nuclear abilities of those powers already armed with nuclear weapons .
in writing . - ( EL ) At a time when the European Parliament is voting on its established annual wish list on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and disarmament , it is refusing to condemn the installation of new ballistic and anti-ballistic systems in Europe .
In essence , this decision is tantamount to acceptance of and participation in the US national missile defence system , the objective of which is to establish a global nuclear rocket attack network .
The installation of new US bases is already being prepared in the Czech Republic and Poland and the European Parliament , in the motions for resolutions by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the overwhelming majority of socialists and liberals , is giving its consent .
We MEPs of the Greek Communist Party abstained from the vote , because we refuse to participate in the self-delusion as to the character of the ΕU , which was and still is aggressive in this sector too .
The political forces which support it are trying to present it as an ' anti-nuclear power ' .
There are Member States ( Britain and France ) which have nuclear weapons .
There are other American nuclear weapons also on ΕU soil .
Now it is preparing to participate in the US national missile defence system , which is fuelling a new arms race and new antagonisms .
Despite the pretty pronouncements , it again proves that the ΕU is with the US and against the peoples on strategic issues .
The aim of the US national missile defence system is to establish imperialist sovereignty through nuclear terrorism .
I wholeheartedly endorse the content of this joint resolution .
The Non-Proliferation Treaty is our best weapon against the spread of nuclear weapons - a serious threat to world security .
It must be said that it is not only important what nuclear weapons there are , but also who possesses them .
As we have seen , not all countries behave in the same way on this issue .
Consequently , along with my vote in favour and my agreement , I would emphasise the idea that we have other responsibilities beyond mere formal acts .
In terms of world politics , what interests us most is to ensure broad , lasting security .
On this question , I am no longer sure of exactly what we have done .
Let us hope that signs that are at the moment unclear but that engender fear , prove to be unfounded .
in writing . The possession of nuclear weapons has been a key element of the United Kingdom 's defence posture for the past 54 years .
Given today 's dangerous world and the unpredictability of threats in the future , it would be foolish to take any decisions that would weaken our ability to maintain an independent British nuclear deterrent or the credibility of our deterrent policy .
For the relatively small investment of less than 3 % of the UK defence budget over a 20-year period , the UK can maintain a vital defence capability .
The UK is recognised as a legitimate Nuclear Weapon State under the Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) and Conservatives support the aim of eventual global nuclear disarmament as set out in Article VI of the NPT .
However , we are firmly against any unilateral nuclear disarmament that would expose our nation and its people to risk and leave our strategic defence entirely in the hands of others .
Decisions that affect the security of the United Kingdom , its territory and citizens , are the responsibility of Her Majesty 's Government and not the European Union .
Most of today 's resolution is surprisingly uncontroversial and the extreme amendments placed by the Left were defeated .
However , we could not support any text welcoming the efforts of international fellow-travellers of the so-called Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament such as the ' Parliamentary Network on Nuclear Disarmament ' ( Recital E ) .
We therefore abstained in the vote on the resolution as a whole .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Euro-Mediterranean relations - Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on EuroMed , which will include the following :
Statements by the Council and the Commission on Euro-Mediterranean relations and
a report by Mr Arif , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the construction of the Euro-Mediterranean free-trade zone .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , any discussion of European-Mediterranean relations is first and foremost a discussion of a shared political challenge .
Today , the Mediterranean region and Europe form a strategic and economic area under construction .
At a time when we are rediscovering our shared cultural and political heritage , we are cementing our future economic collaboration , because we want once again to play a key role in creating an area of stability , peace and prosperity .
The vast Euro-Mediterranean area is the home to two interdependent entities : the 27-member European Union , and the Mediterranean region with its more than 250 million inhabitants .
We are interdependent politically as partners trying to bring peace to the Middle East and elsewhere in the Mediterranean , and working to promote pluralism and democracy .
We are interdependent economically : Euro-Med trade relations are healthy and growing .
Today , Mediterranean countries ' exports to the EU 27 have grown by 10 % per year on average between 2000 and 2006 .
Imports from the EU 27 have also increased , but at a slower pace of 4 % .
The EU trade surplus has been reduced substantially and in 2006 trade was basically balanced .
However , we are interdependent in other ways : environmentally , sharing more than 46 000 kilometres of Mediterranean coastline , and jointly confronting challenges linked to climate change , water and the depollution of the sea .
We are interdependent with respect to energy , too , thanks to the flows of oil and gas resources that originate in , and transit , the Mediterranean .
We are also interdependent demographically , given the need for dialogue with the countries of North Africa on how to handle legal and illegal migration .
Finally , we are interdependent culturally because of the urgently required in-depth dialogue between cultures and religions .
In response to this interdependence , the EU has set up the Neighbourhood Policy and the Barcelona Process : complementary and coherent frameworks for policy and cooperation .
Within these frameworks , we have association agreements and neighbourhood action plans which have been concluded with almost all countries in the region .
The most recent agreement with Egypt was adopted at the EU-Egypt Association Council on 6 March .
The Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area , as has been mentioned , is gradually taking shape and will act as an interface between an increasingly globalised world and Europe 's open , inclusive regionalism .
We are building on our liberalised trade in goods to liberalise trade in services and business establishment in a way that encourages much-needed regional economic integration .
Active Euro-Mediterranean institutions have been set up such as the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly .
The year 2007 will certainly be an important one in our relations with a region that is undergoing major change , which has great expectations of Europe and for which a close relationship with the Union is a major priority .
The year 2007 will be the first year of operation of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
Our work with our partners is animated by the conviction that , if changes are to last , they must come from within society .
In the context of the neighbourhood policy , the gradual implementation of political and economic reforms is opening the road to a rapprochement between Europe and the Mediterranean countries .
If we are to assist our neighbours in implementing challenging reform programmes , we must have something appealing to offer to them .
We have already offered to strengthen our trade relations .
We could also work to relax formalities related to the granting of visas .
The proposals contained in the Commission 's communication require significant political will , as well as economic and financial commitments on an equivalent scale .
The European Parliament 's contribution will be vital to ensure that Europe maintains a coherent policy towards the region and to generate political and financial support for the successful implementation of cooperation policies in the Mediterranean region .
In the context of the Barcelona Process , the German and Portuguese Presidencies , as has already been said , will be working closely with the Commission in order to take forward the course of action adopted at the Barcelona Summit in November 2005 .
Activities planned for 2007 include : a conference on social affairs in March in Berlin , the aim of which will be to add a social dimension to our partnership ; a conference on migration , organised by the Portuguese Presidency during the second half of the year - the first conference of its kind in the region which will provide a forum to discuss joint approaches to combating illegal immigration and managing legal immigration more effectively ; a conference on research and university education , at which the Commission will announce the creation of scholarships for university students in the region ; and finally , a Euro-Med trade ministerial meeting , which the Portuguese Presidency is organising in Lisbon , to take stock of our progress towards our goal of a Euro-Med free trade area .
The year 2007 will also be important because it will be the year that we define and implement far-reaching action plans to help create a brighter future for the region : the Horizon 2020 plan , whose aim is to depollute the Mediterranean Sea ; the Istanbul action plan on the role of women in society , adopted in November 2006 ; the practical implementation of the Tampere programme , adopted during the conference of Euro-Mediterranean Ministers of Foreign Affairs ; and the action plan for implementing the free-trade area that is the subject of Mr Arif 's report , to which I would like to turn now .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur and the Members who have contributed to making this motion for a resolution relevant and complete .
The resolution refers to the mixed results of the Barcelona Process as regards trade liberalisation and economic integration , while highlighting the complexity of the task and the socioeconomic constraints , both structural and linked to the current international context , which characterised this neighbouring region of the EU .
Indeed , the mixed results in terms of prosperity derived from the establishment of an FTA are not always attributable to the process itself or to its weaknesses , but are often due to a number of structural constraints inherent in this region , which have somehow prevented the process of economic integration realising its full potential .
However , despite these constraints , there has been an increase of trade following the liberalisation under the Barcelona Process : exports from Mediterranean partners to the EU have doubled since 1995 ; EU exports have increased by 60 % and the bilateral trade deficit of the Mediterranean countries has decreased from 20 % to 10 % in the same period .
The creation of a Euro-Med FTA remains an objective both of Barcelona and of our neighbourhood policy .
In both contexts , various initiatives have been developed to deepen and support liberalisation in the fields of both further tariff liberalisation and the elimination of non-tariff measures .
New negotiations in the areas of agriculture , services and investments have been launched since the Marrakesh trade ministerial last year , and our European Neighbourhood Policy Action Plans set up priority actions , particularly as regards the elimination of regulatory and non-tariff barriers .
From the beginning , the Barcelona Process has foreseen accompanying and mitigating measures to the Euro-Med FTA .
These include : asymmetry in tariff dismantling ; a gradual approach concerning liberalisation - for example , the agriculture sector is starting only now once a reasonable period followed industrial liberalisation ; and last but not least , the provision of significant aid in support of economic and structural reforms and of sustainable rural development , earlier through MEDA , currently through the new ENP instrument .
Our priority remains to enhance sustainable development and competitiveness in the Mediterranean region through the elimination of obstacles to trade and by promoting regional integration , investments , regulatory convergence towards the EU internal market rules , research and innovation and the reinforcement of infrastructure and networks in the region .
In a nutshell , this means working towards the shared prosperity which is the objective of the Barcelona Process and our neighbourhood policy .
We will make every effort to ensure that this vision becomes a reality .
Honourable Members , at the heart of our relations with our Mediterranean partner countries is our very deep and strong desire to promote security , growth and stability in the region .
However , there is also the abiding conviction that we are taking part in an even more ambitious project : constructing a region and affirming our common goals and values .
The European Commission is counting on the European Parliament to rise to these great challenges with the help of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly and I look forward to our continued working together .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased - even more so after what I have just heard - to present this report to you today .
It testifies to the fact that the Union 's Mediterranean policy is a priority for our institution and that it must remain so .
The report that I am submitting to you analyses the results of more than 12 years of cooperation laid down in the objectives of the Barcelona Conference .
It makes some proposals in favour of the implementation of a mutually beneficial Euro-Mediterranean free trade area .
This piece of work , completed over several months , was made possible by the close cooperation that I enjoyed with various experts , NGOs , government representatives of the countries of the Mediterranean and , of course , my fellow MEPs .
May I thank them for their cooperation .
This sound collective knowledge , sustained by the constructive work of the shadow rapporteurs - to whom I am sincerely grateful - has enabled me , I believe , to come up with a balanced text that reflects all of the worries and questions .
This spirit , this overall balance reinforced by the vote in committee , must guide tomorrow 's vote in plenary .
First and foremost , we must establish something . Although each part of the world has its own specific nature , relations between the Union and the countries of the southern Mediterranean are marked by the weight of history , a history of conflict , lack of understanding and instability , a troubled , even tragic , history .

That is why I have tried to draft this report above all from an eminently political perspective .
A hope was born with the Barcelona Summit in 1995 .
The political will demonstrated was to build a global partnership between the European Union and the countries of the Mediterranean basin , with the aim of making this region a common area of peace , stability and prosperity .
However , we must conclude , today , that the results are not equal to the hopes and expectations .
Since then , we have been living in an unstable political context : the war in Lebanon , the lack of peace prospects in the Middle East , complex relations since 11 September 2001 between the Western world and Arab-Muslim countries and strained relations between the partners of the South .
Added to that is the idea - which I consider mistaken - that Europe does not give priority to its relationship with the countries of the southern Mediterranean .
One might add to this list of concerns the fear of seeing the Barcelona philosophy and the new neighbourhood policy advocated by the European Union weakened .
That would spell the end of convergence and the introduction of divergence , fuelled by competition between countries .
The context is also one of asymmetry in the three areas of the economy , society and demographics .
This striking asymmetry between the two parties to the free trade area , namely the Union and the countries of the Mediterranean , is just as striking between the countries of the Southern Mediterranean and , ultimately , within some of those countries themselves , between coastal and urbanised regions and within rural territories .
Faced with all these difficulties , a strong political will is required , but we must also show that we are realistic .
It is for that reason and in view of the sometimes considerable delays in implementing the economic and political reforms needed to create a genuine Euro-Mediterranean market that I think it necessary to revise the 2010 deadline as the date on which this free trade area will enter into force .
The implications of such an area and the changes that it will bring about call for a more cautious approach on the part of all the partners , particularly when those partners are unequal .
When looking ahead to the creation of this free trade area , the main theme must remain the objective of having a form of trade that serves development and the reduction of poverty , particularly in this region in which 30 % of the population lives on USD 2 a day and in which mass unemployment and uncontrolled immigration are the only prospects for a growing number of young people .
Our priority must be to create a genuine Euro-Mediterranean socio-economic area , integrating all of the social and environmental issues into the economic dimension .
That is why I advocate a free trade area that is developed in a progressive , managed , gradual and concerted way .
It must also be adapted to the socio-economic situation in each of the countries .
Markets cannot be opened up to the detriment of the countries of the South , with the risk that a number of today 's sensitive key sectors will be further weakened , as a result of a competitive struggle .

We all know that their agriculture is uncompetitive and not very diverse , with a majority of smallholdings needing their structures modernised , and that it requires us to look more deeply into a form of integrated agricultural policy , centred around food safety .
We also know that there are countries in which a form of low-technology and low added value industry has developed , which must be helped by means of investment in the areas of training and research , and also through the modernisation of its production structures ; we know that we should not put pressure on these countries to suddenly open up their service markets , while maintaining public services outside the framework of the negotiations .
We need to keep a close eye on all of that , otherwise we will have worked to achieve the opposite effect of the development that we wanted and to the detriment of the social well-being of the populations concerned .
That is why it seems vital to me that we grant our partners the right to manage the rate at which they open up to trade and the way in which they organise their development strategy .
It therefore proves vital to strengthen the overall competitiveness of the economies of the MED countries in order to guarantee their economic diversification , their successful integration into international trade and the fair distribution of the expected benefits ; to maintain an asymmetric system based on trade preferences and continued use of supply-side management tools ; to attract investment , of which there is little in this area ; to provide a stable investment area and to provide for regional Euro-Mediterranean infrastructure and transport networks ; and to work towards a closer political and economic alignment in the SEMCs , in order to help genuinely strengthen cooperation and integration .
To conclude , I should like to stress the urgent need for a renewal of political will among all of the partners and for the return of real cooperation as one of the Union 's priorities , both of which are conditions essential to the revival and success of the Barcelona process and of a Euro-Mediterranean socio-economic area .
Without them , the free trade area is in danger of becoming the symbol of the Euromed misunderstanding .
As far as my generation is concerned , it is vital that we move on to a time of reconciliation - that is the challenge that we have to address , ladies and gentlemen .
Guaranteeing the stability and development of this area means guaranteeing the development of democracy and of our stability .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Foreign Affairs has , by a vast majority , adopted an opinion on the Arif report , focusing above all on political issues and thus also addressing the wider topic of the Mediterranean situation .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs has addressed six points above all .
The first concerns the political commitment to create a free-trade area aimed at ensuring peace , democratisation , respect for human rights , gender equality and the promotion of inter-cultural and inter-religious dialogue .
The second point concerns the urgent need for the European Union to work towards creating an area of security and stability throughout the region ; this must include upholding the full sovereignty of Lebanon and a commitment to peaceful coexistence between the State of Israel and a future Palestinian State .
Thirdly , we also see a need to grant financial support for the reconstruction of these areas , which have been through some really terrible times with violent clashes or even actual war .
We expect , of course , that the creation of a free-trade area will be the first step towards the cessation of the wars of terrorism in the Middle East .
The fourth point stresses the need to encourage political , democratic and socioeconomic reforms in the EU 's partner countries so as to create an area of shared prosperity , not least in view of the growing Chinese presence especially in Africa .
In its fifth point , the Committee on Foreign Affairs insists on the need to establish at last a Euro-Mediterranean bank with autonomy from the European Investment Bank , so as to be able to respond to the constant and increasing demand from our partner countries for loans and financing .
The sixth and final point concerns the rather sensitive subject of immigration .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs calls for agreements with the partner countries in order to control migratory flows at source as well , so as to prevent individuals who might endanger the stability of the European Union and also damage the image of the countries from which they come from hiding among the large numbers of workers who seek employment in Europe and who can be an important resource for our continent .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating our rapporteur , Mr Arif , on the pertinence of his analyses .
From an agricultural point of view , while the opening up of the markets is today offering real prospects of economic development on both shores of the Mediterranean , it is important that this trend be based on the experience of local populations and the actors on the ground .
It is vital for the process to be implemented in a measured way , on a product by product basis and to a gradual timetable , in order to cater for small farms , which are the most fragile , the most numerous and the best equipped to develop a form of multifunctional agriculture that respects natural resources and local development .
This regulatory work hinges on the strengthening of trade preferences on the basis of an asymmetric relationship designed to benefit the most vulnerable countries .
It also hinges on support measures that will enable us to help these countries to modernise their production structures and that will contribute to the development of synergies , through technical and financial cooperation among professionals and by means of common labelling policies .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly ( EMPA ) is due to meet at last in a few days ' time .
The aim is to revitalise it in order to provide a parliamentary dimension to dialogue and cooperation in the Mediterranean .
The European Parliament 's position is fully expressed in the joint motion for a resolution , from which I should like to highlight three points : the call for the creation of the Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank , the call for greater attention to be given to environmental and energy issues , and above all the question of the status of women .
We expect the European Union institutions to pull together , and we call on the Commission to actively support the efforts of the European Parliament and its President , Mr Poettering , to revitalise the EMPA .
I think this support needs to be made very conspicuous in Tunis , through their participation at the highest levels .
The debate on the free-trade area deserves particular emphasis today , since we are aware that , if it is created , it may well provide the political and parliamentary activities with a practical outcome .
We signed up to the Barcelona process in order to make action in the Mediterranean more effective .
We realise that there are now delays in achieving the expected targets .
The European Union has not been able to fulfil its ambitions , and that is why the Euro-Mediterranean integration process is now becoming the EU 's new policy and its political priority .
We are aware that the world has changed , so we need to adapt our strategy without slackening in our actions : we need to enhance North-South trade and help to develop South-South trade .
We need to look for practical , visible measures to move in that direction .
The European Commission should , in agreement with the other institutions , choose and carry out a major , symbolic project .
President Barroso and Commissioners Ferrero-Waldner and Mandelson have all the information they require to put forward a proposal .
It is essential to achieve peace in the area , with the cooperation of all the interested parties - from Israel to the Palestinians , and from Syria to Iran - with active support from the European Union in its new role , and with the intense activity of the Quartet .
The European Union ought to be less timid and more daring : we need to get to the peace conference as quickly as possible .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the Arif report is , in my opinion , an historic one for the European Parliament .
It addresses the commercial dimension of Euro-Mediterranean relations in a novel and thorough way .
However , the political groups have decided to follow up the report with a debate and resolution ; the debate covers the report , of course , but it is also about taking stock of this policy .
I do not hide the fact that we are a little concerned about the prospects of working in partnership with the Mediterranean countries , because the neighbourhood policy , which should have given these relations a consciously continental dimension , is in danger of fragmenting this policy .
We have great respect and appreciation for the work that the Commission is doing in negotiating the action plans country by country , but we would point out that the action plans are only a part of this policy and that major problems such as employment , the fight against poverty , the environment and the recovery of the Mediterranean not just as a physical area but also as an environmental , cultural , political and economic one require a broader approach , a multilateral policy and a more substantial political investment from the European Union .
That is why we would ask the Council , and particularly the German Presidency , which has shown great sensitivity on this dossier , to take another step forwards with , we hope , the support of the Parliamentary Assembly that is to meet in Tunis next week .
I would recall that the Parliamentary Assembly is the only political forum where the North and the South can talk and also the only political forum where Israelis and Palestinians still talk .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , our fellow Members , Mr Bonsignore and Mrs Napoletano , have just made the point that , at the end of this week , the representatives of the coastal populations of both shores of the Mediterranean will meet again in this forum - happily now a parliamentary assembly - where they have endeavoured , since its founding , to develop relationships of trust , of which you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , have rightly stressed the importance .
This will be our first meeting in plenary since the Lebanese tragedy , in which Europe , in my view , remained silent for too long and in which it finally intervened in a disorganised manner , on the initiative of this or that Member State .
However , we know full well that it was the Union itself , as the heir to the humanist and cultural values that we know and bolstered by its economic power and demographic dimension , that was expected to play an intervention role at first , and a mediation role thereafter .
Back then , the time had perhaps still not come to make the Union 's voice heard ; it is perhaps a better time to do so now .
Mr Solana , our high representative , was in Beirut the day before yesterday .
He was received yesterday by King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia ; today , he is due to meet with the Syrian President , Bachar Al-Assad .
I hope that these moves will help strengthen the hope born out of the recent diplomatic initiatives , which would seem at last to bode well for a calming of the situation .
A calming of the situation in Lebanon , after the meeting between the prime minister and the head of parliament ; a calming of the situation in Palestine , after the agreement reached in Mecca between Fatah and Hamas ; and the first signs of calm throughout the Middle East after the first international conference in Baghdad , last Saturday .
It is under these auspices that we must continue to develop parliamentary diplomacy in Tunis .
Such diplomacy will , I hope , enable us to bring together our Israeli and Palestinian colleagues who , since our last plenary session , a year ago , have barely had the invaluable opportunity to meet and exchange opinions with the aim of conquering this disease of mutual fear , which their two peoples have had to suffer so much .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , strengthening the neighbourhood policy with the South must be a strategic priority .
The Barcelona process has marked a significant stage in our relations with the Mediterranean countries and it continues to do so .
Pessimists will tell us that the results have not come up to expectations , that South-South economic cooperation is still only incipient , and that we are still a long way from achieving any substantial results on the joint management of immigration front .
We could of course have done a lot more , but we certainly would not have achieved what we have achieved without the Barcelona conference and without the process that came after it .
What was achieved was in-depth political dialogue between the two sides on a broad range of subjects .
This is demonstrated by the frequent Euro-Mediterranean Councils of Ministers and the conclusion of a series of bilateral association agreements between the European Union and its partners , which may be seen as a basis for developing more comprehensive economic integration .
The new neighbourhood policy provides instruments for closer cooperation in the Mediterranean region .
The action plans enable us to make our actions more specific and to tailor them more to each partner 's needs .
These plans , however , must not be an alternative to the Barcelona process , but additional instruments that should make it possible to implement and achieve the Barcelona objectives more effectively .
These are common issues that change over time and as new needs arise , and they require a common approach in the interests of all the stakeholders in the region .
They include the prospect of gradually integrating the Euro-Mediterranean energy markets in order to carry out joint energy programmes and to develop sustainable sources of energy , within a framework of active cooperation that is also aimed at ensuring the security of energy supplies , the diversification of these energy sources , the promotion of energy efficiency , the development of new technologies , research programmes , and the development of joint projects in this field .
One result of all that has been deeper mutual understanding , which should lead to broader , more open contact and a chance to correct any mistakes that have been made , so that stability , peace , democracy and progress may be the outcome for us all to share .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , featuring among the key aspects of the Euromed relations , and of all the resolutions and declarations relating thereto , are the Middle East peace process , the fight against terrorism , cooperation in the fields of asylum and immigration policy and the promotion of democracy and of human rights .
But how long is the road and wide the gulf between the declarations and modest results !
In the Middle East , the European Union has great difficulty in supporting the genuinely impartial application of international law .
The rhetoric developed thus far by the European Union regarding respect for fundamental rights in the fight against terrorism has been in a bad way since the Fava report on immigration .
The European Union policy has the very immediate effect of imprisoning migrants and refugees in their area of origin or of transit , in violation of their fundamental rights .
What is more , the mediocre performance in the areas of democracy and of human rights clashes each day with the names of the human rights defenders - journalists , political opponents and even prisoners of conscience or trade unionists - who are rotting in prison .
In Tunisia , where the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , the EMPA , will meet for its plenary session , all of the projects funded by the European Union to help civil society are on hold .
Not a single journalist can express himself freely .
The Tunisian Human Rights League , the union of journalists and other associations are still banned from holding their congresses .
Mr Abou , a lawyer and human rights activist whose release we were demanding as far back as June 2006 , has just begun his third year in prison .
Ladies and gentlemen , we know that it is the participation of civil societies in the process and the democratic and parliamentary monitoring of the Euro-Mediterranean policies that are key to the revival of a virtuous dynamic , of a dynamic for peace , and of a dynamic for sustainable development and for human rights .
The Euromed parliamentary assembly must therefore do everything it can to support , promote and involve networks and actors from civil society in its work and to develop a real independent , autonomous capacity of governments , a capacity to assess , to spearhead and to make proposals within the framework of the Euro-Mediterranean policy .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Arif on his complex and well-structured report .
I shall deal with just one issue in the minute that I have : it will not be possible to achieve the objectives and outcomes of the Barcelona process unless we address the Palestinian-Israeli conflict quickly and decisively .
We are in 2007 .
The Palestinian territories have been occupied ever since 1967 , and that means 40 years of deprivation of freedom and justice and 40 years of violations of UN resolutions and human rights .
As the German Presidency has said , what is needed is dialogue , and every initiative to promote it is welcome .
What is needed is negotiations that can lead to a solution to the conflict , so that Palestinians and Israelis can live together in mutual security .
The Arab initiative and the formation of the government of national unity are opportunities to be seized without further delay in order to bring the Palestinians and Israelis back to the negotiating table within the framework of an international conference .
We must make such a conference possible if we want the Barcelona process to consist not just of rhetorical statements but of real , practical action in a Mediterranean of relations and trade .
That is why I believe we need a policy of real partnership in the free movement of goods and people .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , my party favours free trade and establishing good relations .
No doubt Europeans wish that for Mediterranean countries , and this morning President-in-Office Steinmeier expressed the view that the EU should deliver in areas where people want it to .
But they are also entitled to ask how their money is spent , including the EUR 5350 million on Euromed in the period up to 2007 .
Considering all the other calls on resources , they might question the value of that , especially when we add funds for combating climate change .
Here an enormous amount of money is to be spent on chasing moonbeams , for the scientific evidence is very suspect , further discredited by the unscientific , emotional and theatrical way it is presented .
If that classes me as a heretic , I hope I do not suffer the fate of Abdel Kareem , sentenced to four years in jail in Egypt for criticising both his government and the violent radicals in his country .
Bearing in mind that we were asked earlier today to support EU action against the horrendous Mugabe regime , perhaps those who manage Euromed funds might consider that some of this money is going to countries harbouring significant groups who have yet to renounce violence .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the problem of immigration is an important one , and is given far too little attention during debates on the euro-mediterranean partnership .
Since the EUROMED countries produce the highest numbers of immigrants in most European Member States , it is only logical that things should be brought up for discussion within the framework of EUROMED , and that there should be more discussion of certain specific problems .
For example , there is the problem of illegal immigration , of asylum seekers who have reached the end of the line , but who are readmitted to their own countries - in some cases , EUROMED partners - only with great difficulty .
Moreover , we need to talk about the cooperation which we should be able to expect from the other side of the Mediterranean in order to make this sort of illegal immigration more difficult and to discourage it .
We must also place the problem of growing Muslim fundamentalism on the agenda , both for our EUROMED partners and in Europe itself .
Another concern is the deficient integration of many immigrants in Europe , and here too , their countries of origin need to do something in relation to such issues as , for example , that of immigrants adopting the nationality of their guest country whilst wanting , or rather having , to retain their original nationality , which should be up for discussion .
Commissioner Mandelson spoke a moment ago about managing and controlling legal immigration .
Well , I think it is high time we stuck our necks out and said that we do not need any more immigration and that the idea of people who find it difficult to settle migrating back whence they came should no longer be a taboo subject .
( ES ) Madam President , I believe that we must all be pleased that we are holding this debate on the eve of the Conference of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly in Tunis and at the same time approving this resolution which has been adopted by all of Parliament 's political groups and by the Committee on International Trade .
I am pleased that the Commission said that we are facing a joint political challenge .
Along with the commercial , energy , water , cultural and migration aspects , I believe that there is a fundamental problem underlying this debate : the political problem .
I believe that the European Union must pay close attention to the forthcoming Arab League Summit to be held at the end of this month in Riyadh , at which a new plan for the region is going to be proposed .
The European Union , by means of its institutions , Commissioner , should take care to ensure that our comments and views are heard in this regard .
I also believe that we must take very good note of the current active position of Saudi diplomats , the visits of the Secretary of State of the United States and other international leaders , the recent meeting in Mecca between the President of the Palestinian National Authority and the leaders of Hamas , with a view to forming a government of national unity , and the visit of the President of Iraq .
I therefore believe , Madam President , that it is absolutely right to consider all of the factors making up the European Union 's Euro-Mediterranean policy - taking account of all of the possibilities provided by the instruments of the new neighbourhood policy and particularly the significant financial resources available to us - but I believe , Commissioner , that politics must be a priority , and in that regard , I believe that the decisions taken at the last Barcelona Summit , and specifically the code of conduct on terrorism , should be a fundamental factor that has a bearing on the work of the next Summit of the Arab League at the end of the month in Riyadh .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are going to send a message of optimism , because every time we discuss the Mediterranean we give the impression that the situation in that region is entirely grim , and that is not the case .
Of course we have many problems , but we also have many opportunities .
In reality , the Mediterranean presents us with a ' test ' to see whether we are capable of making the most of those opportunities .
Conflicts , for example .
The Middle East , for example , but in this case we must set up a Madrid II international peace conference , taking advantage of the windows of opportunity that have opened up , such as the partial acceptance of the initiative of the Arab League and the meetings of that organisation that are going to take place soon .
We have the problem of poverty , which is at the root of immigration .
We also have the problem of development , though , with a view to tackling that , we have the Doha Round , which needs to be restored , the multilateral agreements , the association agreements and the Millennium Goals .
We have the problem of energy , the environment and climate change . But we also have the Barcelona Process to deal with these issues .
We have the fight against terrorism , but there is a code of conduct for combating terrorism approved by Barcelona + 10 .
We have democracy and human rights , but there are association agreements and agreements forming part of the neighbourhood plans that can be used for that purpose .
There are therefore both problems and opportunities .
The Mediterranean is not a problem and a weak point for the European Union .
It is part of the solution to many of our problems .
We must therefore relaunch and enhance the Euro-Mediterranean process from political , economic , social , environmental , human and cultural points of view .
We must implement the Barcelona + 10 conclusions and ensure that the European neighbourhood policy does not push aside the Barcelona Process .
This region can find a solution as a region .
We must not encourage each country to seek an individual solution . That is impossible , it is bad for the people and furthermore it is bad for the Union as a partner .
I therefore believe that the association between equals which are inevitably asymmetrical is a good working basis and it is the basis of the Barcelona Process , which provides for political dialogue and provides a framework for economic dialogue , as clearly stressed in the wonderful report by Kader Arif and in the resolution that we are going to approve .
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly that is going to meet in Tunis will be a fundamental element in that regard and this Parliament , which was there when it was created , must continue to be fully involved in its activities .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first to thank Mr Arif for the way in which he conducted the preparation of the draft report on which we are to vote .
Six thousand years after the first great civilisations appeared in the Mediterranean , this part of the world is still at the centre of tensions , opportunities and problems that need to be carefully managed .
With the Barcelona declaration 12 years ago , the European Union and the 12 Mediterranean countries benefiting from the MEDA programme laid the foundations for a genuine political pact , the purpose of which - creating a free-trade area - was part of a more general aim of creating an area of peace and stability .
Achieving this aim also means stabilising the Middle East and finding a solution to the Palestinian issue along the lines of the ' two peoples , two states ' principle .
This is essential if we want to liberalise relations not only between these countries and the European Union , but also among themselves .
The Arif report shows how to set about creating a free-trade area , in which Europe 's desire for competitiveness can be reconciled with the expectations of the peoples of North Africa and the Middle East , and in which the European Union 's efforts are not wasted in selfishly defending its own interests .
( FR ) Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating my fellow Member , Mr Arif , on the excellent report that he has produced and is presenting today .
As my fellow Members have said , at the end of this week , the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly will meet in Tunis .
The work done by the EMPA over the last three years has paved the way for an ever more constructive political future , but the Middle East conflict remains the number one problem .
In this regard , the EMPA will hold an extraordinary meeting in Cairo on this issue in June .
Politicians from both shores of the Mediterranean who form part of the EMPA want to help establish a lasting peace .
The fact remains that Europe must become more active in this conflict and must crucially restore financial aid for the Palestinians , as the World Bank recommends in its latest report .
As regards the creation of free trade areas , Europe and its partners must redouble their efforts .
The European Union must encourage the undertaking of reforms in the South by making effective use of the new neighbourhood instrument , and it must support the Facility for Euro-Mediterranean Investment and Partnership , the FEMIP , and its necessary transformation into a true development bank dedicated to the Mediterranean .
For their part , the countries of the South must take ownership of the partnership and work towards enhanced regional integration with the aim of creating a mutually beneficial area of prosperity .
The European Union and its partners are therefore required to act if they are to rise to the challenge of an ambitious and effective liberalisation of trade .
Accordingly , Europe must also help reduce one of the major causes of the imbalances , namely unemployment in the countries of the southern Mediterranean .
Indeed , each year , four million young people from the countries of the South enter the job market without finding a job .
At the same time , the trade imbalance in favour of Europe stands at several tens of billions of euros .
This situation is getting worse each year ; it does not correspond to a free trade philosophy , it is the source of growing impoverishment and it is a factor leading to unrest .
To conclude , together , we must all strengthen dialogue among civilisations in a region in which there are exceptional historical and human assets .
The cultural issue is undoubtedly the most important , since it is in the hearts of men and women that the desire for war or peace is born .

( PT ) I should first like to thank Mr Arif for the comprehensive report that he brought before us today , which will make a significant contribution to this debate .
European-Mediterranean cooperation , in its approach to the Mediterranean , should always help to implement the Millennium Development Goals as a whole .
As previous speakers have said , zero poverty is not a utopian ideal but is within our grasp in this region .
In this context , the main objective of the proposal that , as Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Economic Affairs , I shall be presenting in Tunis next weekend will be the creation of a specific plan for administrative , social and economic restructuring leading to an effective fight against poverty , be it in absolute or relative terms , in the Mediterranean .
2010 could bring us a prosperous area shared by some 750 million citizens right on our doorstep .
Indeed , the political stability of this area is crucial not only for the EU but also for the world .
We are all aware of the sensitivities of the different Member States on these issues and of the responsibility of the Presidency of the Council to take account of those sensitivities .
Mr Mandelson told us precisely this when he revealed his unquestioned commitment as a representative of the Commission .
We know , however , that without strong technical and political commitment from the Commission itself , none of the actors concerned will help in this regard .
At the very least , they will turn the action plans we have been negotiating into nothing more than empty words and will call for a purely individual approach .
Mr Mandelson , the development of this area and its political stability are in our hands .
It remains clear that we must fulfil our role in allocating new social and financial instruments , in offering greater , absolutely unequivocal , support for microcredit and in terms of our unswerving commitment to making this partnership - and the crucial agreements that form part of it - work .
We must unequivocally uphold our values .
( ES ) Madam President , the Barcelona Process launched an extremely ambitious project which , as this reports points out very clearly , still has a long way to go .
It is still deficient in many regards .
There is no question that the creation of a free trade area in the Mediterranean was a crucial corollary to what was intended through this Barcelona Process .
We must welcome this resolution and congratulate its rapporteur on being able to go beyond fine political statements and produce a realistic , sensible and constructive analysis of the situation and of the difficulties being faced .
Our resolutions often contain too many flowery statements . That is not true of this one .
Of all of the interesting things it says , I would like to stress just one : the need to enhance South-South trade .
The need for the European Commission to be directly involved in the efforts to enhance South-South trade .
We have the Agadir Agreement , which needs to be extended , and it was signed on that basis , but we need to make enhancing South-South trade a specific objective , otherwise it will be impossible to move forward in that direction .
Madam President , I congratulate the rapporteur on bringing this report to plenary .
The question of trade in the Mediterranean is , of course , an extremely important and historic one , and the Commissioner was right to reflect on the wider dimension of our relations with the southern shores of the Mediterranean .
Indeed , it is a matter of great concern to me that , as he mentioned , the agreement just signed with Egypt was done against a background of very considerable repression in that country , the most important in the region .
In late January I tried to visit Dr Ayman Nour in prison .
He is one of two parliamentarians currently in prison in Cairo - indeed , in the same prison .
It highlights the failure , in a way , of the EU to stand by the principles which we are supposed to represent here in this House .
I refer to this because , as has been remarked , there is to be a meeting of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly this weekend in Tunis and , as a Vice-President of this House , I am privileged to work on that dossier .
One of the elements that we could begin to think about in the context of that Assembly is the evolution of a more real parliament .
I am the chairman of a working party that deals with the financing and organisation of the EMPA , and proposals for reform are indeed going to the meeting in Tunis .
But one of the areas that we have not yet been able to take forward is the question of the creation of political families in the Assembly so as to normalise the political debate away from the important , but nevertheless existential , questions of the Middle East , to the more mundane , but nevertheless terribly important issues of trade , of environment , of commerce , of transport - so many of the day-to-day issues which , I believe , should preoccupy us in our joint endeavours in making sense of our relationship across the Mediterranean .
In this way we could begin to make less relevant those radicalised Islamic parties which are now the subject of so much attention in that part of the world .

( FR ) Madam President , immigration is a difficult issue in the context of the Barcelona process ; it is a complex phenomenon that must be dealt with from all perspectives , not just from the security perspective , which is too often brought to the fore .
All too often , in fact , it is Europe that has imposed the themes of the Euro-Mediterranean agenda by giving precedence , in a kind of mishmash of subject areas , to terrorism , weapons of mass destruction , drugs trafficking and immigration .
We must no longer take this approach : migratory flows and population exchanges are an economic necessity and a human resource for host countries .
In this regard , I should like to make three proposals .
We need to open legal immigration channels and combat illegal immigration channels , which exploit poverty and create a new , modern-day form of slavery .
We must strengthen the political dimension of the partnership because democracy , respect for fundamental freedoms , the status of women and good governance contribute a great deal to development and also help to contain the spread of poverty to other regions .
To conclude , it is vital to establish operational cooperation between the authorities responsible for managing migratory flows on both shores of the Mediterranean , and , in this regard , I welcome the European Frontex initiative , for which an increase in resources is required .

( ES ) Madam President , over recent years the European Union has paid special attention to the East of the continent .
Think of the Balkans , the fifth enlargement , the political changes in Ukraine and in Georgia and the not always easy relations with Russia .
On the other hand , we have often tended to restrict our discussions of relations with the Mediterranean to the conflict in the Middle East .
We must , however , prioritise the whole of the Mediterranean basin and ensure that it becomes an area of peace , prosperity , freedom and stability .
We are talking about neighbouring countries with numerous and age-old relations with States of the European Union , and countries that are facing serious problems .
For example , their insufficient democratic and institutional development and low economic growth , and their consequent inability to provide a growing younger population with work .
They are countries of origin and transit for illegal immigration .
So all of these problems being faced by our neighbours are now having an impact on the countries of the Union .
We are interdependent .
For the benefit of everybody , therefore , we must cooperate and increase our economic and commercial relations , including the eventual establishment of a free trade area .
Our neighbours must also be capable of carrying out significant reforms in order to deal with their problems .
Maintaining the status quo will not bring stability .
Political , social and economic reforms are needed .
They are also needed in order to attract crucial foreign investment .
To this end , a substantial increase in South-South trade is required .
Regrettably , the 2005 Summit , which marked 10 years of the Barcelona Process , was a missed opportunity to demonstrate the need for cooperation with the European Union , particularly to public opinion in the Mediterranean countries .
The degree of representation of the countries of the southern shore of the Mediterranean was disappointing .
We must continue our efforts , however .
The EUR 12 000 million for the European neighbourhood policy is a modest sum compared to other sums provided for in the Union 's budget and in view of the immense needs of our southern neighbours .
It is increasingly difficult for their citizens to accept the contrast between the prosperity of their European neighbour and the serious deficiencies that they suffer .
In short , Euro-Mediterranean relations must be a priority for the European Union .
They will benefit both parties .

( EL ) Mr President , first may I offer my congratulations to Mr Kader Arif on the excellent analysis and proposals contained in his report .
Obviously we must not take a manacheistic view of the results of the Barcelona process .
However , we must be honest and realistic .
Twelve years , as we sum up today , after the Barcelona Declaration , I believe that the results are negative and that , unfortunately , we are a long way from implementing the objectives set in November 1995 .
I believe that the European Union today does not have a reliable and integrated Mediterranean strategy which allows it to play a leading role in the broader Middle East and Maghreb and there is a specific reason for this : Commissioner Mandelson said that the neighbourhood policy is complementary to the European Union 's Euro-Mediterranean policy .
He must permit me to disagree .
I believe that one of the reasons why Euro-Mediterranean cooperation is not progressing and has negative results is precisely this European neighbourhood policy .
We have turned from strategic partners of third Mediterranean countries into neighbours .
We are moving from strategic partnership to a neighbourhood strategy .
The problem is not just one of semantics ; it is a problem of the fundamental political absence of the European Union from the area as a whole .
I have something else to say : with the European neighbourhood policy we have basically cancelled the regional political , economic and social dimension of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation and that is something which is instrumental to the presence of Europe in the area .
( MT ) As Commissioner Mendelson rightly said , the Mediterranean presents a common challenge for all of us .
I believe that the Commissioner hit the nail on the head when he said that , if we do not appreciate the fact that we are facing a common challenge , then we cannot even begin to address this challenge , let alone meet it .
I believe that the strategy we applied in order to build Europe has to apply to the Mediterranean too .
Therefore , we need further to strengthen cooperation and economic integration , and then the other things will follow almost automatically .
In order to strengthen economic cooperation , we naturally have to step up our endeavours in order to achieve our aim of a Free Trade Area by 2010 .
However , we cannot simply make efforts towards obtaining a Free Trade Area without taking into account the negative consequences that this might have for various sectors , including jobs and employment , the quality of life , social development and the environment .
In order to minimise these consequences , we must make further commitments , both in financial terms and in terms of being more accessible to Mediterranean countries , for example through the Mediterranean Bank initiative .
I agree with this initiative wholeheartedly and hope to see improved developments in this area in the near future .
Through this initiative , we should not only be helping out financially , but we should also be sending out an important political message .
There is a substantial number of other issues that I do not have time to discuss in depth , but immigration and water resources in the region are two of these .
It is a well-known fact that , without water , life cannot go on , yet long-term investment in this sector is sorely lacking .
Also , improving relations in the Mediterranean requires much patience and perseverance on our part .
I am optimistic that , despite the challenges facing us , we will succeed in building a zone of prosperity , in the same way that we built Europe brick by brick after the war .
Now we must persist in being patient and in persevering .
( MT ) It is true that the Barcelona process was too ambitious .
Yet , it is also true that , for many years , we did not accord the Mediterranean the importance it deserved .
Now , it seems as though , all of a sudden , we want to make up for lost time , which is why this project was probably too ambitious .
I was greatly pleased to hear Commissioner Mandelson paint a positive picture of the Mediterranean situation so eloquently and draw attention to several important factors , including exports and trade .
However , if you go through the report , it paints a very different picture .
There are problems in every sector .
Finance , industry and development are just a few examples of these .
Nevertheless , there definitely are issues such as energy and immigration , in connection with which we are trying to come up with solutions together , so as to be able to live together more constructively .
In conclusion , I will just say that , without a doubt , it is vital that we trust each other .
If we reciprocate one another 's trust on both sides of the Mediterranean , we will certainly be able to begin building , and go on building , on the positive elements there are between us .
Mr President , I am in the fortunate position of not having to use all my five minutes .
I get the feeling that there is broad consensus on this point - consensus on the need to received Mr Arif 's report with a great deal of respect and gratitude - together with a firm understanding that , while there is no alternative to the Barcelona process as a means of striving to build an area of peace and stability , it cannot , alone , do everything that has to be done in the region where peace policy is concerned , and that that is not , indeed , what it exists to do .
I would also point out just how much work the Presidency of the Council has put into getting the formal peace process resumed and to bring forward negotiations within the Quartet framework .
There was also general agreement on the need for us not to abandon the goal of having a ' free trade zone ' in place by 2010 , but it is precisely because that can be achieved only if such a free trade framework is ultimately founded upon the ability to compete , that it must be plain to us just how important the European Neighbourhood Policy , with its concrete plans of action , can be , and just how valuable can be the transfer of the experience gained through it to the Barcelona process .
That is the point I wanted to make by way of a conclusion .
There is , indeed , close cooperation between the present Presidency of the Council and the next one , the Portuguese , and , far from in any way wanting to play off these different regions against one another , we want , in dealing with the South , to draw on the experience we have gained - and will continue to gain - in Eastern Europe , for it is in this that lies the great opportunity for the Barcelona process to make good progress .
Member of the Commission .
President , I would to like to thank all the Honourable Members who have spoken for their comments and suggestions regarding Euro-Mediterranean relations .
They are proof of the interest and importance that this House attaches to the partnership and its future , as does the Commission .
The debate has reconfirmed the importance of the Euro-Med Free Trade Area , in particular its potential in promoting north-south , but also south-south trade , as has been highlighted during this debate , if implemented in a measured way .
Despite the difficulties and setbacks encountered by the Middle East Peace Process , the Barcelona Process has continued to make remarkable progress .
The continuing conflict has not shaken our belief in the need for the Euro-Mediterranean partnership and the Neighbourhood Policy .
Since the Foreign Affairs Conference of May 2005 in Luxembourg , we have succeeded in reaching joint conclusions in all the Euro-Mediterranean ministerial meetings .
This is the proof of a shared political will to move forward and to promote the Barcelona Process .
The issue of migration was raised by several Members .
I would like to refer to the Euro-Med ministerial meeting on migration , which is planned for November 2007 .
This ministerial meeting should agree a draft action plan around the three clusters identified : legal migration , illegal migration and development .
What transpires in North Africa and the Middle East is of great importance to Europe 's future .
Where today there is doubt , let us create opportunity tomorrow : by basing our partnership on respect ; by reiterating our commitment to a region that is both close to home and strategically vital for Europe ; and lastly , by making sure that policy is always marked by action .
To conclude the debate , I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( IT ) The idea of creating a free trade area ( FTA ) represents a real opportunity for growth for countries in the Mediterranean region .
Strengthening the role of the Mediterranean is in fact one of the main aims to be pursued by the entire European Community , since this region is at the centre of an important mix of different cultures and a strong economic interest on a world scale .
In this context , the 1995 Barcelona summit produced an ambitious framework of cooperation between the two shores of the Mediterranean , based on achieving three main objectives for creating a common area of prosperity through :
political dialogue and security ;
the use of economic partnership ;
cooperation in social , cultural and human matters .
To make its intervention effective , the EU should step up technical and financial assistance supporting local level economic activities , create a framework for long-term economic and social development , regulate the free trade area in order to prevent imbalances from forming between the various labour markets , and introduce a Code of Conduct applicable to businesses .
Promoting development in the Mediterranean means encouraging dialogue between different cultures , moulding a spirit of peace and mutual understanding , together with respect for human rights .
in writing - ( PL ) I would like to express my support for the idea of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership and the establishment of a Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area by 2010 as announced in the Barcelona Declaration .
As a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I would like to draw attention to some aspects of liberalisation of the trade in agricultural products with the EUROMED countries .
In my view , the markets between the European Union and the southern and eastern part of the Mediterranean should be opened in a gradual and planned way , and negotiations on access to markets must be conducted individually and separately for each product , and take into account the specific features of the agricultural sector in the Euro-Med countries .
It is important to ensure that sensitive products such as fruit and vegetables , sugar , ethyl alcohol and tomato concentrate are excluded from the planned liberalisation .
The European Union must also ensure that it retains the possibility of invoking special opt-out clauses which it could use to counter any potential threats posed by an excess of low-cost imports .
It is also important to encourage the EUROMED countries to improve the quality of the products exported and to observe the quality and plant health standards required by the EU .
in writing . - ( FR ) The project for a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area has fallen behind , making it unlikely that it will be finished in 2010 .
However , there is an urgent need to adopt initiatives in this part of the world , where the Union should have a far greater presence .
Our main priority , via the European neighbourhood policy , should be a more targeted , country by country , approach .
It is not because it is in the collective interest that the approach must be global .
We must develop a form of tailor-made cooperation , so that each country becomes economically powerful enough to participate in the free trade area .
This cooperation must be opened up to the local authorities of both shores of the Mediterranean , in order to establish solid links at all political levels .
Our second objective must be to stimulate South-South trade , because it remains inadequate .
As a result of its enlargements , the Union has unique expertise to share with its partner countries in terms of helping them to prepare themselves in key areas of their economic transition , such as education , research , training , the preparation of economic actors and administrations and the approximation of laws .
It is above all by supporting the creation of a genuine Mediterranean common market that we will be able to implement the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area .
Future of European aircraft construction ( debate )
The next item is the debate on statements by the Council and the Commission on the future of European aircraft construction .

Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , honourable Members , Europe 's continued industrial and technological performance in transport , communications , earth observation , security and defence is to a crucial degree attributable to its aerospace industry , for it is only that industry 's global competitiveness that will enable Europe to achieve its economic and political goals .
The European aerospace industry is a world leader in several important market segments ; it has in excess of a one-third share in the global market .
In 2005 - the last year for which figures are available - it achieved a turnover of EUR 86 billion and gave work to 457 000 workers .
The sector is continuing to grow despite recent difficulties , with a growing market for large civil aircraft in particular .
As Mr Hintze has just stressed , Airbus ' ability to deliver 434 new aircraft last year constitutes a record .
Orders have been placed with it for over 2 500 of them , giving it work for over five years .
With projected growth of 5 % per annum in the transport of persons by air , and of 6 % per annum in the airfreight sector , the next twenty years will see a demand for over 22 500 new large airliners , amounting to a total value of EUR 2 billion at present-day prices .
It has to be said , though , that , over recent weeks and months , Airbus has been making the sort of headlines it would probably rather not make .
We would all rather read about more great successes on its part on the market than about losses and layoffs , but the fact is that the European aerospace industry operates on a global market characterised by sharp competition and has to cope with well-prepared competitors - Boeing , for example - in all its segments , so the industry needs constant investment and innovation if its products are to meet its customers ' requirements .

Airbus is a major part of the European aerospace industry , a truly European enterprise with , at present 57 000 internal and 30 000 external workers , and drawing on many enterprises , both large and small , for the products and services that it uses .
Like any other enterprise , Airbus must adapt to changed conditions , adopting those procedures and structures that will enable it to produce the goods that the market demands as profitably as possible , and it does indeed make matters more difficult that Airbus has to sell its products in dollars , whilst bearing costs expressed in euros , the euro being the stronger of the two currencies .
That makes it all the more important that Airbus should be able to take difficult business decisions rationally in order thereby to recover its position in the market .
It is an unfortunate fact that Airbus ' decision to improve its efficiency by means of a programme of cutbacks and restructuring , including the farming-out of some of its activities , will result in a reduction in the number of staff employed , something that is causing insecurity and prompting calls for political intervention .
While politicians cannot and are not meant to interfere in decisions taken by businesses in an attempt to restore their own competitive edge - for companies ' management decisions are not political matters - there are ways in which redundant workers can be helped , and , perhaps even a moral duty to help them , to get retrained and to find new work in other companies , possibly in other industries .
For this purpose , for example , the Member States can get help from the European Social Fund .
The Commission notes with satisfaction that Airbus had already , some time prior to the restructuring currently in progress , involved workers ' representatives in the decisions that had to be taken .
It is most especially worthy of note that the European workers ' representatives were fully consulted and that the effects of the restructuring on Airbus ' subcontractors were also discussed .
Considering the expected growth , which is the envy of many other industries , it is also important that steps should be taken today to secure , to the benefit of us all , the long-term success of the European aerospace industry .
That is one reason why the Commission is taking action , wherever possible - by , for example , setting up a European space programme or creating a European armaments market and a single European airspace - in order to create conditions that are favourable to free competition .
The EU is also , in its Seventh Framework Programme for Research , making considerable funds available for research and development in air transport and space research .
All companies involved in such research work are being urged to submit proposals for shared-cost projects , which will be selected for funding on the basis of a competition .
I would like to highlight the outstanding significance of the ' Clean Sky ' joint technology initiative in this respect , which will make it possible for the European aerospace industry to take up the challenge thrown down to it by the debate on climate change .
I would like to take this opportunity to appeal , in forthright terms , to the European aircraft manufacturers and also to the airlines , who should be very concerned not to suffer the same damage to their image as that sustained by the European motor industry over recent weeks as a result of responding too late to the demands of our time .
Modernity and innovation , research and development , are a matter of urgent necessity in this area , and , with ' Clean Sky ' , the European Union is offering an effective and strong platform for them .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , as Deputy Mayor of Toulouse , I can testify , having visited the company 's sites on several occasions , that Airbus ' restructuring plan is a test , a test for each of the employees concerned , and , in order to overcome it , the causes need to be correctly identified .
True , the euro appreciated and there were delays linked to manufacturing errors with the A380 , but , above all , the group was governed in an intergovernmental , rather than industrial , fashion , and we must draw the right conclusions from this for the future .
We all know that what Airbus suffered from was not a shortage of public authority input in the business ; rather , what Airbus suffered from was the interference of politicians who meddled in the running of the business , which ended up operating more like an international organisation than an integrated company .
As far as its future is concerned , Airbus needs a new shareholder pact , which places greater emphasis on industrial shareholders .
That means that the current shareholders must clearly declare their intentions .
Do they want to carry on being shareholders , or do new financial and industrial partners need to be found ?
When that was said , was the intention that public authorities should take no further interest in this matter ?
Of course not , and I am pleased that Europe has taken action .
Indeed , Commissioner Barrot and yourself , Commissioner Verheugen , announced that the Union would be supporting Airbus ' efforts by strengthening its research programmes .
However , I should like it , Commissioner , if you could clarify for us the possibility of having recourse to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and to the European Social Fund , for the benefit of the employees .
For their part , the Member States can also come to the aid of Airbus , and especially of its sub-contractors , by granting aid for research and for the training of these employees .
On the other hand , imagine Airbus being rescued by equity investment in a few regions of France - I believe that 0.6 % of the capital would be raised - that is downright unrealistic !
To conclude , I should not like anyone to lose sight of the fact that , even though Airbus is experiencing difficulties , this company has achieved many successes .
I have confidence in its future , in the success of the A380 and of the A350 .
In times of crisis and difficulty , we must overcome national self-interests and show that we are solid and united - solid , because we are united .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this item was put on the agenda under the very neutral heading of ' future of European aircraft construction ' , but the main thing we are talking about today is the Airbus crisis .
The ' Power 8 ' reform programme devised by the management in order to plug the hole in the company 's funds , envisages mass redundancies and the sale of plant .
Airbus is a jewel in the European industrial landscape , with highly-skilled workers , full order books , plant working at full capacity and good products .
The selling off of plant would appear to indicate the opposite ; it is the wrong message to send when you are trying to plug a financial hole .
As we see from the example of BenQ in Germany , selling off a factory generally indicates the slow but sure death of an industrial location and leads to the destruction of jobs and know-how .
I would ask you , Mr Hintze to speak up , as a representative of the Council and the German Federal Government 's coordinator of aerospace policy , for the retention of the Airbus sites in Europe , and against the implementation of the ' Power 8 ' restructuring concept .
It is not Airbus ' workforce who should bear the brunt of the company 's crisis and the misjudgments of its management and not Europe 's position as an industrial location that should lose out as a result of them .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) The A380 is expected to be a success , and evidence of that is the fact that the city of Los Angeles , in competition with New York , has just asked Airbus if it might be the first to welcome the European jumbo ; yet the company is in crisis due to a lack of proper management , the well-known consequence of which is the ' Power 8 ' plan for economies and restructuring .
Airbus 's managers have lessons to learn from the industrial mismanagement that caused delays in the delivery of aircraft .
The Member States , for their part , need to give the European aerospace industry a secure future , while those of them that are shareholders need to do something about the company 's management by reviewing the dual organisational model and renegotiating the shareholders ' agreement .
They must also act in solidarity by maintaining and developing the European aerospace industry , which means , among other things , making additional loans available for research , placing public orders , advancing funds for the investments needed in industrial sites or , indeed , increasing the States ' shareholding - this being exactly what the American state did with Boeing .
What the industry now needs as a matter of urgency is the renegotiation of the ' Power 8 ' plan with the unions , taking on board their arguments about strategy .
How , after all , can one accept the unbalanced way in which this plan proposes to share out work between the French and German sites ?
How is one to accept the idea that Toulouse , on whose two production lines twenty planes a month can be produced , should be limited to fourteen a month , with the construction of the other A320s being moved to Hamburg , necessitating investment in a new production line ?
How is one supposed to accept the effect on jobs at suppliers and sub-contractors , the effect on regional economies and the loss of know-how and expertise if sites ' activities are moved elsewhere ?
How are people supposed to entrust innovation and development to others ?

Airbus has orders for 2 589 aircraft on its books , so it has a full work programme for many years to come , and the quality of the aircraft it builds ought to see it through this crisis , but , in fact , there is only one thing to aim for : the promotion of Airbus as a European project creating jobs , achieving innovation and excellence in the eyes of the whole world and built by the men and women of Europe .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Airbus may be in crisis , but it is a crisis of which there has been prior warning .
Living as I do cheek by jowl with Airbus in Toulouse , I have for years been sounding the alarm , but have done so in vain .
For years , I have been issuing warnings about those holders of elected office who have forsaken their management role for the cult of the A380 and who are now among the choir of mourners bewailing the results of their own actions .
For years , I have been warning of managers who have lost touch with reality , such as Mr Forgeat , who , you will recall , walked away with suitcases full of millions of euros and who , for one , had no doubts about prices and deadlines .
I would remind the Commissioner that I have for years been warning the Commission , suggesting alternative procedures such as transporting Airbus wings by airship , and at no time has any help been forthcoming from the Commission .
The crisis that we are now facing is industrial in character , but also , and above all , a disaster in human terms for Airbus 's workers and for its sub-contractors .
That Europe has an aeronautical vocation is not a matter of doubt ; there is no question of the American military-industrial complex , acting through Boeing , being left in control of the skies .
There are five conditions under which recovery is possible .
One is that the product be put back where it belongs and made subject to industrial logic and environmental law .
Secondly , Airbus must be recapitalised using public funds .
Thirdly , the way it works needs to be reorganised ; it needs to extricate itself from the toils of joint Franco-German government , which - both in Airbus and in this House - prevent anything from moving .
Fourthly , its industrial base needs to be rationalised by calling a halt to the dispersal of aircraft-building across dozens of sites .
Fifthly and finally , the avionics sector being fragile and high-risk , it needs to diversify production , moving into the construction of other means of transport and other energy sources .
Airbus is rich - very rich - but only in the talents of its workers , so please let us not despoil that wealth .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Airbus was the cutting-edge industry that was meant to make us swallow the loss of our iron and steel industry and accept the loss of tens of thousands of jobs in textiles , and that same Airbus is now on the rack , preparing to sacrifice its workers and its sub-contractors - quite an achievement for a company whose order books are full for six years and which has EUR 4 billion in the bank .

Airbus would be able to face the future with confidence if it were not ravaged by the financial cancer that is free-market liberalism , and I can tell the House that jobs and development do not sit comfortably with a policy of keeping the euro strong nor , above all , with the greed for dividends characteristic of private shareholders who seek to cut back on investment in the necessary human and material resources and who put their trust in financiers rather than in the expertise of the workers .
The fact is that , by doing away with 10 000 jobs and dividing by six the number of sub-contractors , the ' Power 8 ' plan is eating away at those things that make Airbus rich : its workers ' know-how and the network of sub-contracting businesses on whose cooperation it could rely .
It was that cooperation that made Airbus a high-performing business , and that is the reality of what ' Power 8 ' is going to destroy by making workers , sites and nationalities compete against each other , something that the workers are quite right to repudiate .
' Power 8 ' fails to respond to the present and future needs of the business and should , for that reason , be withdrawn .
If Airbus is to overcome its difficulties , a return to largely public ownership and funding is what is called for , for the fact is that only the Member States are capable of taking on aeronautical projects of this size .
Moreover , the Commission must resolutely defend before the WTO the system of repayable advances by which means alone it will be possible to fund the A350 and the NSR , and it must also make sure that the company gets low-interest loans from the EIB .
If our aerospace industry is to have a future , a European fund for research , employment and training needs to be set up as a matter of urgency .
Within the space of ten years , 30 % of EADS ' staff are going to be retiring ; if their know-how is not to be lost , a massive plan for recruitment and training is called for .
The aerospace industry will have immense challenges to cope with - ranging from the revolution in composite materials to the death of oil - and it is our duty to help it do that .
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , this business with EADS is symptomatic of what we regard as the fraudulent nature of the idea of European integration .
It is astounding that some claim that the idea of a Europe founded upon cooperation - as proposed by the advocates of national sovereignty - has been a failure , and this at a time when , ever since Airbus was absorbed by EADS , we have seen the logic of cooperation , which had made the first Airbus models so successful , abandoned in favour of the integrationist approach , which , by way of privatisations , consolidations and eventual mergers , brought forth EADS , and one of the first consequences of that has been the jeopardising of the Airbus programme and , along with it , of the many jobs that it provided , particularly in France .
I might add that France obediently acquiesced in allowing its German partner a share in the expertise it had acquired over many years , indeed since the very dawn of aviation , and also in the many - public - investments it had made in the sector , thus making it possible for Europe to prevent aerospace being monopolised by the two imperial giants of the American Boeing and the Russian Tupolev .
It is also worthy of note that Germany did not share its pre-eminence in the field of machine tools , but this cooperation did nevertheless produce good results until the predominant ideology , which was one not so much of liberalism as of free trade , ended up privatising , in France and elsewhere , the great industrial flagships , particularly in aerospace , and the companies that benefited from this were English-speaking , based in the Netherlands and subject to Dutch law .
Things promptly proceeded to go wrong , and I shall conclude by saying that I believe that if anything has been proved to be bankrupt it is the idea of integration as represented by EADS .
Mr Speaker , we are discussing two issues here tonight , and they should not be mixed together .
One is the problem of unemployment , which should be dealt with by Member States with the necessary support from the Union and the different social funds - as was pointed out earlier by the Commissioner - but not by more political involvement in the European aircraft industry .
The other is the future of the European aircraft industry .
If there is to be a future , that future must be based upon commercial decisions and the preconditions of the market , not on political discussions in parliaments or in governments .
It is the involvement of too many governments , too many parliaments and too much politics that is creating problems and hindering the decision-making that would make the best of the opportunities open to the European aircraft industry .
The task of Airbus must be to produce and deliver the best aeroplanes in the world , not to deliver political promises from whatever country or from whatever government it is .
I think there is only way to ensure that we can contribute to that .
Of course , we shall have the best possible support for research and science , but we shall also ensure that we can have a functioning market - and a functioning transatlantic market because that is crucial .
It is important to ensure that the responsibility of the aircraft industry and of Airbus , as we are discussing here , is kept within the company and in the management of the company , because otherwise all the decision-making will be split , complicated and bureaucratic and will lead to new failures .
I think we should go for new success and give the company better opportunities by letting it be independent and not involved in political decision-making .
( DE ) Mr President , full order books and its position as Boeing 's competitor for the number one spot on the global market testify to the high level of skills of Airbus ' employees and to their identification with their product .
It is not the workers who are responsible for the mistakes that have been made ; they have done a very good job , and are continuing to do so .
The European aerospace industry will not , in the future , be able to do without this know-how - derived from France , the United Kingdom , Spain and Germany - any more than it has been able to in the past .
Developing and assembling the wings for high-tech aircraft - which is what Airbus does in Bremen , where I live - calls for special skills .
You cannot simply speed ahead regardless in an aeroplane .
What we are dealing with here is grave failures of management .
The failure of highly-paid managers to look far ahead cannot be a reason for sites to be played off against each other , which is what is happening now .
Nor is it acceptable that Airbus should fail to give either its workers or the European Works Council plausible explanations of its decisions .
To me , this makes it plain yet again just how urgent is the need for a revision of the directive on European Works Councils ; it is overdue , to say the very least .
I will also say once more to Mr Hintze that it is not acceptable that development times for new air technology be cut arbitrarily , and those who rely on market considerations alone will pay a bitter price for it .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , how long are the Commission and the Council going to sit there in silent complicity while those who run major companies compensate for their own failings by getting rid of jobs ?
Both the French and German Governments were loath to do anything about it , and , even now , their protestations of opposition to the cuts in jobs are no more than half-hearted and , in the final analysis serve more as a means of striking poses than of finding solutions .
We therefore demand that ' Power 8 ' , described as a renovation programme , be withdrawn .
The Airbus workers in France and Germany must not be played off against one another .
The aerospace industry is so important that not only must its funding be assured , but also the public control of it .
The EU needs to be determined in taking up the cudgels for Airbus .
Low-interest loans secured through the EIB could be used to employ more workers , develop their skills and support research and development .
In any case , we support the workers ' and trade unions ' European day of action to be held in various locations on 16 March and affirm our solidarity with them in their struggle .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to start by expressing my support for all those who work for Airbus or its sub-contractors and who have been told that they now face redundancy .
They are now paying the price for the errors of management and administration and the errors committed by uninvolved shareholders who allowed financial considerations rather than the interests of the industry to carry the day , but the solidarity of workers across Europe will be their strength in getting the restructuring plan reviewed .
This business also shows just what is lacking in European social dialogue , with workers ' representatives completely absent from the decision-making structures .
While this state of affairs is not Europe 's responsibility , Airbus ' status as a flagship and a symbol of European and world industry does mean that a response is expected from Europe , which should say ' yes ' to the injection of public capital into these businesses , ' yes ' to repayable advances ; ' yes ' to loans for research and development ; ' yes ' to taking into account the difficulties presented by the EUR / USD exchange rate and ' yes ' to reforms of business governance and of shareholders ' agreements .
For our tools of intervention , we must use the EIB and the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
At present , it is the skills of its workers that assure the company of a future , so let us do likewise through our support for them .
( Applause )
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to express our profound concern about the current Airbus crisis and our solidarity with the workers affected , who deserve our full support .
I would also like to say that we are hopeful that the Power 8 restructuring programme can relaunch the company and restore the competitiveness of a European project that has represented the future of industrial innovation in the European Union .
We also recommend that we learn from the management mistakes , the unfair competition and the intergovernmental squabbles .
We need the criteria of business and industrial efficiency and the most up-to-date innovations to take precedence over outdated political squabbles .
We also want to be able to tell the Airbus workers in all parts of Europe - also those in Puerto Real , Getafe and Illescas - that the European Parliament is committed to working together with the unions and with the management in order to provide all the assistance they need and encourage them to make it through each day .
We call upon the Commission and the Council to join forces to find a clear and sustainable solution for them .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , honourable Members , I have followed this debate with interest .
Its subject is a serious one .
The question is that of how we are to maintain , in Europe , a strong aerospace industry , and here the principle must apply that businesses do business and politicians make policy , and this distinction is an important one if we are to do justice to the matter in hand .
Various speakers have pointed out that , while Airbus is currently doing well , it does nonetheless have problems to cope with .
That is indeed the case , but we must also look to the future .
For a long time now , the United States have underestimated Europe 's ability to build aircraft , and now , having thrown away their competitive advantage over a considerable period of time , they must regret having done so , while we , in Europe , must watch out in case the same thing happens to us as a consequence of our underestimating Asia .
What that means is that , in times when the European aerospace industry still possesses some strengths - in innovation and finance - it must also develop in such a way that it remains competitive and can cope with future challenges as well as the current problems with the delays in delivering the A380 , the delays in developing the A350 , and the problems arising out of the weakness of the dollar .
It is for the company itself to decide what is right and what is not .
I have to tell the honourable lady Member who spoke earlier that it would never enter my head to say that it was for politicians to prescribe the time required for the development of an aircraft .
For them to do so would be absurd .
That is a decision for the company to take ; it is a technological issue and a business decision , but certainly not a political matter .
Nor , indeed , would I ever tell a company what it should or should not put on the market , but it is clear that , if a company does not judge the market properly , if it does not review it constantly , it is going to end up in trouble .
Since many of you have had something to say about the workers , I would like to point out that the company told us that the slimming-down it intends to carry out will be carried out in a socially responsible manner , that there will be no immediate redundancies , and that the process will be ongoing over many years .
Let me add that it is in Airbus ' interest to conduct in-depth discussions of the necessary restructuring with its workers , who are highly skilled .
The company can win only if it understands the project as a joint one shared between management and workers , if it seeks this dialogue and continues with it .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission shares the concern expressed today that it cannot be good for the future of the European air and space industry if skills and experience are being lost as a result of the biggest company in this sector cutting back jobs .
As we have already said , of course , the Commission will deploy the instruments available to it at European level in order to help the persons affected to cope with the consequences of restructuring .
Members of your House have been quite right to say , as they have done today , that this company 's problems do not in fact have anything to do with the workers ' skills ; that much is not in any way a matter of doubt .

Over and above the steps we are able to take - and will take should it prove necessary to do so - we are currently engaged in taking very decisive action to create equal and fair competitive condition for the European air industry .
On 22 March , the Commission will be making , in writing , a complaint against the USA to the World Trade Organisation , which will serve as a protest against the American state 's open-ended subsidy of Boeing , which amounts to numberless billions .
That , too , is a major indication of our desire to secure the future of the European air and space industry .
The debate is closed .
Council Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0012 / 2007 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Council .
Subject : Further ratification of the EU Constitution
One of German EU Presidency priorities is the continuation of the EU Constitution 's ratification process .
Does the German Presidency already have a road map for the continuation of the constitutional process , in order to adopt a Constitution before the next European elections in 2009 ?
What are the concrete steps which the German Presidency is going to make in order to achieve its goal concerning timely ratification of the Constitution ?
Mr President , honourable Members , further to the mandate conferred on it by the Council at its June 2006 meeting , the German Presidency will be submitting a report in the first six months of 2007 .
The European Council asked that this report should include an evaluation of the progress made in the deliberations on the constitutional treaty and should highlight possible future developments .
In preparation for this report , the presidency is , at the moment , among other things , conducting a series of consultations with representatives from all the Member States , and will , over the coming weeks , be establishing contacts at various levels .
In view of the ongoing nature of its endeavours , the Presidency is not at present able to state precisely what the report will contain and it has no desire to pre-empt it .
( LT ) I thank the Council member for the reply , but the reply does not satisfy me , because that is one of Germany 's priorities .
I have asked some very specific questions and I would nonetheless like the Council member to comment on the document that is being prepared today ( at least its most important , essential points ) .
The only possible way in which I can answer your question , Mrs Andrikienė , is by reference to the procedure .
We have been mandated to produce this report on the basis of in-depth consultations with all the Member States .
This process has not yet been completed .
The report will be presented to the June summit and it is only in June that it will be possible to put the finishing touches to it .
It really would diminish our chances of real progress if I were to make known to the House today any details of the ideas that we might be putting into the report .
All I can say is that we are engaged in a process of consultation , that we will continue to be so until June , and that we will , then , produce a comprehensive report , which will , of course , indicate what further steps might be taken , but it goes without saying that that must be a decision for the European Council .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is a point of order which I feel it is necessary to clarify from the outset .
For this question , we have had a request for five supplementary questions .
I have some 100 questions for the Council , not all of which will be answered , but I shall endeavour to ensure that the Council answer as many as possible .
Consequently , I can only give the floor to two Members of the House per question and naturally I shall use the usual criterion of seeking to alternate between political groups .
Thank you , President-in-Office , for your answer .
I , for one , was very happy with it , but deliberately did not say very much .
However , as you are talking about a consultation process , will you accept that , as part of the consultation , you should listen to those who think that a revisiting of a constitution or , indeed , a constitutional treaty is not a very good idea ?
We look forward to your report , but please open your minds to excluding , as well as including , certain things .
Do you accept that , sir ?
This consultation process obliges us to form opinions on a very broad basis and to accept all proposals and reports that we receive from the individual countries .
The only question is as to what finds its way into our overall report , but we can decide that only as and when we have a complete overview .
( LT ) At the last Leaders ' Summit , Poland expressed dissatisfaction regarding the method of reaching decisions , believing that it does not serve Poland 's interests .
There are also certain countries that are unhappy with the way members are appointed to the Commission , and the number of Commissioners .
Can this be looked at , and will it have an influence on further review and change of the Constitution ?
Mr President , honourable Members , the proposal for a framework decision on the combating of racism and xenophobia is one of the German Presidency 's priorities in the area of justice and home affairs .
The Article 36 Committee , in January 2007 , examined this instrument on the basis of a German compromise proposal , which is itself largely founded on the Luxembourg compromise proposal from 2005 , which the great majority of the delegation saw as a potentially sound basis for an agreement on the framework decision .
Moreover , this issue was raised on the margins of the Council meeting of 15 February 2007 in Brussels , when it came up during lunch .
The presidency intends , on the basis of these deliberations , to produce a revised text and to present it to the Council during its meeting on 19 April 2007 .

deputising author . - ( NL ) Although I am indebted to you for answering the question , there is still something I should like to learn from you .
You said that the subject will be raised again on 17 April , but could you give us an outline of the concrete steps we can expect of the German Presidency in the next three months ?
Also , if these cannot be expected , what do you think the handover of the dossier to Portugal will signify in terms of progress ?
I can in fact do no more than repeat that the actual step we intend to take on 19 April - that being the submission of a revised draft of the framework decision - is an important step forwards .
The text of this framework decision will make clear just what functions are incumbent on the Member States as regards the stepping up of the fight against racism and xenophobia .
( DE ) I wish to raise a rather practical question that has emerged in the course of our discussions on this subject .
It has to do with the collision between two philosophies .
On the one hand , as in Austria and in Germany too , there are laws that make certain statements subject to penal sanctions , while , on the other , in other European countries , the principle of free expression of opinion can be said to take precedence over such regulations .
What stage have the Council 's discussions on this issue reached ?
I do believe , Mr Leichtfried , that you are right .
There is no contradicting your contention that there is here a conflict between these two interests , and that it is difficult to reconcile them .
It is for that reason that the framework decision will leave the individual Member States a great deal of leeway in taking their practical decisions in line with their own country 's legal culture .
For example , the framework decision will refrain from making statements concerning specific historical events , the denial of which might then be made subject to penalties .
That will be a matter on which each country must decide for itself , although the framework decision must certainly make some statement to the effect that the public approval , denial or minimisation of genocides , war crimes or crimes against humanity is to be made punishable .
The precise expression and justification of what constitutes such an offence and whatever must be added to that in the view of an individual country , will certainly remain a matter for the Member States , and this framework decision will not be able to make specific enactments on the subject .
( LT ) I am still trying to get a clear picture of what is intended to be achieved during the term of Germany 's presidency .
During Luxembourg 's presidency , it was not possible to reach agreement .
Do I understand correctly that an effort will be made to at least minimally harmonise the statutes governing penalties for spreading racist and xenophobic information , or will it be something else ?

At their informal meetings between 14 and 16 January in Dresden , the ministers of justice and internal affairs agreed that consideration of the issue of violent videos and games would initially take the form of a review of the various national rules and regulations on the subject , the intention being that the planned inventory of national rules currently in force should serve as the basis for a comparison of the protection standards , interventions and sanctions available , and afford the Member States some insight into which system might be best .
Since then , the Council Presidency has drafted a questionnaire , the purpose of which is to summarise the legal position in the Member States as regards media - specifically videos , computer games and films - that glorify violence .
The questionnaire is comprehensive and covers the regulations on the protection of the young , as well as general prohibitions in criminal law and in other legislation , both those specifically intended to protect the young and the systems of labelling for age .
The questionnaire will also touch on the problematic aspect of the degree to which the free expression of opinion is guaranteed by the various national legal systems .
Finally , the questionnaire is also intended to consider those violent games that are prohibited in the Member States and of which a separate list needs to be compiled .
The intention is that the questionnaire should be sent to the Member States in the immediate future , with their responses being - as requested - received by April , and that the evaluation of the survey at the end of the first half of 2007 should help to achieve the goal of an EU-wide safety standard in this area .
( EL ) Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply , I wish him good luck in collecting replies to the questionnaire and I congratulate him on the short timetable .
My question does not concern the age limits , as the President-in-Office said ; it concerns the correlation between a ban and the internal market .
I have an example from my country , which banned gambling and has been condemned by the Court of Justice of the European Communities on internal market grounds .
You have also raised the question of freedom of expression , which is also an issue which will prevent the ban .
I think , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , that you have a perfect understanding of what we want to do , namely to achieve a single common standard of protection across the EU .
At the moment , however , I am able only to describe how we are going to do that .
What we are going to do , basically , is to look for best practice .
Regulations in the EU , have , indeed , been very diverse up to now , and our idea is that this questionnaire should be used to ascertain what works , and how , as well as what experience has been gained - and where - in order to achieve a uniform standard of protection across the EU by simply comparing and see what common ground emerges .
In view of the great differences between practice in the various countries , we really do not think there is any practical way of doing this other than by , in the first instance , conducting such an inquiry and then looking for examples of best practice .
( SV ) The questioner wants to see age limits put on games .
There already exists a partly EU-funded PG marking .
In my own country of Sweden , all computer games are age-labelled , and there is cooperation between the industry and the states concerned , the age limits in question being + 3 , + 7 , + 12 , + 16 , and + 18 years .
What is more , all computer games come with descriptions of their content in terms of discrimination , drugs , bad language , sex and nudity , violence and elements that may be frightening or horrific .
An excellent system is now in place , and , as I say , the EU is involved in funding it .
I should like both the Council and Parliament to study this system so that we might debate it when our agenda includes the report on children that is being produced by the Commission right now .
Practically at a stroke , you have answered the whole form and put the case for the Swedish system .
That is of course permissible , and we are happy to take that on board , but we will - and I am sure that you will understand this - have to obtain information about other systems , some of which work and some of which do not , before we can come to a decision on a proper common approach for the whole of the EU .
We will , however , be examining your experience with great attention .
( EL ) Mr President , I wish to point out that there is a mistake in the translation of the title of my question .
I am not asking about age limits , I am asking about the link between the ban and the rules of the internal market .
The clarification will naturally be noted .
( DE ) I would be interested to know whether it might be possible to set up a Europe-wide intelligence unit to which we might report by electronic means those things that strike us a particularly objectionable ?
Further to my statement just now that we are at present at what might be called the inventory stage , I shall simply take your proposal as an addition to the various examples that we are currently collecting , and say that I am very grateful for it .
Subject : Combating corruption
Article 9 of Council Framework Decision 2003 / 568 / JHA on combating corruption in the private sector requires Member States to transmit to the Council and the Commission by July 2005 the text of provisions transposing its obligations into national law .
On the basis of a report established using this information and a written report from the Commission , the Council was due to assess by 22 October 2005 the extent to which Member States have complied with its provisions .
Has the Council done this assessment ?
In particular , has the Council received full information on the transposition into UK law of the 2003 Framework Decision , and why does it think there have been no UK prosecutions of foreign bribery ?
In what way does the Council believe that the UK Government 's decision in December 2006 to drop the inquiry into corruption in BAE Systems ' Al Yamamah arms deal with Saudi Arabia is ( a ) compliant with UK obligations under the EU Framework Decision , ( b ) compliant with UK obligations under the 1997 OECD anti-bribery convention , and ( c ) helpful in the EU 's attempts to eliminate corruption in trade deals around the world ?

The Council has not yet received the Commission 's report on the transposition of the Framework Decision 2003 / 568 / JI on combating corruption in the private sector into the domestic law of the Member States , and it is for that reason that it has not yet examined the question as to whether the Member States have done as they are required to do by the provisions of this framework decision .
The Council has , however , received information concerning the transposition of the 2003 framework decision on corruption in the private sector into UK law .
The Council is reviewing , in accordance with Article 9 of the framework decision , the degree to which the Member States have adopted legislation implementing it .
The Council is not , however , obliged to examine the manner in which procedures are conducted in the Member States , nor is it required to make statements relating to the obligations imposed on the Member States by the OECD convention to which the honourable Member referred .
deputising for the author . - The allegation is that a British company , BAE Systems , corruptly paid bribes in order to win a competitive advantage over other European defence contractors in Saudi Arabia and that an independent investigation of this behaviour has been stopped by the UK Government .
Surely this not only breaches countless principles of the European Union , but also competition policy rules as well .
Has the Council considered calling on the Commission to take infringement action against the UK Government , and if not , why not ?
What does it take to get the Council to point the finger at one of its own members ?
Mr Davies , we have to consider very carefully what rights the Council possesses in this regard .

So far as we are informed , the BAE Systems case , to which you refer , has to do with the possible bribery of foreign officials , but it is precisely this that is not regulated ; although there are rules applicable to bribery in the private sector , there are none applicable to the bribery of officials , and certainly not to that of foreign officials .
That being so , the Council is not bound to do anything about this .
( DE ) I should like to ask you , Minister , whether the Presidency takes the view that it might be appropriate to discuss with the Commission new measures whereby more might be done in the fight against corruption .
We know that the level of corruption in the various EU countries varies widely , and it would be good if we could do something together to bring it down in all of them .

It goes without saying , Mr Paleckis , that the current presidency is , like its predecessors , very much interested in stepping up the fight and campaign against corruption in whatever form and in whatever country .
As I said , of course , in the first part of my answer , the Commission 's report on the implementation of the Framework Decision is not yet with us in its written form .
I think it would be sensible to wait for this report and then to examine and analyse it in order to see whether , and if so where , things have been left undone or new things need to be , and then to take a decision , but I do think your point is an important one and that it seems quite possible that we will find such omissions and then have to take action .
Subject : European Cervical Cancer Manifesto
I would like to draw attention to the European Cervical Cancer Prevention Week in January and the launch of a manifesto to stop cervical cancer .
The content of the manifesto contains four elements .
The first is to work diligently to implement effective population-based organised cervical cancer screening programmes in accordance with the EU Guidelines on Quality Assurance in Cervical Cancer Screening , together with professionally organised public health education programmes to ensure that all women take full advantage of the services that are available to them .
The second is to facilitate the exchange of best practice between Member States so that the world-class expertise that exists in some Member States can be applied uniformly across the European Union .
The third is to support independent population-based research to establish the most appropriate means for implementing the available new technologies within public health programmes and thereby ensure the most effective reductions in cervical cancer across the European Union .
The fourth is to recognise and support the essential role played by charities , non-governmental organisations and volunteers in the ongoing reduction of cervical cancer in Europe .
Does the German Presidency support this manifesto and if so how will it work to ensure its effective implementation throughout the EU ?
I am obliged to the honourable Member for drawing attention to this important issue .
I would also refer her to the Council 's answer to Mrs Dičkutė 's written question .
In its conclusions on women 's health on 2 June 2006 , recorded in Official Journal C 146 of 22 June 2006 , the Council acknowledged that cervical cancer is a disease exclusively occurring in women , something also stated in the text of the statement .
The Council has emphasised the great importance of targeted approaches in dealing with women 's diseases , and the Commission is asking for support in the exchange of information and experience relating to best practice in gender-sensitive promotion of health and prevention of illness .
Collection of data and exchange of information and best practice relating to cervical cancer are among the measures the funding of which is envisaged under the Community action programme on public health for the period 2003-2008 , which is currently under discussion .
The German Presidency is determined to broker a final agreement between the Council and your House ensuring the implementation of the programmes with effect from 1 January 2008 .
Thank you for that reply , President-in-Office .
The Council will be aware that a new vaccine is now available that can protect thousands of women against cervical cancer .
In fact , estimates indicate that about 32 000 cancers in women could be prevented by this vaccine .
Given this , can the Council assure this House that a vaccination programme will be implemented as widely as possible throughout all 27 of the EU Member States , and can you also give assurances that a comprehensive programme of education and information will be implemented to ensure that all parents are fully aware of the benefits of such a programme ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) The honourable Member is right : the licensing of this vaccine to protect against human papillomavirus does indeed represent important progress in the prevention of cervical cancer .
After all , it is claimed that the vaccine affords protection from this cancer in 96-100 % of cases .
This vaccine is still very new , however , and - as the honourable Member also mentioned - any vaccination and information strategies are still in the early stages of development .
Therefore , the emphasis is still on the exchange of know-how and experience at the moment .
Nevertheless , we also believe that protection can be significantly improved by means of information campaigns and the implementation of the existing screening guidelines on the subject .
Subject : Accession negotiations with Croatia
How does the Council view the current state of the accession negotiations with Croatia and what further progress is planned for the current year such as the opening and closing of new chapters ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Posselt , in its conclusions of 11 December 2006 , the Council assured Croatia of its recognition of the country 's progress , whilst emphasising that the accession negotiations had started well and results were starting to emerge .
At the same time , the Council emphasised that Croatia must now build on the progress to date .
The progress made by the candidate country continues to dictate the tempo of the accession negotiations .
As the Presidency has told Croatia , including within the framework of the third meeting of the Stabilisation and Association Council on 6 March , the Croatian Government should pay particular attention to accelerating its reform of the judicial system and of the public administration .
Of Croatia 's outstanding commitments arising from the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , the Council has highlighted state aid and the acquisition of property .
The Council welcomes the fact that Croatia is continuing to cooperate unconditionally with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia , and emphasises that it must do so also in future .
At the same time , the Croatian judiciary needs to improve the prosecution and conviction of war criminals .
Croatia must also step up its efforts in the field of good neighbourly relations , including the efforts to be made towards resolving outstanding bilateral issues , particularly border disputes .
The Council has already completed the screening process for 22 negotiating chapters .
In respect of seven of these chapters , benchmarks have been laid down that are to be met by Croatia as a precondition for the opening of negotiations .
Croatia has been asked directly to submit its negotiating position on each of the remaining 15 chapters to the Accession Conference .
As regards the opening and closing of negotiating chapters in the accession negotiations , two chapters - science and research and education and culture - have been opened and closed again temporarily .
Three more negotiating chapters - economic and monetary policy , enterprise and industrial policy , and customs union - have been opened .
In addition , both parties ' negotiating positions on Chapter 7 - intellectual property law - have been submitted , and this is expected to be opened shortly .
Croatia has submitted its negotiating position on five of the other chapters to the Conference .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , as rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on the accession of Croatia , I hope it will be possible to conclude the negotiations by the next European elections at the latest , so that Croatia can participate .
My specific question is as follows : does the President-in-Office think it conceivable that a further eight or so chapters could be opened under the German Presidency , and can he really assure me that a tougher line is not being taken with Croatia than with other candidate countries ?
Parliament sometimes has the impression that , with Croatia , an attempt is being made to make up for some of the precision that previous enlargements lacked .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Posselt , at the very least , you can be assured that Croatia will receive absolutely fair treatment .
If you are thinking of the framework conditions for the negotiations with Turkey , for example , you are right , of course , that the instrument of negotiations has changed over time ; and , if you are thinking of the newly introduced benchmarks , for example , it is indeed true that the framework and the instruments have evolved .
This is not something that is peculiar to Croatia , however , but will of course apply to all future accession negotiations , including those with the Western Balkan countries - who also hope to see their negotiations opened at some stage .
This is not a case of applying a special law to Croatia , therefore , but instead reflects the evolution of the instruments for European enlargement as a whole .
Regarding the honourable Member 's request for predictions , I have to say that predictions are hard to make .
I can only tell you in general terms that we have found Croatia , on the whole , to be a very conscientious , very committed negotiating partner , and that , regardless of any other ideas as to political framework or timing , we are endeavouring to make swift progress with the negotiations .
I have of course mentioned the state of play in the negotiations - which is excellent .
If you consider that Croatia made its application for membership as recently as 2003 , attained the status of candidate country in 2004 , and started negotiating last October , this is quite astonishingly rapid progress - even compared to the latest negotiation processes with the 12 countries that have now joined the EU .
We are assuming that both sides are interested in continuing this rapid progress .
( DE ) The President-in-Office also mentioned Turkey - he even made a direct comparison .
Here , some negotiating chapters have been suspended , or it has been decided not to open any more .
Does the Council believe that the negotiation process is really progressing at a different speed , or is this basically just a formal measure whose effects will be felt at some stage ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Rack , as you know , there was a specific background to the suspension of the negotiations on certain chapters .
Solving this problem so that we can return to a normal rhythm is in the hands of the Republic of Turkey .
Of course , one thing is true . The whole strategy of negotiations with Turkey is governed by different rules again from those for the other negotiations to date - including those now being conducted in parallel - in that a consensus decision must be taken every time a chapter is opened or closed .
The decision of October 2005 enables all Member States to play a particularly strong , even controlling , role themselves in the negotiations - which was indeed the basis for the consensus on opening negotiations in the first place .
Turkey , too , understands this and has approved this approach and procedure .
It cannot be said , therefore , that Turkey is receiving unfair treatment ; it is more a case that a consensus could not have been reached otherwise .
Both sides have approved this consensus .
( DE ) It is known that regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations form part of European policy .
The President-in-Office has mentioned that there are a number of problems with Croatia 's relations with other countries , for example border disputes .
As the President-in-Office sees it , who bears greater responsibility for the fact that these border agreements have yet to be signed , Croatia or its neighbouring countries ?
I would prefer to avoid apportioning blame , Mr Paleckis .
This has been our policy for all the other accession processes .
We have always said that there is a Copenhagen criterion that states that good neighbourly relations must be organised .
A precondition for this is that any problems with a country 's neighbours must be resolved .
As long as a country does not ask us to intervene in any way , we assume that the country is attempting to solve these problems itself , as this is a precondition for the enlargement process and the accession process itself .
We should not , at this stage , be pursuing a different policy with Croatia from the one we pursued in the past with the other 12 countries , who all resolved their neighbourhood and border problems on their own responsibility .
This also goes for the Baltic States , even though there are unfortunately some additional things to be regulated there now .
This is good practice , however , and should not be avoided .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , many thanks for permitting me to answer these questions together , as they belong together in terms of their subject matter .
My answer is as follows . The Council can confirm that the restrictive measures against the Zimbabwean Government will be continued in their present form .
On 19 February 2007 , they were extended by a further year .
The Council monitored the situation in Zimbabwe closely throughout last year , but was unable to detect any improvement with regard to the criteria it had established as a precondition for the resumption of dialogue .
The Council is monitoring the humanitarian and social situation in Zimbabwe very closely .
Humanitarian aid , including food aid , is being provided where needed .
The Council is paying particular attention to the human rights situation in Zimbabwe .
In September 2006 , following violent attacks on demonstrating trade unionists , a declaration was issued calling on the Government of Zimbabwe , ' to stop intimidation and assault and to respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of its citizens ' .
In this connection , the EU made express reference to the African Charter on Human and Peoples ' Rights to which Zimbabwe , too , was a signatory .
The Presidency reacted immediately to the violent break-up of a peaceful , church-sponsored rally in Harare on 11 March 2007 , during which one participant was killed , several were injured and many were arrested , with a statement .
It expressed its concern about the criminalising by the Zimbabwean authorities of this peaceful rally , and urged that the persons arrested be released immediately and that they be given access to legal assistance and medical care .
There is no doubt that the crisis in Zimbabwe has had a negative economic and social impact on the whole region for years .
Regarding the role of South Africa , the Council assumes that this country is monitoring the political , economic and social developments in Zimbabwe very closely and working on solving the problem with the means at its disposal .
deputising for the author . - Mr President , the extension of the restrictions in Zimbabwe is very welcome , but given the catalogue of human rights abuses , including the recent mistreatment of Morgan Tsvangirai and his colleagues , and given the possibility that the current regime may well remain in place after elections at the end of this month , how does the Council intend to handle the African Union 's insistence that all its Member States participate in the EU-Africa summit , scheduled for Lisbon in December ?
deputising for the author . - Thank you , President-in-Office , for your response .
Following the arrest of Morgan Tsvangirai last Sunday , it was not until Tuesday - yesterday - that he was arraigned before a court and given access to medical treatment .
We all know about the human rights abuses that have taken place - they have been well catalogued over the last few months - but there are also the effects on the human population : 3.5 million refugees have left Zimbabwe .
Furthermore , last Saturday the price of a loaf of bread was 3000 Zimbabwean dollars and today it is 9000 .
There is 80 % unemployment .
Is it not now time that neighbouring countries , like South Africa , took a firm stance with Zimbabwe and the corrupt regime of Robert Mugabe ?
Your supplementary questions are very much appreciated .
Since it is so very topical , perhaps I might begin with what has happened to the opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai .
According to the most up-to-date information , the 14 persons who had been arrested but not injured - having , as required , appeared in court - were then sent home again , since the court evidently realised that there was no case to answer against them .
Mr Tsvangirai , however , who is evidently seriously injured , has not yet been sent home .
According to the latest information , he has sustained a fractured skull , has lost a great deal of blood , and is at present in intensive care .
Another eleven persons were also injured in the course of being arrested , and were for that reason unable to appear at what might , if one were to use such modern terminology to describe it , be called the custody hearing .
It is as yet unclear what has become of them .
We are of course working on the assumption that they , like the uninjured persons , have also been set free .
I want to take this opportunity to reiterate that the Council Presidency has expressed its great concern about this mistreatment and the serious injuries sustained by opposition leaders in the following terms : ' The Presidency once more emphasises the responsibility of the Zimbabwean Government for the safety and freedom from bodily harm of the arrested persons , and it will continue to observe closely what happens in Zimbabwe ' .
We are , then , determined to maintain an active interest in the area in view of these dramatic developments .

While still on this subject , I want to address two other matters , firstly the behaviour of the other African states , in which , of course , people know what the Mugabe regime is like , and are well aware that this dramatic turn of events in Zimbabwe - where unemployment is running at 80 % and inflation has gone over the 5 000 % mark - will have a dangerous effect on the whole region .
It is , however , precisely because this development is so threatening that different states are responding in different ways .
The response of the community of African states is not uniform ; for example , South Africa , which is certainly affected by what is going on , is putting its trust in quiet diplomacy , which it wants to use as a means of avoiding a breach between it and a state that is a neighbour , and a very important one at that .
This is , without a doubt , motivated by economic interests .
We also see reciprocity at work here , in that , the firmer the international pressure and the stronger the condemnation of the Mugabe regime in Zimbabwe , the more cautious the African states become , and the more they practise what they might well term African solidarity .
We simply have to bear this in mind and try to deal with the situation in an intelligent manner - which brings me to the other supplementary question , which had to do with the preparations for the EU-Africa summit in Lisbon , which is scheduled for December .
At the moment , we are prioritising the preparation of the substance of this important summit , and we regard this , indeed , as the most important task of our presidency .
There are , of course , still a number of other problematic African issues that will certainly demand our attention in the course of this year , and that is why we believe we have to do a great deal of work , in the first six months of it , on preparing the ground for this Africa Summit .
The decision on who is to be invited to attend the summit will be taken rather later on in the year , and it is for this reason that we will be paying careful attention to what is currently going on in Zimbabwe , but no decision has as yet been taken on who is actually going to be invited , and so I am unable to answer this question at the present time .

Minister , I think we would all welcome the renewal of the sanctions against Zimbabwe , but it is clear that much more needs to be done , not least in the light of the wanton abuses of human rights demonstrated by last week 's actions against the opposition .
Will the Council in particular maximise pressure on Zimbabwe 's neighbours ?
Are they not the key to this matter ?
You talk euphemistically about South Africa applying silent diplomacy , but is the truth of the matter not that South Africa has been propping up this regime for years , and that you are being far too timid in your response to South Africa and need to apply real pressure there ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) I have just addressed this subject in some detail , admittedly in a rather descriptive form , by explaining the relevant sensitivities in the realm of African countries , particularly within the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) , which has competence in the region .
We are conducting a dialogue with the SADC countries on the subject , which we shall continue .
In our experience , however , simply increasing the pressure is not conducive to improving the way African countries deal with Zimbabwe - almost the reverse is the case : it gives rise to instinctive African solidarity .
We have not yet found an answer to how to deal with this , but we shall of course continue our intensive dialogue with the SADC countries - including with South Africa , of course - as we have no idea as yet what the reaction to these recent occurrences will be .
This is against the background of Robert Mugabe 's announcement that he may now run for office again .
No responses to this have been forthcoming from Africa as yet , but these responses will be very important in aiding a decision on how to react .
Subject : Article 301 of the Turkish Criminal Code
For the entire period preceding the funeral service of the murdered Armenian journalist Hrant Dink ( Istanbul , 23 January 2007 ) the thousands of demonstrators following his coffin were calling for the abolition of Article 301 of the Turkish Criminal Code concerning ' denigration of Turkishness ' .
However , no pressure exerted to date has led to this article being amended .
Does the Council agree that , as the recent murder of Hrant Dink has shown , those charged under Article 301 automatically become targets ?
What immediate measures will the Council take with a view to having Article 301 of the Turkish Criminal Code amended ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) The European Union reacted immediately to the tragic news of the murder of Hrant Dink .
In its statement , the Presidency expressed its conviction that the Turkish authorities will identify and arrest the persons responsible for this abominable murder as quickly as possible , and that Turkey will steadfastly continue along the path towards fully realising freedom of expression .
As the author is no doubt aware , the Council has emphasised repeatedly how important it considers freedom of expression .
Further continuous efforts are required to ensure that there is freedom of expression in Turkey in line with the European Convention on Human Rights and the relevant case law of the European Court of Human Rights .
The EU has raised the particular issue of Article 301 of the Turkish Criminal Code and other imprecisely worded articles systematically at all levels within the framework of the ongoing reform process in Turkey .
At the most recent meeting of the EU-Turkey Association Council , the EU made it clear that Turkey must alter the imprecisely worded articles in line with the relevant EU standards in case judges and public prosecutors adhere to a restrictive interpretation of these provisions .
We expect the tragic murder of Hrant Dink to mark a turning point that brings substantial changes in the Criminal Code .
The author can also rest assured that the Union will continue to monitor developments in this field attentively and if necessary raise the issue at all levels .
Progress in this key area is of prime importance for the general progress of the accession negotiations .
deputising for the author . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like to inform you that just yesterday the public prosecutor instituted proceedings for denigration of Turkishness against Attila Yayla , a professor of political sciences , who was suspended from the University of Gazi in Ankara because he called Kemalism a backward ideology .
The prosecution clearly makes targets of the defendants .
In Dink 's case , the fact that he was acquitted by the court did not prevent fanatics from murdering him .
Consequently , the Council cannot wait for court rulings in order to demand that the Turkish Criminal Code be amended .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Triantaphyllides , you will understand that I cannot go into detail here today on something that happened yesterday ; although the things you say do unfortunately confirm the continued necessity of the things I have mentioned .
There is a clear need to conduct this dialogue at all levels - and I have explained that we are doing so - and also to put pressure on Turkey to adapt its standards and legislation on this to European standards .
This is crucial for the chances of success of the accession negotiations .
At present , this is the most important instrument at the Council 's disposal , and we are using it .
( EL ) Mr President , I have listened carefully to the reply given by the President-in-Office of the Council to Mr Papadimoulis .
I fear that we are confining the issue solely to the tragic case of the murder of Hrant Dink .
I believe that the European Union and the Member States must - and here the German Presidency must play its part - we must all together see the dangerous proportions which the development of the nationalistic climate in Turkey is taking on .
Starting in the area of Trapezounta , a broader nationalistic climate is developing today which cuts across the political parties and is jeopardising not only the life of intellectuals , journalists , men of letters and artists , but also delicate internal democratic balances and , of course , Turkey 's progress towards the European Union .
( The President cut off the speaker )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) The honourable Member 's words further illustrate the problem of the imprecision of Turkish legislation .
This goes for not only Article 301 of the Turkish Criminal Code , but also the anti-terror legislation .
This imprecision is not just a legal , but also a political problem , because it can suddenly be put to a different use depending on the prevailing mood or on political developments .
For this reason , we are urging our Turkish counterparts to make changes in these very areas , in order to establish some degree of legal certainty and to avoid a situation in which certain agitation or certain trends in Turkish politics lead to changes in people 's legal certainty .
This is our important objective .
The honourable Member can rest assured that we shall continue to work towards this objective with great commitment .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )
Appointments to interparliamentary delegations ( proposal by the Conference of Presidents ) : see Minutes
Hepatitis C ( written statement ) : see Minutes
Reform of EU trade policy instruments ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Mr Barón Crespo , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the Commission Green Paper and public consultation on a possible reform of EU trade policy instruments B6-0009 / 2007 ) .
deputising for the author . - Mr President , we have asked for this debate to examine the background and the purpose of the Green Paper adopted by the Commission on 6 December 2006 .
With the Green Paper , the Commission intends to stimulate a debate over the use of trade defence instruments in Europe : countervailing , anti-dumping and safeguard measures .
I believe that this is a commendable initiative and I am convinced of the value of this debate .
We need to talk much more about trade policy and about the choices made by the European Commission and by the Council and we need to ensure that decisions are properly discussed before this Parliament .
We need to give this Parliament more power and to make trade policy more subject to democratic scrutiny .
We are all living through a moment which many view as some sort of crisis period .
We are living through a time when Europeans are asking themselves : what does Europe represent and why do we need such a complicated thing as the European Union in the first place ?
And , when these legitimate concerns are raised , the importance of the role of a united EU in the globalised world and the importance of having a single voice to represent and defend the interests of 500 million citizens in any negotiation with other trade partners in the world market are vital factors to be considered .
Global trade and its impact on the lives of our citizens and on the future of our businesses , big , medium-sized and small , play an essential role in the anxieties felt by many over what we usually call ' globalisation ' .
And , while many of us believe that some of the criticism is no more than cheap demagogy , we must understand those anxieties and we must oppose pure determinism in the way this new world develops , in the way trade takes place , in the way wealth and poverty are distributed .
Europeans who lose their jobs when a company suddenly decides to move eastwards in search of higher profits cannot simply be told that times have changed and that they cannot stand in the way of progress .
They want to know what is going on and they must have their voice heard by those that ultimately decide .
We should not forget that there is more than one recipe for economic growth and trade development .
It is a matter of policy options whether the future of Europe belongs only to huge retail corporations and to importers or whether we can preserve a model compatible with our most essential social and environmental concerns .
Our strong belief in free trade is perfectly compatible with the need to ask for a level playing field .
Even the most peaceful countries in the world - and Europe among them - know that a full commitment to peace does not necessarily mean that armies are abolished and all means of defence are to be destroyed .
So , we say yes to the huge benefits of free trade in our open world and we say yes to the fair implementation of the rules on which this global trade is based .
We welcome the Green Paper , which has the merit of opening a debate on this subject .
Its text and the questions it raises already assume that something must be done to modify the current Community trade defence system .
This might be true .
The recent footwear case has shown that the risk of deadlocks is real .
They are clearly of no benefit to anybody .
Nobody here is blindly defending inefficient European production or supporting a protectionist approach to this highly sensitive matter .
Trade defence reform can be considered , if it is to be made more effective and more transparent .
The Green Paper can be a good starting point if all the stakeholders ' views are properly taken into consideration and if the Commission and the Council do not entrench themselves behind preconceived ideological positions .
The decision-making process can also be improved and we need to ensure that decisions are taken by Member States based on the well-founded research carried out by independent Community bodies , rather than on the basis of national interests , or , if you prefer , national selfishness .
It is therefore important to improve and reinforce trade defence instruments instead of watering them down .
On the other side , a fresh approach can be made to less traditional threats to a balanced and free world trade .
Practices such as so-called social or environmental dumping need also to be confronted and , when necessary , new means of tackling them should be seriously considered as a matter of Community interest .
The following are the questions I would like Mr Mandelson to respond to tonight .
Firstly , the Doha negotiations have been restarted and I sincerely hope that they will result in a clear success .
In this respect , would it not have been better to wait for the successful conclusion of multilateral negotiations before starting this exercise , which might weaken our position in Geneva ?
Secondly , can Mr Mandelson explain why his services are already applying quite a few questionable innovations mentioned in the Green Paper , even before the public consultation has come to an end and without any discussions either before the Council , or before this Parliament ?
Thirdly , since the new trade defence system proposed by the Commission assigns a role to all possible interested parties , including those not related to the production of goods falling under the scope of the investigation , do you not believe that the time has come to allow trade unions to lodge a complaint , as foreseen by the WTO anti-dumping agreement ?
I conclude by formally asking Mr Mandelson to provide assurances that the European Parliament will be kept informed at all stages of the process and that the views expressed by its members will be fully taken into account when discussing this highly sensitive matter .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I do not think I have ever been asked to reply , in any Parliament in which I have been President-in-Office , to an opening question or a speech with which I have agreed more than the speech I have just listened to .
In terms of its description of the spirit , purpose and context of this exercise , I must say I thought the honourable Member captured in every respect what we are doing most accurately and well .
The only stage at which , I have to say , I somewhat part company is when he asks me why our services - DG Trade - are applying new rules before the conclusion of the review .
I have absolutely no idea what instances or issues he is referring to , and I would be pleased to hear because I do not know of any .
On 29 May last year , I informed the European Parliament of the necessity to review our trade defence instruments .
I am pleased to be able to be back here and to update you on this process .
We are now coming to the end of the consultation that we launched in December .
That consultation solicited opinion from Member States , business , NGOs , individuals and , of course , the European Parliament .
What it did not do in any way was question the importance of trade defence instruments .
TDI is necessary to combat unfair trade in an international economy that has no international equivalent to the competition rules we take for granted in our own domestic economies .
TDI , in my view , is the flip side of an open economy .
It is the guarantee that others will not abuse that openness by trading unfairly .
The Green Paper asks if we could use TDI better , if our tools have adapted to a changing global economy and whether our rules could be clearer and operate more transparently .
I think the justification for such an exercise is pretty obvious .
The last review of our trade defence instruments was in 1996 , and a lot has changed in the ways EU companies operate and as regards the role of global supply chains in our economy .
Many more EU companies now produce goods wholly or partially outside the EU for import into the EU .
These changes challenge traditional understanding of what constitutes EU production and the EU 's economic interests .
They make a definition of European workers ' interests harder to write , as cases are more complex .
Because these interests overall are those in which trade defence is rooted , that is good reason to assess the way we work and the way those rules operate .
But the Green Paper launched a consultation ; it contains no recommendations for reform and is not intended to .
It puts forward a set of questions .
I have repeatedly emphasised that this is an open process and I have no preconceived ideas .
There was a question asked of me about the intentions behind the six categories of question in the consultation paper .
They are designed simply to put the various issues in context .
Some are linked to the impact of globalisation on our trade defence system .
Others , especially those related to transparency , were raised by stakeholders and experts with whom I had informal discussions in July last year .
So there are no intentions beyond the desire for intelligent debate and to rebuild the consensus and solidarity that has underpinned TDI and has come under strain in some recent cases .
I fully echo the honourable Member 's initial observation : we need to replace national selfishness with European solidarity , and that is what I hope to rebuild through the process of this review .
I do not come to you today with substantive proposals because that is not my role at this stage .
Right now , we are listening .
The scope of any proposed changes will depend on what we hear .
Somebody asked how this review fits with our attempts to reform anti-dumping rules in the WTO .
The honourable Member reflected that question .
Actually , it is a rather good question .
It is vital to push through the WTO to ensure others match the kind of standards we apply to ourselves .
We are doing that and we will keep doing that in the DDA negotiations .
But EU legislation on TDI already goes beyond WTO requirements in many ways .
The most obvious examples are the compulsory lesser duty rule and the Community interest test which we apply in all investigations .
These are rules we introduced because they make the system work better in the wider EU interest .
Of course we will push others to adopt similar rules , but reform at the international level is difficult and some of our key partners are , frankly , stubborn .
So long as our refinements do not put us at a competitive disadvantage , so long as they reflect the EU 's economic interests , why should we not pursue further reform ?
That point relates to the question about the EU 's general posture on anti-dumping .
Are we protectionist or do we follow a ' response and defence ' approach ?
In my view , protectionism is the shielding of a domestic industry from foreign competition , from fair competition - tough competition , yes , but fair nonetheless .
That is not the intention of EU TDI policy and I will , of course , remain vigilant on that .
We are not going to see our trade defence instruments turned into measures to protect EU industry from fair , legitimate competition .
A protectionist does not recognise the difference between tough competition and unfair competition .
We do . Our system does .
That is the difference between protection and protectionism .
The EU process is complaint driven .
We act only when EU industry can provide sufficient evidence that they are threatened by unfair trade , but we defend European production only against unfair trade , and we are bound by law to ensure that any trade defence measure is truly in the wider European economic interest .
We are prudent and we are restrained but , above all , we are objective and dispassionate .
A number of questions have gone right to this issue of making sure that TDI is effective and serves Europe 's growth and competitiveness agenda .
As you know , this review is part of the global Europe framework policy that I launched last year , which is explicitly intended to put EU trade policy at the service of this growth and job strategy .
Beyond saying that , I think TDI can and should be part of our wider strategy for ensuring that EU companies compete on a level playing field internationally .
I think it is for stakeholders to suggest how well the system is working to that end , and that is the purpose of the review .
The question about the effectiveness of our measures is a good one .
The possibility of review of trade defence measures always exists and measures cannot be extended without clear evidence that they are functioning as intended .
The Commission also undertakes internal analysis to ensure the effectiveness of its work .
DG Trade has recently started to analyse the impact of trade defence measures on certain companies and sectors .
A credible TDI system has to be based on this sort of analysis .
A question was asked about public information and about the results of the consultation process .
As you know , the Commission has very clear rules on the transparency of decision-making .
Some of you may have attended the seminar on the Green Paper that took place only yesterday in Brussels .
This event was open to the public and relayed on the website .
Unless a contributor requests anonymity , we are publishing all responses to the Green Paper on the website of DG Trade .
The whole process has been totally transparent .
Finally , on cooperation and dialogue with Parliament : you know that I have constantly appeared before you on all important trade policy matters , and I will continue to do so .
Parliament has a very important role in the TDI reflection process .
Your report will be central to the ongoing review process , and I will study its recommendations very closely .
I thank you for hearing me again today and I look forward to being back here again soon to discuss any and every issue of trade policy , on which I delight in remaining answerable to this House .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Mr Mandelson , trade defence instruments - the name is quite revealing : an instrument for defending ourselves against trade .
To protect ourselves against trade would be both expensive and stupid , however , and there are therefore few economists who make a habit of supporting the use of this instrument .
I myself have on more than one occasion here in Parliament talked , for example , about the way in which consumers are forced to pay astronomically high prices for a limited producer interest .
The fact is , however , that , in the future too , we shall have some form of trade defence instrument .
Until such time as we have common competition legislation right around the world , all countries will probably feel a need to protect themselves against what they perceive as unfair trade .
I therefore believe that we need to design the instrument now so that it is legitimate and viewed as such by everyone - producers , importers , consumers and all the Member States .
We must get away from the predictable conflicts pitting North against South and producers against importers and consumers , as the conflicts in themselves undermine confidence in the instrument and , in the longer term , in EU trade policy .
If we are to have any consensus surrounding these trade defence instruments , we must do more to emulate competition legislation .
Everyone I meet demands , for example , more transparency , more predictability and , above all , less political horse-trading on this issue .
I can understand them , as it is frankly ridiculous that the Member States should only be given a few days in which to assess thousands of pages prior to decisions on anti-dumping duties .
The fact that , in Brussels , we have an army of consultants who run around in pursuit of rumours of Commission proposals concerning new defence measures is ridiculous too , as is the political horse-trading whereby duties on shoes can be exchanged for exemptions from the working time directive - exemptions that , in turn , can be exchanged for duties on Norwegian salmon .
All this shows that a fundamental overhaul is required .
What is more , the world has changed .
As global duties become bound and lower , more of our trading partners use instruments to prevent the import of goods in the traditional way , and , given that Europe is the biggest actor in the world market , we must show leadership .
I should therefore like to conclude by asking you how we are to ensure that this reform does not , in actual fact , continue down the road of seriously becoming one that Frédéric Bastiat , for example , would characterise in terms of cutting off our nose to spite our face .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I welcome the Green Paper as it is clear that our trade defence instruments are in need of reform .
The vast majority of stakeholders are unhappy with the status quo .
As they stand , anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigations lack transparency , consistency , objectivity and are over-politicised and inappropriate to the realities of a modern economy adapting to the forces of globalisation .
While it is probably impossible to create a totally objective process , there can and must be improvements to the current investigation procedure in order to depoliticise it and ensure that the interests of all European citizens are best served .
In order to do this , as the Commissioner has indicated , we must redefine and give greater weight to the Community interest .
If the European Union is to become more relevant to people 's lives , it must take genuine steps to look after citizens ' interests .
This , of course , means the protection of jobs against unfair and anti-competitive behaviour .
However , too often the narrow interests of an outspoken group of producers have won out against the interests of the millions of consumers who stand to gain from the process of globalisation and whose voice has often not been heard .
Moreover , the potential damage to European companies who set up global supply chains in order to remain competitive in a globalised economy must also be given greater consideration when considering the Community interest .
In terms of the process of anti-dumping investigations , there is widespread dissatisfaction across stakeholders with the access they currently enjoy even to non-confidential documents and information .
The use of analogue countries must also be questioned .
I am referring in particular to last year 's shoe case where the Brazilian economy was used to make comparisons with China , whereas in reality their two economies are as comparable as their football teams .
I would also be eager for the Commission to investigate the viability of expanding trade defence instruments to deter environmental and social dumping in order to ensure that an unfair advantage is not obtained through the abuse of the environment or through failure to ensure decent labour standards .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the question that we are debating , the content of which I support , is a strong appeal to the European executive to ensure that , without going back on its commitment to revive multilateral dialogue , to open markets and to lay down rules that encourage development rather than blocking it with non-tariff barriers , the Union does not take unilateral action that penalises us more than we would wish in relation not only to emerging countries but also to the major developed nations , primarily the United States .
Reviving competitiveness and consistency with the Lisbon Strategy , opening markets , protecting consumers , including by introducing obligatory origin marking on imported goods , the success of measures adopted to defend the effectiveness of free competition ; these elements are all inextricably linked .
We emphasise that we are opposed to a distorted use of anti-dumping measures and to forms of disguised and non-agreed protectionism presented as fighting unfair competition , of which our global competitors accuse us .
We do ask , however , that reform of anti-dumping rules by the European Union should not act as indirect support for those in the world who have not come out in favour of liberalisation .
At this stage and for a good while yet , I believe , liberalisation and regulation must , more than ever , be strictly linked in the interest of the market itself .
The rules must however be objective , as was the case when drafting those governing competition , which are clearly defined , accessible , effective and easy to apply .
For this reason , we must minimise the element of discretion used in applying defence measures , and small and medium-sized enterprises must be able to actually uphold the rules when prices are subject to abnormal changes .
Commissioner , we hope that the European executive will take account of these considerations , in the knowledge that Europe 's real economy needs to feel part of a strong community that encourages and urges it to take up the challenges of an ever more globalised world , yet defends it from those that breach the rules to unjustly pursue their own development at the expense of others .
on behalf of the UEN Group.- ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome the launch of the debate on the reform of trade policy instruments .
The current system of trade policy instruments , which has remained unchanged for several decades , is no longer effective enough to counteract the negative effects of burgeoning globalisation .
As this is too large a topic to discuss in any great detail here , I would like to draw attention to those issues where reform is needed .
Firstly , anti-dumping tariffs are imposed by the Commission on a product on the basis of proof that its price on the EU market does not exceed the cost of production .
To this end the Commission considers mainly production factors such as wages , cost of materials and energy for example .
The Commission does not , however , establish whether the enterprise bears the cost of social security for its employees , or of environmental protection measures .
It is therefore difficult to establish whether the costs submitted are incomplete , and consequently that the price of a product that does not take account of them has been artificially reduced .
Secondly , it is often the case that the relatively high prices of some products originating in the European Union , and hence their lack of competitiveness on the world market , arise from the very high standards demanded , regarding animal welfare , for instance .
The European Union must require that products from third countries sold on its market also meet these standards .
Thirdly , the European Commission is very cautious in applying so-called protective clauses whose aim is to prevent the European Union market from being suddenly flooded by a particular type of product .
These instruments , however , are much faster and easier to use than anti-dumping tariffs .
Finally , the Commission should also try to shorten to a minimum the period between the start of a particular procedure and the implementation of the relevant protection instrument .
Currently this takes many months , and for anti-dumping tariffs as long as nine months , which exposes European producers to huge losses .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , free trade is no good if it is unfair , and trade defence measures are an attempt to make it fairer .
I think that the Commission places a little too much emphasis on multinational companies , and I am uneasy about redefining the Community interest .
I wish to clarify the fact that , if an EU-based transnational company is involved in social or environmental dumping , either for its own part or through subsidiary companies or subcontractors , it cannot be regarded as a Community interest just because it is EU-registered .
It must be punished for engaging in such practices .
The Green Paper also addresses many interesting issues that we are to debate , for example increased transparency and more influence for small companies and non-governmental organisations .
One important dimension is missing , however : the Green Paper is insufficiently green .
The whole dimension of environmental dumping is absent .
Let me remind you of paragraph 11 of the Muscardini report from October , whereby the European Parliament ' invites the Commission to consider whether it would be appropriate to radically revise the rules on the use of trade defence ... measures under the WTO aegis ' , and this for the purpose of including non-compliance with global agreements and with conventions on the environment and social issues as forms of dumping or subsidy .
The fact is that countries that have weak environmental legislation or that lack the environmental taxes of their competitors must be seen as subsidising or dumping their production costs ; in other words , as engaging in nothing less than traditional dumping .
This will become a growing problem when the global level of ambition increases .
There must , then , be no free zones for environmental destruction that undermines global environmental work .
We must , for example , introduce a Kyoto tariff for countries that do not comply with the Kyoto Agreement .
Other countries must be brought before the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , and perhaps we shall win and perhaps we shall lose .
Many believe the WTO to be a powerful organisation , but one thing is certain : the climate cares not one jot for the WTO and , if we do not introduce climate measures into trade policy , will change irrespective of what the WTO thinks .
One final comment : if we are now to have solidarity and we have a one per cent limit , when is Malta to be able to apply these defence measures and when is it to obtain more than one per cent of internal trade ?
( HU ) Free trade works well if its rules are followed .
But this is not always the case .
Unfair trade practices and dumping are increasingly being used against the EU and its producers .
In several cases of dumping it has been demonstrated that it is the vendors rather than the consumers who profit .
There is no reason for the EU to water down the current trade rules .
It is unacceptable that we should punish those companies that have remained in Europe , that have retained European jobs , and reward those which moved their production offshore .
We need protection against unfair competition .
We should not loosen the rules against unfair trade , but rather enforce them .
This is especially true in the case of countries that are not market economies , where for instance the state is using complex and non-transparent means of giving aid to companies that are producing for export .
Moreover , China is using its increasing trade revenues not to expand democracy , reduce poverty , protect the environment or reduce CO2 emissions , but rather to purchase armaments .
This year , China is increasing its military expenditures by 18 % .
According to official statistics , this will reach USD 45 billion .
Moreover , according to some experts on security policy , the true amount they are spending on armaments will be three times this sum .
Commissioner , there is not much point for us to support China 's military build-up by cutting European jobs .


( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mr Barón Crespo and Mr Guardans Cambó for having taken the initiative in putting this oral question to the Commission .
The whole issue of our trade defence instruments is in fact of the utmost importance , not only in that they ensure that European producers are protected effectively against forms of unfair competition , but also when considered within the context of the broader debate on the place of the European Union in a globalised economy and on the rules that it wishes to promote for its governance .
Even though the European Union has always defended the WTO 's multilateral system , I think it surprising to say the least that the Commission should launch a public consultation of this kind and be contemplating a potentially major reform of our defence instruments at a time when the WTO negotiations on anti-dumping , anti-subsidy and safeguard measures have not yet been completed and when the results of these will impact upon the way in which these instruments are used .
Let me , then , remind the Commission that it did itself commission a study evaluating the European trade defence instruments , the conclusion of which was that the status quo was both the most reasonable solution and the one best suited to addressing the concerns of all parties .
This study also lends support to the idea that there is , at the present time , no visible and pressing need to review or amend the Community 's existing trade defence instruments .
I would like , therefore , to know just what concrete changes the Commission is planning and how this House is going to be involved in every stage of the process , and I call on the Commission to take account of these different factors within the framework of its forthcoming discussions at Council level , as well as taking account of the views of the Members of this House and of the results of the public consultation that it itself initiated for the purpose of drawing up its future proposals .
( PL ) The Green Paper and the debate on trade policy instruments are extremely important to our economy and could bring us considerable added value .
European foreign trade policy must respond adequately to any change that takes place in the manufacture and sale of goods on the internal and external markets .
For example , in the framework of agreements , our market can promote the purchase of materials for biofuels , the sale of which has good development prospects , and restrict imports , thus reducing the output of the sugar industry , for instance .
Through our mutual relationships we should help those of our suppliers who could start up production in line with our needs within the scope of promotional or association agreements .
As far as dumping goes , our response is long-winded and indecisive , doing us more harm than good .
For example , in the case of frozen strawberries from China it took several years to put anti-dumping measures in place , by which time numerous farms had folded and gone bankrupt .
An analysis of operational efficiency , and radically shortening existing bureaucratic procedures could lead to clear working regulations and responsibilities which would allow applications to be processed quickly .
Another problem for the European Union is defining the principles of our common trade policy to avoid unfair competition on the external market .
The issues I have mentioned require constant monitoring .
I thank other Members for engaging in the debate on this issue .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the EU must think carefully about how to better defend its own interests .
The strategy of making early concessions in the hope of later benefits will certainly not work .
Instead , the rules must be observed in the interests of free , fair competition .
Unfair trade practices should not be tolerated , and therefore , without a doubt , effective trade defence instruments form an integral part of the European strategy for competitiveness .
In this sense , I wholeheartedly agree with Mr Glattfelder : the defence instruments must not be further watered down .
As I see it , Commissioner , the timing of the Green Paper is very unfortunate , as the results of the current multilateral negotiations on trade defence instruments should not be forestalled .
There should be no reforms in Europe before the conclusion of these negotiations , whether successful - which I hope - or not .
The second thing I want to say is that the present instruments have fundamentally proved their worth .
If there have to be reforms at all , these should be geared towards improving the existing system .
We need to make a clear distinction - as the Commissioner rightly mentioned - between real dumping on the one hand and pricing in line with competition law on the other .
Anti-dumping measures must not be abused for protectionist purposes .
On the other hand , however , the long-term preservation of European production should not be sacrificed to apparent short-term consumer interests .
From the procedural point of view , it must be ensured that the assessment of cases is as objective as possible , and not influenced by specific national interests in the Council .
It is my firm conviction that , whilst third countries are making intensive use - often abuse - of trade defence instruments against us , we must not relax ours .
All of this is possible under the existing rules if they are just applied correctly , and so I would ask the Commissioner to be very sensitive in this regard , and I would recommend to him the stimulating reading that is my latest draft report on external trade strategy , in which I also discuss the subject of trade defence instruments .
( EL ) Mr President , my special thanks to Commissioner Mandelson .
I believe that this evening 's debate highlights an internal strategic split in the European Union .
I believe that , as Mr Fjellner said in his speech , on the one hand there is the Europe of major commercial consumer protection networks and , on the other hand , the Europe of productive powers , of the protection of the productive and industrial fabric and of employment and of the defence of the workers .
We must reconcile these two strategic approaches for the good of the European Union .
Of course no one wants to turn the European Union into a protectionist fortress .
On the other hand , however , it would be an illusion to believe that the European Union can remain unarmed in the face of the challenges and the negative consequences of globalisation , that it can remain unarmed in the face of unfair international trading practices , in the face of social and environmental dumping by certain emergent economies in the developing world .
I believe that the Green Paper presented by Mr Mandelson can form a good basis for further discussion .
We need trade defence measures on the basic precondition that they will be effective , that they will help to defend the commercial interests of the European Union , that they will help to defend the principle of transparency and faster decision-making .
Provided , Mr Mandelson , that your proposal moves in the direction of improving the trade defence mechanisms of the European Union , we really can hold a debate and make a positive contribution to that debate .
( LT ) Today for discussion we have the Commission 's Green Paper , which focuses on Europe 's trade defence instruments in a changing world economy .
In the communiqué , concerns have been expressed about trade defence instruments which would not affect high productivity .
Also mentioned is the issue of coordinating the Community 's interests and those of high productivity , importers , consumers and even the interests of developing countries .
The figures provided show that the USA and India , in protecting their markets , have initiated more studies on how to apply defence instruments than has the EU .
The EU is having difficulty implementing the Lisbon Strategy and creating new jobs , and there is a catastrophic lack of qualified workers in the engineering profession , and of scientists who could create new competitive technologies .
In the current situation , by no means should defence instruments be relaxed , as that would stifle current EU productivity , especially small and medium-size businesses , particularly in new Member States .
Furthermore , I would urge the Commission to quickly carry out anti-dumping studies , as delay on this has already bankrupted the Lithuanian telescope manufacturer ' Ekranas ' .
( PT ) Mr Mandelson , this Commission initiative straight away has the merit of promoting debate on a issue to which there are no simple answers .
There are sectors in Europe that lean more towards the demagogic and populist responses of those who feel they have simple answers to this question .
They may be simple answers , but they are wrong .
The key issue is how the EU should use the trade defence instruments at its disposal to guarantee compliance with the rules of fair trade and to take an active role in the process of regulating international trade .
The European economic and social model must be defended , but it must never overstep the boundary into protectionism .
This is currently the most important issue facing the EU .
We have already seen that there are natural differences of opinion and opposing interests within the EU itself .
The interests of the manufacturers do not necessarily coincide with those of the major importers , and the immediate interests of consumers do not necessarily coincide with each other .
What is needed is a guideline that always emphasises a key principle - that of how the EU will participate actively , seriously and intelligently in the process of regulating international trade .
In this context , it must seek to project onto an international scale , within the framework of the World Trade Organisation , some of the basic values that identify it , namely a competitive economy and , at the same time , a society that shows greater solidarity and more cohesion and that is very alert to the preservation of certain key environmental values .
This is the challenge now facing the EU , and I therefore feel that the Commission has done the right thing in promoting this debate .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I too should like to thank the Commission for having opened this debate on the EU 's trade defence instruments , and I should also like to congratulate Mr Guardans Cambó on having offered us the opportunity to debate the subject today .
What I find striking about the Commission 's questionnaire , or , more broadly speaking , about all its thinking about trade policy , is the lack of any reference whatsoever to the issue of the euro exchange rate against the currencies of our main trading partners .
I want to know from Commissioner Mandelson just how he thinks the European Union 's trading interests can be effectively defended when the euro stands as it does against the dollar , the yuan and the yen ?
If , then , I may take the example of the aerospace industry , which , with its plans for redundancies and cutbacks and its threats of farming work out and of moving it to other sites , holds the centre of the stage today , a ten-cent change in the euro / dollar exchange rate amounts to the loss or gain of a billion euros in Airbus ' year-end figures .
Is it not the case that competitive currency devaluations on the part of our competitors are the most flagrant examples of dumping , the consequence of these being that Airbus , the flagship of European industry , now finds it does better to produce some of its aircraft outside the euro zone if it wants to be able to compete with Boeing ?
Just what we always wanted !

I would encourage Commissioner Mandelson to look to the European Central Bank and do something , today , about making it responsible not only when the euro 's value goes down but also when it goes up , for has the time not come for the Council and the Commission , by virtue of the powers accorded them by Article 111 of the Treaty , to at last discharge their responsibilities and enable us to equip ourselves with something we cannot do without - the general outlines of an exchange rate policy ?
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , by my reckoning 85 % of those who have spoken have welcomed this review and therefore I feel gratified in having taken the initiative in proposing it to the Commission .
I hope that this fact and the very intelligent and , in the main , very balanced contributions that have been made to this debate will be registered in the Council and by the Presidency .
I do not know whether they are represented tonight .
It appears not .
But , nonetheless , I am sure that this fact will communicate itself .
Now , having welcomed the review , people do differ as to whether they want to use it to water down the existing TDI or not .
I am going to disappoint both those categories , both the water-downers and the anti-water-downers , by saying that the aim of the review is neither to strengthen nor to weaken our existing trade defence instruments .
Instead , the purpose is to make sure that we have rules that are clear , consistent and capable of commanding consensus across the Union .
I am not fully satisfied that we are striking the right balance at the moment .
Hence the controversy , hence the breakdown in consensus , hence the breakdown in solidarity amongst and between Member States that we have observed in recent cases .
It is my responsibility to do what is necessary , if anything can be done , to repair that solidarity and make sure that we have consensus rebuilt .
Of course , we are faced with constant dilemmas in exercising and applying these rules .
One person 's legitimate protection is another person 's protectionism and that is where judgement needs to be applied on the basis of the objective analysis undertaken by the Commission .
But I have heard the call of many in this House to ensure that our anti-dumping system is clear , transparent and objective .
I have heard the concerns expressed about the length and lack of efficiency of the process and I have heard those who have said that they want environmental concerns better reflected .
I am not sure whether I will ever be able to fashion a set of instruments that will enable us to use trade defence to tackle global warming or bring climate security to the world .
Of course , if this is a challenge that Members of this Parliament want to set us , then we will rise to it , but I am not sure that we will be successful , just as I am not entirely sure that we will be able to use trade defence instruments to address exchange rate policy either .
I am very grateful to those who have spoken and raised very important points .
My own view , just to go back to the opening speaker in this debate , is that if you want to make and sustain the case for economic openness in Europe , which I do , then the people of Europe have to feel confident that , when they are unfairly threatened or harmed by the anti-competitive behaviour of others , that they have someone on their side : that someone is us .
It is the essential and growing role of the European Union and of the European Commission in this global age .
It does not make our task easier , but it makes it all the more necessary and important and it is a responsibility that , for my own part , I intend to see discharged in a fair , objective and dispassionate way .
The debate is closed .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) The Commission has adopted a Green Paper and launched a public consultation on the use of the EU 's trade defence instruments ( TDIs ) in a changing global economy .
This public consultation should prepare the way for proposals by the Commission aimed at reforming its trade defence instruments ( anti-dumping , anti-subsidy and safeguard clauses ) .
This reform project needs , however , to be considered with prudence .
The European Union must not act unilaterally or precipitately , for any revision of its instruments must be carried out within the legal framework of the ongoing negotiations on the multilateral disciplines applicable to TDIs , forming part of the Doha round .
Quite apart from the need to be in line with the WTO calendar , it is also imperative that the Commission should take into account the fact that the liberalisation of trade makes TDIs indispensable .
TDIs are typically used in moderation and are in no way the straitjackets for which free-traders take them , or the weaponry of protectionists .
As regulators , they are in fact effective as means of restoring the conditions of fair competition to international trading markets and of limiting illegal practices ' adverse effects on industry , growth and employment in the European Community .
Compliance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Voggenhuber , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on compliance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Commission 's legislative proposals : methodology for systematic and rigorous monitoring .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at prime media time this morning , in the course of the debate on the Berlin Declaration , we celebrated the Union as a common system of law , and we all agreed that what holds this system together at heart is human dignity and fundamental rights and freedoms .
At a late hour this evening we are now discussing the everyday business of this common system of law : the enforcement - an arduous task - and protection of these fundamental rights and freedoms .
Those who have long been working on the everyday business of fundamental rights in Europe will be aware of three irritations .
Firstly , for the achievement of its economic and monetary-policy objectives , the Union has hard law , specific objectives , penalties if need be , large amounts of money and tough action ; whereas fundamental rights and freedoms at European level have only soft law .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is still not binding .
Some Member States are even calling for its removal from the Constitution .
The EU is not a member of the European Commission of Human Rights .
Organisations such as Europol , Eurojust and Frontex do not fall under the European Convention on Human Rights .
Police cooperation is still not Community law , and it evades scrutiny by national parliaments and the European Parliament .
A grey area of fundamental rights is emerging in Europe .
The second irritation - which I am seeing more and more in my debates on the Constitution - is that cracks have emerged in the original confidence of the European public in the will and ability of this Union to enforce fundamental rights and freedoms uncompromisingly .
The CIA affair , the illegal kidnappings , the illegal overflights and the lack of cooperation by governments have been contributory factors , as have the negative judgments of the European Court of Justice on the transfer of passenger data and SWIFT bank data and the lack of legal bases for Union action .
All of this has dented the original confidence of the public in the will and ability of the Union to protect these fundamental rights uncompromisingly .
The third irritation concerns the Commission 's monitoring .
Commissioner , I do not know how often this House is supposed to carry on demanding that the Commission 's work and proposals on the protection of fundamental rights be more systematic , less restrictive , more public ; or that the Commission increase the involvement of civil society and of independent experts and organisations .
We did so in the report on Article 7 ; we did so in the reports on the Human Rights Agency ; we did so with regard to the accession treaties .
Yet the Commission gives the impression of being unsure , indecisive , in this field .
Its choices are often incomprehensible , and its pressure on the Council and the Member States is often insufficient .
We welcome the procedure for enforcing the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Commission 's legislative proposals : it represents progress .
Nevertheless , it is insufficient , and it suffers from all the things this House has pointed out so many times already .
Checking against the Charter of Fundamental Rights cannot be smuggled in via social , environmental and economic criteria , but must be a criterion in itself .
Every one of the Commission 's legislative initiatives must be checked against the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and this checking must be substantiated and documented in all cases .
How often have we demanded - as we are doing again - that the Commission show greater respect for the particular responsibility of Parliament as advocate of the European public for the protection of fundamental rights ?
We did this when we dealt with Article 7 , the Agency and the accession negotiations .
We called for increased involvement of NGOs , international organisations and the Human Rights Agency .
How much longer do we need to go on doing this ?
How much longer do we need to go on demanding continuous dialogue between the institutions ?
The outstanding part of the Commission 's proposal is its talk of the development of a fundamental-rights culture .
We share this ambition and support it .
Yet this development requires a systematic , continuous , open dialogue between the institutions ; it requires reports ; it requires that the institutions be given the right to point out abuses and wrong turns in the Member States .
It is also essential that the Commission 's monitoring system be extended to the field of intergovernmental cooperation and to the comitology system .
Commissioner , we are repeating our demands .
We are doing so at a late hour , without public exposure , without anything .
I do think , however , that it is time the Commission responded to Parliament 's wishes and demands in this field .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I warmly welcome this report and wish to thank Parliament for its positive reception of the Commission 's communication of 27 April 2005 on a methodology to check fundamental rights compliance in the Commission 's own legislative proposals .
Let me briefly recall why the Commission adopted this communication on a methodology for compliance with fundamental rights , the first product of the Commissioners ' Group on Fundamental Rights , Anti-Discrimination and Equal Opportunities .
We , the Union 's institutions , must at all times show that we cherish fundamental rights , not only in words but in actions and above all in our own legislative action .
This is crucial for the Union to be credible and legitimate in the eyes of its citizens .
The Charter , which the institutions subscribed to in 2000 , must encourage us to enhance respect for individual freedom in all its facets .
This includes classic civil liberties to be upheld , precisely in our current efforts to combat terrorism .
It also includes economic and social rights and , last but not least , the new generation rights such as data protection , good administration and bio-ethical guarantees .
But , briefly , it must become clear to our citizens that the European Union locks a true fundamental rights culture into its own policy-making .
It is therefore a matter of great satisfaction and encouragement for the Commission to see that our communication of 2005 has found such a prominent echo in your resolution of today and that this Parliament makes the same commitment on its part to include internal rules for monitoring fundamental rights .
Taking rights seriously must be a common leitmotif for all institutions throughout the EU 's legislative process .
I also wish to thank Parliament for some constructive practical suggestions which the Voggenhuber report offers to the Commission in order to develop further our human rights compliance methodology .
As you know , we have scheduled a review of our methodology to be launched later this year , and the Commission will present Parliament with the results of this review .
The Commission is very keen to share its experience with Parliament in that respect .
In the context of this review , the Commission will of course pay utmost attention to your suggestions .
For instance , we have noted that we should refer not only to the Charter as a point of reference , but also to European and international human rights conventions , and that Parliament emphasises the Commission 's right to withdraw its proposal where changes are made in the legislative process which would violate a fundamental right .
We are also open to giving even greater visibility to fundamental rights in our impact assessments .
Finally , a major theme of the planned review will be how to involve the newly-established Fundamental Rights Agency when preparing new policy initiatives which are sensitive to fundamental rights .
As regards the call for a new annual report from the Commission on fundamental rights in the EU , we think that it could be useful to have a yearly general discussion on this issue .
This could take place in the context of our annual discussion relating to progress in the area of freedom , security and justice .
We are less convinced on having a new formal , specific annual report , in particular since the recently established Fundamental Rights Agency will , as perhaps its most important task , adopt such an annual report on fundamental rights issues within the EU .
That report , and thus our new Fundamental Rights Agency , should receive all the public attention it deserves .
That report should therefore be at the centre of discussions on fundamental rights issues in all three institutions and we should avoid any duplication of it .
But , with that caveat , I would like to say how much we commend this report on its content and how seriously we take it .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate the Commission on this new approach to the protection of fundamental rights .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for having informed us this evening that a substantial part of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs ' idea will be transposed by the Commission into the amended text .
We hope that the European Parliament will become ever more involved in protecting these rights and , above all , we are pleased to support the idea of continuous monitoring of all the legislative activities that will lead to such protection , which , as the Commissioner was saying , could culminate in a final report .
However , this becomes scarcely important if the monitoring is incisive , constant and continuous .
Secondly , as regards the involvement of the newly established Fundamental Rights Agency , I believe - as has already been said in committee - that its activities also need to be diversified , in order to prevent any pointless overlapping or duplication of effort .
I therefore believe that the full involvement of the agency , and of non-governmental organisations and associations , as the rapporteur was saying , should become ever more meaningful and significant , given that there are some very important associations that concern themselves with the protection of human rights .
Finally , in our opinion , systematic internal checks should be implemented at all levels during the stage of drafting legislation .
I therefore hope that these suggestions contained within the rapporteur 's clear , lucid report - qualities that he has illustrated this evening - become part of the activities of the Commission itself .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Respect for our fundamental rights and for all human rights , and their implementation , is under all circumstances the cornerstone of every European democratic state , governed by the rule of law .
They cannot be circumvented or overriden .
It is when problematic , conflictual situations arise that it becomes especially clear that we need always to confirm anew these now seemingly self-evident rights , and that their observance is not automatic , and we need to struggle time and again for our fundamental rights to be respected .
The respect for and defence of our fundamental human rights was the starting point and the achievement of the European Union , but till now the declaration has been accompanied by few concrete legal and practical measures .
One of the concrete achievements is the birth of the Charter of Fundamental Rights itself , and although the Charter is far from complete , nevertheless adding legal force to it - let us say by subscribing to the European Charter of Fundamental Rights - would represent a much-needed step forward in the Community 's defence of fundamental rights .
The problems involving human rights that appear daily , and the complexity of these issues , demonstrate that there is much to be done in this area .

For this reason , I can only welcome Mr Voggenhuber 's report , that is , the initiative of the Commission , since it draws the attention of all of us to the key question that the effective respect of fundamental rights begins when respect for the Charter of Fundamental Rights features among the Commission 's legislative proposals , when regular and strict controls of human rights compliance have been developed , and when the Fundamental Rights Agency is able to work effectively .
And although there are a few paragraphs which are subject to legal debate , as shadow rapporteur I support the report , as will the People 's Party at tomorrow 's vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I confess , in a minute and a half , that , every time this House is asked to debate human rights , one has the worrying feeling that the debate will end up being nothing more than a rhetorical exercise .
I say this while also having in mind the fact that , although one month ago this House debated the outcome of a year 's work by the Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners , this month neither the Commission nor the Council have in any way acknowledged the work done by the European Parliament and submitted for their opinion .
We do want to see the same thing happen with the precious communication before us which , as Mr Voggenhuber points out , is intended to clarify and enhance what has been standard practice in this House since 2001 , namely guaranteeing the compatibility of all the legislative processes developed by the institutions with the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Recognition for this practice was a long time coming , and we hope that its implementation will not be shelved .
One point must be made clear : we are asking the Commission for an annual report , to be submitted to Parliament , which summarises the implementation of fundamental rights in European policies .
It seems rather strange to us that annual reports on the application of Community law and on competition policy should be planned , but not a report on fundamental rights for the Commission to submit to the European Parliament .
We also take this view because of the impact that such policies have on 500 million European citizens and because we believe that this is a sensitive issue for which the European institutions must take responsibility if they are to restore dignity and substance to the human rights on which we are often asked to focus .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all , I will not dwell on Mr Voggenhuber 's excellent report except to say that my group will support it wholeheartedly .
In principle , we very much welcome the Commission 's proposals , but my problem is that they risk becoming the emperor 's clothes .
They are full of good intentions but there is a big risk that they will be passive , bureaucratic exercises , because there is such a gap between reality and the proposals in your paper , Commissioner .
I have a problem , Mr Mandelson .
How do I explain your wonderful proposals to my voters , when the Commission does not speak out when a minister for education in an EU Member State is on a crusade against homosexuals ?
Why does the Commission not speak out in the case of the CIA flights , as Mr Fava just reminded us ?
Why does the Commission not speak out in the case of the flagrant discrimination and abominable treatment of Roma people ?
There are so many cases where the Commission is passive and even in some cases hiding behind the rules .
Lately , every time we ask about these cases we are told : ' just wait and see when the agency for fundamental rights is set up ' .
Commissioner , why does the Commission , the champion of fundamental rights , as Mr Barroso promised us in October 2004 , not seek the limits of its powers ?
Why do you hide behind the rules ?
People expect you to protect and promote their fundamental rights .
I , too , would like the annual report , but frankly I consider it much more important that you should act and speak out .
That is political leadership .
One of President Barroso 's favourite phrases is ' the Europe of results ' and I very much like that phrase .
But why is it restricted to the economic area ?
Why is it not applied to the area of fundamental rights ?
Soon we will be celebrating 50 years of European integration .
After the Second World War the idea was that people would never have to fear for their lives again , that everybody would be free , safe , equal and live in a democracy .
So fundamental rights should be the first priority of the Commission and that should be the meaning of the ' Europe of results ' .
I hope that this Commission in the next two years will create that Europe of results and of fundamental rights .
I see this proposal only as a basis for that , but I expect action now .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Charter of Fundamental Rights has been around for over six years now and is vital as regards respect for citizens ' rights , yet it is still not legally binding .
We can only hope , therefore , that the Council Presidency succeeds in giving the constitutional process new momentum , as there is no doubt that the individual rights of EU citizens belong to the substance of the Constitution ; the Charter is its core substance .
In the light of this , in particular , we cannot but support the Commission 's initiative .
We are talking here about the development of a genuine fundamental-rights culture .
I should like to declare my express support for this approach and highlight two issues in this connection .
Firstly , systematic monitoring of fundamental rights must at all events mean focusing on the specific fundamental rights concerned in each case , and also evidencing this checking in detail in every legislative proposal .
Secondly , scrutiny to identify any legal errors in weighing up the respective importance of the freedom of the individual and the requirements of the public interest is insufficient on its own .
What we need is an optimisation in terms of fundamental rights , which means a political analysis to ascertain which of the various solutions that weigh up these interests correctly produces the best balance between determination of the objective and restriction of fundamental rights .
Such an approach could characterise the fundamental-rights culture of which the Commission speaks , and this way strengthen the identity of the European Union as a union of citizens .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , in principle , guaranteeing the fundamental rights of all citizens is of major importance , although we have different opinions on how this should be done .
It is striking that the European Union is once again seeking to create a distinct profile for itself by means of fundamental rights .
Meanwhile , the Union now has a Charter and a Bureau for fundamental rights , neither of which have been established unanimously .
A reasonable minority , not least in this Parliament , have major objections to the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the way in which it is being shaped further .
Could I draw your attention to the fact that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is an unnecessary duplication of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ?
The same , in fact , applies to the Fundamental Rights Agency .
Both duplications are avoidable , and citizens ' rights would not thereby be affected .
This is something the European Court for Human Rights here in Strasbourg can guarantee , provided it can count on the necessary workforce and financial resources .
Moreover , it respects the individuality of the national legal system .
This strikes me as a sufficient guarantee for our freedoms and fundamental rights .
I would therefore argue in favour of the Union 's functions in the area of fundamental rights being limited .
We should allow the Union to join the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ; this will no doubt be followed up by a debate on compliance with , and monitoring of , the fundamental rights in respect of the Commission 's legislative function .
Mr President , colleagues : you lost .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights would have been given legal force by the European constitution but that constitution , it seems necessary periodically to remind this House , was rejected .
55 % of French voters and 62 % of Dutch voters said ' no ' .
Simply to disregard those results and carry on as if the Charter were in force would be outrageous , yet that is precisely what you propose to do .
Indeed , it is precisely what you are doing .
As the Voggenhuber report cheerfully admits , the various institutions of the EU are proceeding as if the Charter were already justiceable .
Indeed , this report may be summarised as an attempt to regularise an illegal and undemocratic extension of EU jurisdiction .
I hope we can take it as read that every one of us here believes in basic civil liberties .
We all support freedom of speech , freedom of worship , freedom of assembly and so on .
But some of us object to the way in which these vital matters are being lifted out of the hands of our accountable national governments and subjected to the whims of European judges .
The EU is wanting , not in its respect for basic human rights , but in its respect for democracy .
Paper entitlements , unaccompanied by democratic accountability , are meaningless .
The principles adumbrated in the Charter of Fundamental Rights could equally be found in , say , the constitution of East Germany or that of the Soviet Union , but as the peoples of those unhappy states knew , written charters are worthless if you cannot hold your rulers to account .
Do we really need to learn that lesson again in the EU ?

Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Voggenhuber on his report .
Saint Teresa used to say that the devil is the detail .
It is obvious that the European Commission is not one day going to approve a piece of legislation that blatantly violates fundamental rights : nobody expects that .
But , for example , we have situations , as in the case of restrictions on liquids in aeroplanes , where comitology has been used in a shameful way to impose , through a secret piece of regulation - and I emphasise , a secret piece of regulation - duties on citizens which cannot be reviewed by any court in Europe , national or European .
This is a case of the European Commission not being a witness to a violation of fundamental rights but itself legislating in a way that goes against respect for fundamental rights and the most basic rules on transparency .
These things happen , so let us stop the rhetoric and begin applying to ourselves what we pretend to apply to everybody else , to our neighbours and to our partners throughout the world .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the need for legislative proposals always to be compatible with fundamental rights may be a good route to a serious resumption of the debate on the real European constitutional process , with no clumsy attempts to revive a treaty that died on impact with the public .
I believe that , on the eve of the imminent and still mysterious Berlin Declaration , this may be a serious way of re-opening the debate and of making Europe stand for something once again , and for this I am grateful to Mr Voggenhuber .
In recent years , we have witnessed CIA flights and abductions by the CIA on European territory , the systematic monitoring of Europeans and the violation of their privacy , and the detainment of migrants in inhuman and degrading places .
All of this serves as the clearest example of the difficulty faced by the European Union when it comes to protecting fundamental rights .
We believe that the EU 's legislative proposals should always be fully compatible not only with the Charter of Fundamental Rights , but also with the other European and international instruments in the field of fundamental rights : I am thinking of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and of the European Social Charter .
We feel that this is a good way to start a thorough debate aimed at the revival of Europe .
( PT ) Mr President , fundamental rights are the very backbone of all of the EU 's political action .
Since the Treaty of Rome , democracy has been a condition of this union of nations and the basis of consensus .
Democracy undeniably implies that all institutions must adhere to an ethic of rights ; indeed , it is an ethic of rights that gave birth to democracy .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights , formalised in the Treaty of Nice , is simply the clear expression of this genetic matrix of the EU , thus dispelling any possible doubt or ambiguity .
The EU has always had an intrinsic connection to fundamental rights , and it is only through this connection that the Union has been able to true to itself .
The methodology of self-monitoring that the Commission has brought before us - featuring respect for fundamental rights as an integral part of monitoring the legality of legislative proposals and a completely new assessment of the impact of this legislation on fundamental rights - is therefore welcome .
This will blow fresh air and bring transparency into the offices of the Commission .
This is a more structural and more positive solution than the new fundamental rights agency , because this method proposed by the Commission presupposes that human rights cut across the Union 's policies , all the Union 's policies .
This is its strength .
In a democratic society , the monitoring of rights begins with the institutions monitoring their own political practice .
Nevertheless , the virtues of this methodology are limited , as it does not encompass the Council of the EU or decisions on intergovernmental cooperation , in relation to which the Commission does not take initiatives .
If one were to name issues that nowadays lack specific attention from the point of view of a culture of rights , it would be issues under the third pillar - that of criminal law and criminal procedure .
Terrorist threats and public concern give rise to the temptation in the Member States to drift towards a disproportionate preoccupation with security , which sometimes oversteps the boundaries of freedom and justice .
The Commission 's method has opened the door , but the window must also be open .

( DE ) Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating Mr Voggenhuber on his report and also declaring my support for him in his fight for more rights for our citizens .
As a representative of the business community , I have to say that it is true that the rights of the European Parliament and the other European institutions have been fully enforced in the field of the internal market .
In that field , we have been able to implement a rationalisation process for our 27 Member States and 500 million citizens and ensure that , rather than 27 different regulations , a single one applies , which was adopted through constructive cooperation .
I should also like to emphasise , however , that the establishment of an equally solid basis in the field of fundamental rights is a genuine concern of mine .
When Mr Hannan says that France and the Netherlands voted against the Constitution , I can only counter this by saying that a direct consultative referendum in Spain produced a clear majority in favour of this project .
In addition , if we add up the population groups of the three countries , this makes a clear majority .
We have the support of most Europeans .
The vast majority in this House have pronounced their support for it , and Europe 's governments have unanimously declared themselves in favour .
How many more votes do we need before we achieve democracy in Europe , rather than stopping at geographical boundaries and measuring democracy in kilometres when we should be judging it by its principles ?
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Negotiation of an EU-Central America Association Agreement - Negotiation of an EU-Andean Community Association Agreement ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Willy Meyer Pleite , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the negotiating mandate for an association agreement between the European Union and its Member States , of the one part , and the countries of Central America , of the other part , and
the report by Luis Yañez-Barnuevo García , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the European Parliament 's recommendation to the Council on the negotiating mandate for an association agreement between the European Union and its Member States , of the one part , and the Andean Community and its member countries , of the other part .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Fourth European Union-Latin America and Caribbean Summit , last spring in Vienna , gave the green light to the start of negotiations of a strategic association agreement between Europe and the Andean Community .
In this report I propose some thirty recommendations for the Council and the Commission to take into account when drawing up the negotiation guidelines .
We want this association to be ambitious , broad and wide-ranging , in line with the association with the twins , Mercosur and Central America , because we believe it to be a strategic requirement for both regions .
In view of their history , language , culture , beliefs and values , as well as their common view of the world and their support for multilateralism and the United Nations system , Latin America and Europe are destined to become strategic allies in a globalised world .
This is the case for the Andean countries in particular , where there are certain pockets of extreme poverty and the continent 's greatest inequalities .
The agreement must have three pillars . A political-institutional pillar , a cooperation pillar and a trade pillar .
In the political and security field , we should create a Euro-Andean Peace and Security Charter , implement a permanent political dialogue , promote the quality of democracy , social cohesion , support for governability , poverty reduction , human exchanges , combating terrorism , conflict prevention and coordination in terms of the reform of the United Nations , as well as civilian and military crisis management operations .
The second pillar is the promotion of sustainable human development and gradual access for Andean products to European markets , under competitive conditions , taking account of the immense economic imbalances and the degree of integration between Europeans and Andeans , which will require a review of the CAP and subsidies from the Union .
The third pillar is trade itself , but unlike other models with third countries , such as the Andean countries ' agreements with the United States , they must not be free trade agreements in the strict sense , or free trade agreements pure and simple , but rather they must take account of the huge gulf separating the two regions .
Without economic measures to provide support , cooperation and funding , purely commercial policies would not be able to play their role of contributing to development .
The inclusion of labour rights , particularly for indigenous and tribal peoples , the protection of decent working conditions , non-discrimination and equality between men and women in the workplace and the eradication of child labour must be included in the agreement .
We must also stress in particular the importance of European investment as an essential factor in the development of those countries , as well as the need for European companies to apply the same standards with regard to working conditions as they do in European countries .
Immigration , as a phenomenon and as a source of opportunities , must be included in the agreement , with protection for the rights of immigrants , and transfers of money must be made easier , cheaper , more transparent and more secure .
The environmental chapter , which must have a prominent place in the agreement , must include the establishment of common policies aimed at energy saving , diversification , the promotion of alternative and renewable energy sources and the reduction of polluting emissions , in line with the approach taken by the last European Council .
In summary , Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that the objective must be for us to be in a position to conclude this ambitious strategic association agreement between the European Union and its Member States and the Andean Community and its Member States at the Fifth European Union-Latin America and Caribbean Summit in Lima in 2008 .

rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , it is clear to everybody that this debate that is going to take place in Parliament comes at a significant time for Latin America in general . It comes at a time when its people seem to be forcefully questioning the policy that has impoverished them .
They are currently questioning the policy of neo-liberal formulae . President Bush 's visit to Latin America is ample evidence of this .
Specifically , with regard to the Association Agreement with Central America , the European Union owes an historical debt to that region .
We played a very significant role during the 1980s in Central America 's process of pacification and democratisation - the San José agreements , the Esquipulas agreement - in which the European Union detached itself from the United States , adopting an autonomous position , and played a crucial role .

Central America 's current situation is abundantly clear : there is very weak economic growth - currently 0.6 % - rates of poverty that remain similar to those of the 1990s , and increasing inequalities .
Peace agreements have yet to be verified . The same is true in the fields of human rights , impunity and corruption , and regional integration is still very weak .
Within this context , this humble rapporteur opted for a certain kind of report with a view to determining what type of association we wanted .
I based it on three fundamental pillars : political dialogue with a view to good governance , development cooperation to contribute to eliminating the structural causes of poverty and inequality , and trade under conditions of fairness and mutual benefit based on complementarity and solidarity .
An agreement that seeks regional integration in order to contribute to the balanced and fair redistribution of Central America 's income and wealth .
That was the context .
We wanted an agreement that did not turn into an agreement on a free trade area and on privatisation of public services .
In short , we did not want political dialogue and cooperation to be overrun by free trade formulae .
I am convinced that a trade agreement of a pronounced neo-liberal nature between unequal regions - unequal in all senses of the word - would simply increase that inequality and promote exploitation by a business elite , leading to an even greater cycle of dependency , exclusion , poverty and extremely high social and environmental costs .
I believe that trade and cooperation must be geared towards sustainable development at regional level , benefiting the people , rather than a series of projects benefiting transnational capital , such as the Puebla-Panama Plan or the European Investment Bank .
It was with that intention that I drew up my humble report , with the cooperation of many civil society organisations from Europe and Central America .
Parliament 's Committee on Development and Committee on International Trade then naturally issued their opinions on the report .
I would of course like to thank you for all of the contributions that improved the text from the point of view of the approach I wished to maintain throughout this process .
I would like in particular to thank Miguel Ángel Martínez for his always fair and cooperative contributions , in this case from the Committee on Development .
In the opinion of the Committee on International Trade , Mr Susta presented some very significant amendments to the text which truly distort the report that I intended to present to the House .
The true intention was to produce a balanced report , based on those three pillars that I mentioned before , but , in practice , the amendments as a whole created a document that essentially sought the establishment of a free trade area .
On that point , my intention was to try to tone down that approach as far as possible .
I am talking about the approach of trying to give Central America the impression that what we Europeans are seeking is essentially a free trade area .
We agreed on seven compromise amendments with Mr Salafranca , of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mr Obiols , of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and Mr Susta , of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , and I would like to thank them once again most warmly for their efforts to agree on a way to tone down the report and not to spoil it .

I would of course , however , like to thank Mr Obiols and Mrs De Kayser , of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and Mr Romeva , of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , for their amendments , because they improve and provide more detail on this desire to turn the mandate into a clear mandate for an association agreement of that kind , one that does not include a free trade area .
This has been a good thing to a certain extent because , as I have said , we have managed to tone down such significant points as letter v ) , which explicitly recommends that the free trade area should be a priority strategic objective , and makes references to the CAFTA Plan , and we have naturally managed to tone it down , but not sufficiently so .
I do not know whether this has happened before , but I am going to recommend to my group that it abstain from the vote on this report , because I do not believe that it has achieved my intended objective , which was to produce a balanced report .
In any event , I am very interested to hear the opinion of Parlacen , the Central American Parliament , and of Central America 's political organisations , and my hope is that , when the negotiation begins , the European Commission will bear in mind that what Central America is asking for is not a carbon copy of the United States ' position , but an equidistant , different and autonomous position .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , let me first welcome , also on behalf of my colleague , Benita Ferrero-Waldner , the remarkable work of the two rapporteurs as well the constructive analysis and comments made by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , the Committee on Development and the Committee on International Trade concerning the different aspects and perspectives for future agreements with these regions .
The conclusion of association agreements with Central America and the Andean Community is a long-standing strategic objective for both regions , confirmed repeatedly by the Heads of State and Government at the summits in Guadalajara and Vienna .
With the negotiation of these agreements , the EU shows its commitment to the region and its determination to reinforce its relations with all Latin American countries .
Europe and Latin America are natural partners , and closer ties with Central America and the Andean Community will contribute to a stronger partnership , both politically and economically .
The agreements will be negotiated on a region-to-region basis in order to provide further impetus to the regional integration processes both in Central America and in the Andean Community .
As repeatedly emphasised , also by the European Parliament , regional integration is key to political and social stability .
It will also help to insert these regions more successfully into the world economy by developing larger and more stable economies able to attract investment .
Nevertheless , it is worth dispelling the idea that the EU tries to ' impose ' its own model : regional integration should be developed by each region on the basis of its own ambitions and agenda .
The association agreements are envisaged as comprehensive agreements , embracing the whole array of the multifaceted relations of the EU with both regions : political dialogue , cooperation and trade .
The respect and promotion of democratic principles , fundamental human rights , the rule of law and good governance will remain at the core of our relations with Central America and the Andean Community .
In addition , the Commission is of the opinion that the association agreements should pay particular attention to the effective implementation of internationally-agreed standards in the human rights , social , core labour and environmental fields in order to enhance sustainable development .
Concerning political dialogue , these agreements will aim to tackle a wide range of matters , such as climate change , energy , migration and the fight against drugs .
These are vital not only for both our regions but also for the entire planet .
An enhanced dialogue with Central America and the Andean Community aims to seek constructive engagement towards effective multilateralism and international governance that may respond to the world challenges of the 21st century .
The political chapter of the association agreements will be accompanied by measures aiming to enhance bi-regional trade and investment in a balanced and fair way .
This should be pursued not only through the progressive and reciprocal liberalisation of trade in goods and services , but also by establishing a fair and transparent regulatory framework .
Asymmetries between our regions should also be taken into account .
The trade part of the agreement will be fully consistent with WTO rules and obligations , while going beyond its basic rules , so as to maximise the mutual and long-term benefits of bi-regional trade liberalisation .
Cooperation between the two sides is to be deeply rooted in the global objectives and principles established by our development policy , such as the European Consensus on Development , as well as by the international agreements to which we are party , including the Millennium Development Goals , and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness .
Social cohesion will be a priority .
The cooperation chapter should reflect the willingness to work jointly and to exchange experiences .
It should also reflect solidarity towards the poorest and most excluded people .
Let me conclude with an overview on the preparation of these negotiations : the draft negotiating directives were adopted by the Commission on 6 December 2006 and are currently under discussion with Member States .
The Commission hopes to have the negotiating directives adopted and , if conditions allow , actually to start negotiating with these two Latin American sub-regions within the first half of this year .
If we manage to stick to this ambitious timetable , it will be largely thanks to your support and determination to enhance relations between the EU and Latin America , in particular with these two regions .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( ES ) Mr President , the initial report presented to us by Mr Meyer on the Association Agreement between the European Union and the countries of Central America provided the basis of the opinion that we drew up in the Committee on Development .
We agreed in very general terms with his proposals and we also agreed on a series of recommendations from our Committee on Development with regard to them .
Mr Meyer proved to be very receptive and we jointly signed seven amendments introducing the specific concerns of the Committee on Development .
I must point out , ladies and gentlemen , that I find the text being presented to the House to be very anaemic compared to the initial proposals . They have been reworked in a largely neo-liberal vein , perhaps reflecting the thinking of the majority of Parliament .
The truth is that we can live with these texts thanks to the compromises . We will vote for them , but we will not be voting with any enthusiasm , since they do not square with the needs of Central America or with the aspirations of its people and also because this text will not increase the European Union 's standing within those societies .
Of the seven amendments proposed by the Committee on Development , three have been accepted . They stress that the Association Agreement between the European Union and Central America must include the development cooperation dimension and therefore take up the priorities defined in the European cooperation consensus , as the Commissioner has said : the eradication of poverty and the achievement of the Millennium Goals .
As a result of those acknowledgements and the importance we attach to producing this agreement , the text that we will vote on contains just the minimum required for us to support it .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the rapporteur for a comprehensive and balanced report , which is exceptionally significant in today 's world .
It is a vital signpost and an aid to negotiating the Association Agreement between the European Union and the Andean Community at a crucial moment of political and economic change in the region .
The Andean Community is a productive and cohesive system integrating individual Latin American countries .
Both parties - the European Union and the Andean Community - will benefit from a deepening of mutual political and economic relations .
The guidelines drawn up for the Council are a cohesive and comprehensive document containing all the necessary elements for satisfactory cooperation .
The rapporteur highlights the key role of political dialogue , the promotion of sustainable development , education and human rights .
He also emphasises the importance of the fight against drugs , arms trafficking and organised crime , and stresses that this cooperation must be based on free trade .
The Association Agreement must gradually liberalise trade and develop political relations , whilst simultaneously promoting democracy and the social and cultural rights characteristic of the region .
I am pleased that the role of small and medium-sized enterprises in the association process has been included in the negotiation guidelines , something which I stressed in my opinion for the Committee on International Trade .
As we are all well aware , the SME sector is one of the main sources of economic growth , and has a key impact on living standards and poverty reduction .
For that reason , I think we have to lay particular emphasis on promoting this sector by making access to loans easier for SMEs , eliminating unnecessary trade barriers , and implementing programmes aimed at innovation and development .


draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall focus on the Meyer report , which addresses an important initiative for the European Union , which must come to view Central America as an opportunity , encourage trade and gradually reduce tariff barriers over time , but not the freedom of movement of persons , goods or services , thereby making the most of the specific characteristics of these countries .
This means increasing cooperation and development , protecting the social and individual dignity of the weakest members of society and gradually opening up our markets primarily to these countries ' local farming produce , which still accounts for a large proportion of their GDP .
The Committee on International Trade has , as usual , made a contribution in line with its area of expertise , but the growth in competitiveness of the countries of Central America is undoubtedly a prerequisite for the political stabilisation of an area that is still suffering the consequences of the violent clash between the tyrannical institutions and the revolutionary forces of some years ago , a clash that caused hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of deaths and that convulsed that geopolitical area .
The report 's cultural and political approach is therefore positive , and I do not believe that it has been watered down by the Committee on International Trade 's proposal .
Furthermore , the fact that some of its guidelines have been accepted in substance has helped to combine the issue of the creation of a free trade area with the more general set of issues linked to the development of democracy in that geopolitical area .


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reports presented by Mr Yañez and Mr Meyer respond to our Parliament 's long-standing call for the Andean and Central American Communities also to have association agreements , like those that we have with other parts of the region , and hence to benefit from the most well-tuned and developed instruments that the European Union has in its relations with third countries .
These are clearly not the only areas with which the European Union is negotiating association agreements , Mr President .
Since the Trade Commissioner is with us here this evening , I would like to take this opportunity to ask him to make a special effort with regard to some negotiations that have been dragging on for too long now , which are the European Union 's negotiations with Mercosur .
I appreciate the difficulties facing those negotiations .
They are not entirely due to the will of the European Union , of course , but I believe that we should make an effort to try to give them some impetus so that they can move forward .
Mr President , I would like to point out that , in the first and second generation agreements between the European Union and the countries of Latin America , the emphasis was placed on research and development , in the third generation the emphasis was placed on the democratic clause , and in this fourth generation of association agreements the accent is being placed on a gradual and reciprocal liberalisation of trade .
This does not mean that the commercial aspects are the most important , naturally .
As the Commissioner said a moment ago , this association provides the foundations for the relationship in terms of political dialogue , respect for human rights , for democratic values , respect for the rule of law , and the fight against corruption .
It is clear , however , that we cannot ignore the importance of free trade , which is something that the Central American and Andean countries are asking for , and in that regard , my only recommendation , Mr President , is that this ambitious timetable that the Commissioner has told us about , given that the Commission has approved the negotiation guidelines and Parliament is going to approve them tomorrow as well , can be given substance as soon as possible , because we have already waited too long for the Andean and Central American Communities to have association agreements , like those with Mexico and Chile , which have produced excellent results , by the way .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , our group has been seeking a consensus with regard to the reports by our fellow Members , Mr Yañez and Mr Meyer .

He has sought compromise amendments , because we believe that it is important to send a message to the Latin American sub-regions in question that what the European Union is proposing is not merely a free trade agreement , but an agreement with a broader scope that takes fundamental account of political agreement and development cooperation .
If I have understood the essential discussion that has taken place in this Parliament with regard to these two reports , it appears that the representatives of the European People 's Party 's position places more emphasis on the free market aspects of these negotiations , while others , including our Socialist Group , attach more importance to political agreement , solidarity , support for democratic institutions , the fight against poverty and the fight against violence .
If we consider the actual context of commercial relations between the European Union and Central America , for example , we will see that the European Union 's trade with Central America represents around 0.3 % of our external trade and that , in Central America too , trade with the European Union represents no more than 9 or 10 % of their external trade .
If we apply the classic maxim primum vivere , deinde philosophare [ live first , philosophise later ] , we will soon reach the conclusion that , given the situation in these countries , the most crucial aspect of our relations is not so much trade as fighting poverty , fighting lack of security , fighting violence and , in some countries , fighting the increasingly significant problem of drug-trafficking and organised crime .
That is the fundamental issue .
A short while ago , a great European journalist , the Pole Kapucinski , said that we only take notice of these countries when there is bloodshed , and he added , ' this is sad , but it is the case ' .
We are clearly facing a situation in which , having stopped paying attention , after ten years of signing peace agreements in Central America , we must now begin to take more notice and take the greatest possible advantage of the possibilities offered by the opening up of negotiations on an association agreement which we believe must enjoy the greatest possible consensus and majority support in this Parliament .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs .
Mr Pleite Meyer and Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García , for their fine work on the association agreements with the countries of Central America .
Their reports fully address the political aims underlying expansion of cooperation .
The Central American countries , share our European and Latin culture .
They are close to us , it is only natural that we should negotiate association with them .
The agreement aims to strengthen the position of both parties in a globalised world .
At present our assistance to this region is mainly humanitarian in nature .
We are giving them a fish rather than a rod .
It is China , India and world capital that are helping these countries to help themselves , by building roads , mines , factories , creating jobs and successfully selling their products there .
Our association negotiations should secure economic links that will benefit both Europe and other Central American associated countries .
Only on this basis can we build a lasting system of economic and political relations between our societies .
It is to be hoped that European capital will play a greater role involved in the countries with which we want to enter into an Association Agreement , alongside Chinese and Indian support .
The Association Agreements between other countries and the European Union are of great political importance and if they prove successful in securing ongoing economic cooperation , they will pass with flying colours .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I too would like to begin by congratulating the two rapporteurs on their efforts to seek a consensus amongst the groups with regard to establishing the mandate for negotiating the association agreements with Central America and the Andean region .
Nevertheless , as has also been said , the process of drawing up these reports has revealed that there are profound and significant differences between the groups .
Despite the efforts of the rapporteurs , the final text displays a real lack of balance in terms of the three fundamental elements of this agreement : political dialogue , cooperation and trade .
We do not believe that a free trade area is a realistic or appropriate objective for regions as vulnerable as the ones we are discussing here .
We therefore believe that we have missed a good opportunity to encourage bi-regional relations that make it possible to enhance the many dimensions of those relations and ensure the sustainable human development of the Andean and the Central American peoples . Our group will therefore abstain from tomorrow 's vote .
We regret this . We wish to point out that we want to carry on working , but we regret that a better result has not been achieved for either report .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , these reports demand that developing countries deregulate , give European companies power where public procurement is concerned , protect European and North American patents and do everything to ensure that large European companies ' investments are protected .
One of the reports even demands that a free-trade area be set up - in its own words , ' without excluding any sector ' .
Give some thought to that wording .
No , it is not that particular road we should go down .
The more deregulation there is , the better it perhaps is for large companies but the worse it is for workers , the environment and local small companies - all designed to be protected by the laws that are being repealed .
Allow me to give two examples .
It is good for Monsanto if it succeeds in patenting crops in South America , but bad for farmers and the environment . It is good for European health care companies if the health care sector is exposed to competition , but bad for those who cannot afford to pay for health care .
There is an alternative : fair trade instead of unbridled free trade , and cooperation and security instead of competition and a market free-for-all .
That is what the peoples of both Europe and Latin America require .
I shall now conclude by stating the position of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , namely that we are abstaining from voting .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , what is the best way of increasing living standards and human and civil rights in Central American and the Andean Community countries ?
The question could equally well be applied to the whole of Central and South America and the rest of the economically developing world .
It is in the long-term self-interest of the economically developed and democratic world to use its economic strength to promote economic growth and democracy in the developing world .
The best way to do this is by reducing trade barriers worldwide and by concluding trade and cooperation agreements conditional on respect for the rule of law , respect for property and contract rights and respect for human and civil rights .
We have seen how China , even while under the yoke of a dictatorial communist regime , can nevertheless achieve staggering economic development when it embraces capitalist , free-market practices .
Capitalism , for all its faults , works .
It delivers prosperity , choice and the conditions required for democracy and civilised values .
Socialism , for all its idealism , does not work .
It delivers oppression , lack of choice and material and political stagnation .
So what the developing countries of the world need is not to follow the example of the quasi-Marxist European Union .
They do not need what these reports recommend , which is the export of the worst features of the European Union : economic and political integration and harmonised legislation .
The last thing that these countries need is to follow the example of the failing economic model and increasingly centralised European Union , with its increasingly undemocratic and unaccountable political institutions .
These reports call for free trade - which is good - but that must not be conditional on recreating the failing structures of the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García , on the report on the agreement with the Andean Community .
Based as it is on the three pillars , it provides a framework that is not just limited to economic aspects .
It was , in fact , the intention of all the institutions to include in the forthcoming association agreement issues such as unemployment , security , migration , social development , the environment , sustainable development and , hence , political stability .
We are concerned to uphold the protection of human , civil , political , economic and social rights and even , in line with EU policies , biodiversity and the protection of ecosystems .
There is a need to combat child labour and to provide investment in education , research , science and technology .
The major differences within the Andean Community require a commitment to reduce poverty .
We should also all like to highlight the need to beat the scourge of narco-terrorism and to do everything possible to eradicate organised crime , corruption , impunity , terrorism , money laundering and arms trafficking .
By means of this agreement , we therefore need to promote employment and , above all , the cultivation of crops other than drugs .
We also hope that the association agreement will give a new impetus to the liberalisation of the market and of trade by means of the free trade area , as well as to the controlled customs tariffs and to the simplification and harmonisation of customs procedures .
Furthermore , we need to guarantee legal certainty for investors , by refusing point-blank to accept the enforced nationalisations that we have seen take place in recent times .


( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would first like to thank Mr Meyer Pleite for preparing the report containing the European Parliament 's recommendations to the Council concerning guidelines on the negotiation of an Association Agreement between the European Union and the countries of Central America , and Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García for his report on the guidelines for Association Agreement negotiations between the European Union and the Andean Community .
The recommendations of the European Parliament stress that association agreements , whilst aimed at the gradual liberalisation of trade as well as at political dialogue and collaboration , are also aimed at supporting continuous social development , social cohesion , strengthening democracy , the rule of law and respect for human , political , civil , economic and social rights , not forgetting the cultural and environmental dimensions of these rights .
The countries of the Andean Community and of Central America have in the past 20 years undergone a peaceful transition from authoritarian regimes to democracy .
In the 1980s , the European Union played an important role in this process .
Through its recommendations , the European Parliament is upholding this tradition .
Nowadays , trade liberalisation cannot be an end in itself .
I stress , it cannot be an end in itself , but only a step towards establishing democracy and the rule of law , social development and sustainable development in Latin America .
The association agreements with the countries of Central America and the Andean Community must incorporate politics , trade and development .
( PL ) Mr President , in Central America , the term ' European Union ' is gradually being consigned to the dictionary of rare expressions .
European political influence in the region is diminishing , even though in the 1980s those same European countries were instrumental in the democratisation of the region .
Over 11 years , trade turnover between the European Union and Central America fell by 11 % , to its current level of 13 % , despite unilateral preferential conditions on our part .
The Association Agreement should alter this situation somewhat .
The second Association Agreement with the Andean Community coincides with an intriguing political period in the region .
The victory of the anti American Left in Venezuela and Bolivia and the altered balance of power in the region is a challenge for the European Union .
It actually favours the process of economic and political integration for all of Latin America to a greater degree than MERCOSUR .

I would like to thank the rapporteurs Mr Meyer Pleite and Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García , and only regret that we are debating such important questions just before midnight .

- ( ES ) Mr President , this time I would like to use my speaking time to lay out the position of my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left-Nordic Green Left , with regard to the report by Mr Yañez .
He will understand that we are going to vote in the way that we voted on the report that I had the pleasure of presenting to the House .
We are going to abstain .
We are going to do so for the same reasons , and in the knowledge that Mr Yañez has made a real effort to present a very balanced report with the emphasis on the fundamental thing that Latin America is currently calling for , which is political dialogue and cooperation .
With regard to the cooperation aspect , we can play a very significant role compared to the role being played by the United States in Latin America , but unfortunately other Members , essentially those in the Committee on International Trade , have altered this approach substantially .
We are going to abstain .
The truth is that our instincts sometimes urge us to go a little further .
But we are going to abstain because we also believe that we must listen to the opinion of Latin America and , in this case , its social organisations as well .
We are going to take care to ensure that our abstention in this case contributes to the fundamental debate on the Association Agreement with Central America , and we are going to be very critical with a view to producing an association agreement that does not mean a free trade area .
- ( PL ) Mr President , despite the European Union 's undeniable contribution to strengthening the peace process and building democratic structures in the Central American region , its role there has diminished noticeably over the past decade .
As we have already heard , the same trend can be observed in trade , which declined from 24 % to barely 13 % in 2001 .
This situation shows clearly how important it is to sign a new Association Agreement between the European Union and the countries of Central America .
Such an agreement , in addition to its indisputable economic benefits , will also impose certain obligations on the European Union , mainly concerning support for the process of democratisation and decentralisation , and improving administrative efficiency in combating violence , corruption and infringements of human rights .
These obligations are the reason why the future Association Agreement should be more than merely a trade agreement .
It must also incorporate political and social cooperation .
The fight against poverty and social inequality can become a very useful tool in strengthening democracy , establishing trust in public institutions and also in the political elite , that ought to be the guardian of these values .
Another very important element of a future Association Agreement would be establishing compulsory environmental protection standards .
The system of incentives tested in previous cases should prove useful in this regard .
All the elements I have mentioned should become part of a future Association Agreement , and at the same time pillars of the cooperation between the European Union and the countries of Latin America .
It is only by playing an active and committed role in this region that we can contribute to its genuine economic development , social and political stability , and to the establishment of democratic values .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Missing persons in Cyprus ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on missing persons in Cyprus .
In this respect , I should like to welcome the members of the United Nations Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus , who are present in the official gallery to follow the debate on this issue and , more specifically , Christophe Girod , Chairman of the UN Committee , Elias Georgiadis , a Greek-Cypriot member of the Committee and Gülden Plümer Küçük , a Turkish-Cypriot member of the same Committee .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes and supports the motion for a resolution on the Committee on Missing Persons .
Like the honourable Members of this House , we believe that relatives have a fundamental right to know what became of missing persons .
Since the unrest of the 1960s and 1970s , about 1500 Greek Cypriots and 500 Turkish Cypriots have been missing , presumed dead .
The Committee on Missing Persons is charged with finding and identifying the remains of the missing , of returning them to their families and of counselling the bereaved .
The Committee has the support of both sides on the island and of the international community .
It is currently the most important and successful bi-communal confidence-building and reconciliation measure in Cyprus .
Recent exhumations and the establishment of an anthropological laboratory in the buffer zone show that , if there is a political will on the side of both communities , much can be achieved .
The Committee on Missing Persons can count not only on the Commission 's political support but also on the financial support of the European Union .
Under the aid programme for the Turkish Cypriot community , EUR 1.5 million has been earmarked .
This should come on stream shortly in line with the Committee 's needs , and I hope that the work of the Committee will help prepare the ground for the overall solution of the long-lasting conflict in Cyprus .
I take this opportunity to recall that monitoring of the implementation of the judgments of the European Court of Human Rights falls under the responsibility of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe .
The Commission follows the follow-up given to such judgments closely .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , I wish first of all to thank the chairmen of the political groups who included the humanitarian issue of missing persons in Cyprus as an extraordinary item on plenary 's agenda and all the political groups which signed the motion in question , which is expected to be passed tomorrow .
My special thanks also to Mrs Rothe , Mr Guardans , Mr Lagendijk and Mrs Kaufmann , who have supported my proposal to debate the question and issue the relevant resolution from the outset .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , today we are debating a purely humanitarian issue : the issue of the missing persons .
We are not debating the Cyprus question this evening .
We are not debating the problem of the military occupation of Cyprus by Turkey .
We are not politicising the issue .
We are debating a human tragedy ; the tragedy of our missing fellow human beings .
More than 2 000 people are entered on the register of missing persons , Greek Cypriots , Turkish Cypriots and others .
More or less equal numbers of families , some of which have two or three missing persons , have been living for decades with the anxiety and pain of the loss of their loved ones .
The time has finally come for them to find out - and they have the inalienable right to find out , as the Commissioner said - if their loved ones are dead or alive and , if they are dead , where they are buried .
The time has come for all parties involved to put political expediencies , fears and guilt to one side and to cooperate with the Committee on Missing Persons .
Turkey in particular is called upon to give the information and data in its possession to the committee , to comply with the decision of the European Court of Human Rights .
However , the time has come for the European Union to also take on an active role .
The resolution which is expected to be approved tomorrow renews the involvement of the Commission and the European Parliament in this humanitarian issue .
Finally , I would like to express my deep appreciation to the members of the Committee on Missing Persons for the difficult job they are doing .
I welcome their presence this evening in the European Parliament and I trust and hope that the human tragedy of the relatives of the missing persons will end as quickly as possible .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like first of all to say that I have the special honour of also speaking on behalf of my honourable friend Mrs Rothe , who is absent this evening .
I wish to congratulate Commissioner Mandelson on his statement , my honourable friend Mr Demetriou on his initiative and all my honourable friends from all the political parties who played a decisive part in putting this important humanitarian issue , the issue of the missing persons from the tragedy in Cyprus , on the agenda .
I believe that , in the vote tomorrow , all the members , regardless of their political group , will willingly attend to vote in favour of the motion for a resolution , an act of confirmation of the defence of humanitarian principles and of the deep humanitarian problem of the missing persons in Cyprus .
In 1981 the Committee on Missing Persons was set up under the aegis of the UN Secretary General .
In 1995 we had the first resolution here in Parliament , an important step in raising the awareness of the European public and international public opinion .
In May 2001 , the European Court of Human Rights returned its decision on the appeal by the Republic of Cyprus against the state of Turkey .
In its decision - and I think it is in the interests of all of us to study it - it confirmed the clear infringements of fundamental human rights and of the European Convention on Human Rights by Turkey , specifically of Article 2 on the right to life , of Article 3 on the right to freedom and security and of Article 4 on the right not to be maltreated .
Despite all this , it is now 2007 and , unfortunately , very few results have ensued from the investigation of this problem .
I believe that , as the European Union and , more importantly , as the European Parliament , we have at the very least a humanitarian responsibility to defend the fundamental - in Mr Mandelson 's words - right of the families of the missing persons to know the fate of their relatives and we must express this responsibility tomorrow in the most absolute terms .
I think it is especially important for the European Parliament to remember everyone 's obligations , because the missing persons are a humanitarian problem which concerns the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots , it concerns Greeks and Turks .
It is the outcome of tragic events in Cyprus in the 1960s , from 1964 onwards following the clashes between the two communities and , of course , it is the outcome of the Turkish invasion in 1974 .
I believe , as Mr Mandelson quite rightly said , that activating the Committee on Missing Persons is a very important step , just as the funding of its operation on the part of the European Commission is an important step .
I should like to point out here that the Member States also have an obligation to contribute funds for the operation of this committee .
I welcome the fact that Mr Mandelson backs the need for funding and has reconfirmed the European Commission 's willingness to fund its operation .
I believe that , with this debate today , not only are we activating the historic memory , but also , more importantly , we are helping the two communities in Cyprus , the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots , to become closer .
That is why I think that our debate may form a bridge for the creation of confidence-building measures leading to reconciliation and the reunification of the two communities within the framework of a united Republic of Cyprus within the European Union .
I also believe that all of us here , with the humanitarian sensitivity for which we are known , will continue to demonstrate our interest and , as the motion for a resolution states , it is very important for the European Parliament to contribute to developments or , if you like , to monitor them through the periodic reports which the committee must submit .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the problem of missing persons is a drama that is part of the history of many countries of the world .
Cyprus is not the only one , but it is certainly the closest country to us in which this drama is still absolutely part of the present and is not something consigned to the past .
It is therefore very important that we acknowledge the work of the Committee on Missing Persons created within , and recently given new impetus by , the United Nations , which is doing an extremely commendable job and one that must be recognised and supported .
That is the true purpose of the resolution that we are going to vote on tomorrow .
This work benefits the families of these missing persons and it goes far beyond the conflict , far beyond the political tension and the historic drama that has divided that island and that still divides it today .
This resolution is therefore intended to deal with this issue strictly from that point of view .
From the humanitarian point of view , geared towards the families and the suffering of people who have the right to recover the remains of the people they loved and who , as a result of the conflict , have no way of knowing , without the experts and the forensic scientists of the Committee on Missing Persons , either where they are or who they are , and they cannot be identified .
That is the intention of this resolution .
To call for the support of the institutions , including the financial support that we know the Committee on Missing Persons needs , and that is the message we intend to send .
This will not heal the wound currently being suffered by Cyprus . That requires too much work .
We know that it will take a long time to heal , despite the recent actions that we have seen .
Nevertheless , it is important that , amongst all of us , we do not contaminate this debate on joint support from the two communities for this institution with the political tension which continues to exist , but which should in no way be mixed up with the support of all of us for the work of this committee .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of the missing persons in Cyprus has been an open wound for over 30 years .
According to official figures , 2 000 people are still missing , from both sides .
Each side accuses the other of being uncooperative in the resolution of the cases .
I would ask the House to refrain from such accusations , at least in this Chamber .
Meanwhile , the families of the missing persons are still living in uncertainty as to the fate of their relatives .
The mothers ' tears are the same whether their sons were of Greek or Turkish origin : they were all Cypriots , and died because of enosis ( union with Greece ) and taksim ( partition ) .
This is one of the truths when we express our opinions about this conflict .
The work of the Committee on Missing Persons plays an important role in this context , and we cannot thank it enough .
This is primarily a humanitarian matter , and we should not make the committee 's work any more difficult by politicising it .
The committee 's work is not only important to the relatives of the missing persons , but also serves to bring the two communities closer together .
This bi-communal work on the mass graves stimulates a common culture of remembrance and understanding of the trauma suffered by the other side in the past .
That is why the financial support is so important - I agree with my fellow Members on this .
EU support for further bi-communal projects on the island is also desirable .
I am thinking of projects by filmmakers and intellectuals , such as Panikos Chrysanthou and Niyazi Kizilyürek , and also of the bi-communal art project Manifesta 6 and many other projects , which we must support if all the dreadful images of Cyprus we have seen in the past are to remain in the past and not recur in the future .
The demolition of the bridge on Ledra Street is a sign of hope .
The response to this - the demolition of the wall running through Nicosia - is another sign of hope .
Let us work together to ensure that these signs of hope are followed by other such signs .
Both sides are required to behave in a constructive , European-minded manner to make this conflict in Europe a thing of the past .
We may not be able to bring back the dead , but we can ensure that nationalism is never given another chance in Cyprus .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , we have been living through the tragedy of ignorance about the fate of some 2 000 of our missing Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot compatriots in Cyprus for years now .
The competent Committee on Missing Persons , which is made up of representatives of the Turkish Cypriots , the Greek Cypriots and the UN , has already made progress on the question of the exhumation and identification of remains .
However , their work does need to be speeded up and an end needs to be put to the suffering of our compatriots as quickly as possible .
This is a purely humanitarian issue , which affects our entire people , both Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots , and which no one should use to serve political or other ends .
We consider that the Member States should support the work of the committee by increasing their economic aid and we call on all sides to cooperate in order to establish the fate of all the missing persons .
The case of the young Greek Cypriot referred to who was taken to Turkey in 1974 is an opportunity to promote cooperation .
We believe that , in resolving this humanitarian issue , we shall have taken another step in our efforts towards finding a solution to the Cyprus problem .
( FR ) Mr President , the issue of the missing persons in Cyprus illustrates better than anything else the human drama that was played out on that island over thirty years ago .
It is an issue for Greek and Turkish Cypriots alike and is not only about the missing persons themselves but also about their families , who are still there today .
Speaking as the coordinator of the High-level Contact Group for relations with the Turkish Cypriot community in the north of the island , I can assure the House that this is still a live issue in people 's minds and that its effects are still widely felt on the ground .
I have also given notice of my intention to raise this issue , among others , at the Conference of Presidents when we present our written report to it tomorrow morning .
The issue of missing persons in Cyprus is part of the shared past that the two communities are now attempting to understand and to overcome .
Although the issue is a difficult and sensitive one , a joint project has been got up and running , symbolising the desire of both communities to build a shared future .
The project to which I refer is the Committee on Missing Persons ; it exists under the aegis of the United Nations , and the humanitarian work it does is crucial in terms of the help it gives to both communities as they look for some 2 000 persons who are still listed as missing .
I cannot but be very pleased about the interest shown by my fellow Members of this House in the problem of missing persons in Cyprus .
I agree that political support at the highest level is indispensable to the success of this project .
Work on the missing persons problem must be seen primarily as humanitarian in character , as this House has always pointed out .
The project must rely on the goodwill of both communities and be a joint enterprise with , of course , the appropriate material , financial and human resources .
Since it came into being , this committee has come up against many obstacles , but it has now entered upon a new phase and has taken definite and useful action , which is what prompts me to welcome and encourage the efforts being made on both sides of the Green Line towards opening new border crossing points in various places , among them on Ledra Street in the historic heart of Nicosia .
It follows , then , that the Committee on Missing Persons is not merely symbolic , but a means of dialogue between the two communities and hence an essential contribution to the overall settlement of the Cyprus issue .
Mr President , I shall speak briefly only about the missing children of the 1974 Cyprus tragedy .
Christakis Georgiou , a five-year-old boy , was slightly injured after being shot inside his home by a Turkish solider during the 1974 invasion .
He was taken to a Turkish military field hospital , and that was the last time he was seen by his mother .
Evidence that came to light 33 years later - including eye-witness accounts by Turkish soldiers - strongly indicates that he was transported to Turkey , where he was adopted by a Turkish army officer who had no children of his own .
The mother , who is now elderly , desperately wants to see him again before she dies .
Andreas Kyriakou , a five-year-old boy , and his three-year-old twin sisters , Maria and Kika , were forcibly separated from their mother by Turkish soldiers who attacked their village .
They were taken , along with a group of other civilians , to a nearby field in the now occupied area of Cyprus , from where shortly afterwards gunfire was heard .
It is feared that they might have been executed in a frenzied reprisal .
The Turkish army has never given any information as to what happened to them .
Their mother hopes and prays that they might still be alive .
If not , she begs to have their skeletal remains given to her so that she can give them a proper burial .
The above are 4 out of the 30 children and the more than 1500 persons missing in similar circumstances after being taken into custody by the Turkish army in 1974 .
The Turkish Government says nothing of their whereabouts or of the circumstances of their disappearance , despite the European Court of Human Rights ruling of 10 May 2001 condemning Turkey in the strongest possible terms for such behaviour , which , in the words of the Court 's ruling , ' attains a level of severity which can only be categorised as inhuman treatment ' .
Commissioner , the affair of the missing persons is not a necrology issue .
The relatives still hope that their loved ones might still be alive .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , not all the missing persons are Greek Cypriots ; there are also missing persons from the Turkish Cypriot community .
Parliament 's high-level contact group for relations with the Turkish Cypriot community has seen with its own eyes the exemplary cooperation taking place within the Committee on Missing Persons .
This is the only bi-communal initiative in Cyprus that is functioning smoothly .
It is very much in the interests of the Cypriot people on both sides to reappraise what is indeed a dark chapter in their common history .
Contemporary witnesses are advising the scientists on possible sites .
We have seen with our own eyes the professionalism with which the international team , headed by an Argentine , has been working on identifying the human remains .
It is good that we are now giving this committee our attention , and hopefully also additional funding .
I would caution against abusing this issue for political ends , however , as it would be all too easy for this to disturb the laborious , careful process of rapprochement between the two communities and do a great deal more damage .
It would not be the first time , as the urgently needed technical committees that were supposed to be set up long ago to ensure smooth cooperation between the two communities on essential everyday matters such as health , crime-fighting and trade facilitation have yet to show any success in three years .
Why is this ?
The citizens of Cyprus are certainly not unwilling .
The reason lies in the spirit of the negative power politics , the obstructionist politics , that have been standing in the way of teamwork on both sides for decades .
At the end of the debate I have received a motion for a resolution on missing persons in Cyprus .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.05 a.m. )
( SV ) Mr President , it is an issue of protocol that I am addressing .
Yesterday , when I was to talk about the report on trade defence instruments , I wanted to quote the Muscardini report from October , whereupon I discovered that an important bit of it was missing . As a result , I do not know how we are to proceed now .
The report is from October 2006 , but there is a serious error in the Swedish version , as the whole of the following text is missing from paragraph 11 , and I wonder how we can remedy this .
The following text is missing from the Swedish version : ' with a view to including non-compliance with global social and environmental agreements or international covenants as forms of dumping or subsidy ' .
If the whole aspect of the environment and social dumping is missing from the Swedish version , the Swedish people will get a false picture of what it is that Parliament wants .
Mr Schlyter , this comment is very important and it will be taken into account .
It will be checked and the necessary action will be taken .
Documents received : see Minutes
Regional policy ( islands and natural and economic constraints ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Musotto , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the islands and natural and economic constraints in the context of the regional policy .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my sincere thanks to all my fellow Members who have contributed to the drafting of this report .
We believe that this is the first time that a complete study has been dedicated to the islands , taking account of their specific characteristics with regard to all areas of Community competence : although the 2007-2013 cohesion policy pays particular attention to structurally disadvantaged regions , no specific measures are provided for island regions .
Parliament has highlighted this gap several times and , although the situation in European islands is varied - there are 121 islands in all , with a population of roughly 15 million inhabitants - they share a series of difficulties that constitute a competitive disadvantage : higher prices due to additional transport costs and little competition ; difficulty in accessing the single market , the need to import raw materials , higher energy costs , lack of infrastructure , immigration , limited diversification of economic activities and vulnerability to environmental risks .
It is no accident that the average per capita GDP on the islands is 72 % of the European Union average .
It is therefore necessary to recognise their specific island characteristics when implementing Community policy , beginning with State aids .
We believe that greater flexibility is needed in order to offset the additional costs and , as regards energy , to compensate for fluctuations in the cost of fuel .
In the context of the Structural Funds operating programmes , particular emphasis must be given to carrying out infrastructure projects , especially within the framework of European maritime policy , in order to integrate the islands fully into the internal market and the Lisbon Strategy .
On the other hand , islands enjoy an advantage as regards the generation of energy using wind , sun and sea .
These represent unequalled potential value , which is why the Commission must support projects for renewable energy sources and energy security .
Tourism is another resource to be exploited .
We need a Community policy for promoting island tourism , a quality and origin label and an in-depth study on sustainable tourism .
Among other things , we propose 2010 as the European year for the islands .
The report also tackles the issue of illegal immigration , which we view as both a human tragedy and an unsustainable burden for the Mediterranean islands , for which the European Union must take responsibility .
We welcome the creation of Rapid Border Intervention Teams and call for the establishment of a European coastguard body .
As a matter of urgency , the European Union must allocate the necessary resources to guarantee rapid and timely intervention in this field .
There are other proposals which warrant further development , such as the financial instruments JASPERS ( Joint Assistance in Supporting Projects in European Regions ) and JEREMIE ( Joint European Resources for Micro to Medium Enterprises ) to facilitate access to credit for small and medium-sized enterprises and to promote the diversification of island economies , or the distribution of broadband to bridge the technology gap .
Finally , it is essential that we revise the legal framework in order to take into full consideration the specific characteristics of islands and update the statistical indicators accordingly : taking account of the islands within the context of the European Spatial Planning Observation Network and setting up an administrative unit for the islands within the Commission Directorate-General for Regional Policy .
We hope that this report will represent a real turning point , once and for all , by producing genuine development and providing practical answers for new generations who intend to continue to live and work in the place where they were born , integrated into the European context .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , islands and other territories with natural or specific constraints are very important to the Commission in terms of ensuring territorial cohesion , developing cross-border cooperation - usually with third countries , tourism , culture and other issues .
While acknowledging that a cross-sectoral approach may be useful , cohesion policy aims to play a central role in dealing with the specific problems of these territories .
In the draft 2007-2013 Cohesion Policy General Regulation , issued in July 2004 , the Commission specifically proposed granting a co-financing rate top-up to these regions .
Unfortunately , this proposal was not finally adopted by the Council in the final version of the regulation approved in July 2006 and which is now in force , as you are aware .
However , the Commission will ensure , during the ongoing negotiations on the Cohesion Policy intervention for 2007-2013 , that the specific constraints of these territories are duly taken into account in the corresponding programmes and that suitable measures are programmed to tackle them .
In addition , the Commission is now preparing the Fourth Cohesion Report to be published in May , which will contain a comprehensive analysis of the state of play and trends in territorial cohesion in the EU , including islands and regions with natural handicaps .
Likewise the Commission intends to continue upgrading work within the ESPON programme in order to obtain more suitable indicators and more updated information on these territories .
At the same time , the Commission would point out that statistical data for islands or other territories that are NUTS II or NUTS III regions are already available .
Gathering statistical information for smaller territories is certainly more difficult , but in fact 95 % of the European island population , outermost regions excluded , live in NUTS II or NUTS III regions .
Turning to the practical implementation of the notion of territorial cohesion , despite the lack of an explicit legal base as provided by the Constitutional Treaty , the Council already agreed in 2004 in Rotterdam to introduce the territorial dimension into the Lisbon process .
It also started to develop the territorial agenda and this document , which aims at presenting the challenges , objectives and policy recommendations for territorial cohesion , is due to be adopted in May 2007 in Leipzig .
Moreover , the Community strategy guidelines on cohesion adopted by the Council last October include a specific chapter on the territorial dimension of cohesion policy .
The Commission is now working to ensure their practical implementation in the programming documents that are now being negotiated .
The Commission is very much in favour of promoting Euro-regions or similar structures in order to manage cross-border transnational and interregional cooperation .
These bodies could be particularly suited to islands and other regions with natural handicaps and , in addition , the Commission encourages these territories to make use of the brand new European Grouping for Territorial Cooperation in order to facilitate the management of the corresponding programmes .
With regard to state aid , it may be that regional investment aid is not the best instrument to tackle local problems in islands .
I believe that the islands ' main problems can be tackled more effectively with , for example , horizontal instruments .
Our state aid rules already allow for many forms of aid .
For example , our rules on services of general economic interest allow compensation for the provision of local public services , including passenger transport services .
Secondly , our new guidelines on risk capital and our framework for research development and innovation offer new opportunities to support young , innovative companies , with extra bonuses for small and medium-sized enterprises .
In some cases , the support levels needed by small islands will not be counted as aids at all .
Under the new de minimis regulation , aid of up to EUR 200 000 , granted over any period of 3 years will not be counted as aid .
Investment for all kinds of public infrastructure can be financed .
They do not have an aid element .
Moreover , the specific situation of islands is effectively taken into account in the new regional aid guidelines .
Under the new form of aid to help business start-ups , a 5 % bonus is given to small islands .
I think that these examples really show how , through our state aid reform process , we are making the rules more predictable and reducing the administrative burden of state aid notification , and that was what you were asking for in the interests of island regions and all other stakeholders .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( MT ) I would like to begin by congratulating my colleague , Mr Musotto on this report .
It is an extremely important report , especially for those who , like me , come from islands .
It is particularly important because it lends a voice to islands .
Islands deserve to be heard , because up until now the European Union has not paid them enough attention .
This report is therefore devoting the appropriate consideration to them .
I was also pleased to hear Commissioner Kroes state that islands are important for the European Commission .
However , Commissioner , we want islands to be considered in all the various policy areas within the European Union and not simply viewed through the lens of regional policy .
For example , you are Commissioner for competition and , as you rightly stated , there are rules on state aid that , as yet , are not sufficiently flexible in the case of islands .
The rules intended for the whole of the European territory are not necessarily flexible enough to apply to islands , and we would like you to examine these rules seriously , to dedicate more attention to islands and to ensure that the rules can be applied as flexibly as possible .
I would like to highlight paragraph 10 of the report .
It talks about the need for the Commission regularly to draw up a report on the requirements of islands and on how these can be addressed .
I expect the Commission to draw up such a report , and we will keep insisting that this be done .
Once again , I would like to say that this is a good report and , undoubtedly , one that all the islands involved will appreciate .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again the European Parliament has brought up the subject of islands .
Once again it has clearly stated in this report - and I should like to congratulate Mr Musotto on a job very well done - that island regions need special treatment .
They need more aid , in order not only to overcome the development problems they face , but also so that they can make use of the potential of the common market and the globalised economy .
For all of us who inhabit island regions , problems to varying degrees , such as geographical isolation , the lack of infrastructures , economic and demographic stagnation and limited resources and options are , I would say , a way of life .
At the same time , however , we are all - both permanent residents and the millions of citizens who choose European islands for their holidays - well aware of the advantages of island regions : their cultural wealth , their rich but sensitive ecosystems , their natural environment , their special way of life and their quality products and traditional methods of manufacture .
We must support these advantages , we must highlight them and we must promote them through the policies of the European Union , especially through the cohesion policy , if we really want fundamental economic and territorial cohesion between the regions of Europe .
It is in this context that I should like to refer to the particular importance of granting state aid to island regions , where the cost of fuel and energy has an adverse impact on their competitiveness and on the flexible application of both existing and future state aid in relation to the cost of transport , the application of an integrated policy on tourism , the application of an effective business policy and the immediate creation of an administrative unit for islands at the Regional Policy DG on the basis of experience acquired by the administrative unit for remote regions , the operation of which will safeguard all the peculiarities and needs of the islands and of their permanent and seasonal inhabitants which are taken into account in the development and application of European policies , especially in the transport , energy and water resource management sectors .
At a time when the Fourth Cohesion Report is being prepared and the debate on the future of regional policy is starting in the run-up to the review of the financial perspective for 2008-2009 , the European Parliament should remember that the European Union cannot deal differently with similar situations or with different situations in the same way .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , the ALDE Group thanks Mr Musotto for his very valuable report on the natural and economic constraints affecting islands .
All the topics covered merit full attention , but I should like to concentrate on issues relating to state aid and paragraphs 8 , 9 and 19 .
The reason has to do with the realities of life on islands , particularly those remote from centres of population .
The examples are from my own constituency , but resonate across the whole of the EU .
To emphasise the problem of distance , it takes a friend from the Shetland Islands a 14-hour journey by car and ferry to reach the nearest cinema .
The price of petrol is some 11 % higher in the Western Isles than in Scotland 's central belt .
This rises to around 16 % for the Shetland Islands .
A bale of hay costs five times as much in the Western Isles as it does just outside the nearest city of Inverness .
Facts like these only begin to illustrate how far matters of location alone can place islands at a competitive disadvantage .
I thank the Commissioner for what she said about state aid , but a more flexible regime is still needed simply to level the playing field .
I have particular concerns , as she knows , with the market investor test .
Again , the realities of life on islands and in other remote regions make this test very difficult to satisfy , as no appropriate comparator may be available and the small size of the market creates problems where the average level of return for a given sector is concerned .
All we seek in this context is for our islands to enjoy access to the single market on equal terms with mainland regions .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for the work done .
If we are honest with ourselves , we must today admit that not all citizens of EU Member States enjoy the same advantages .
In our Community there are areas where particular constraints exist because of distance or poor accessibility .
Those areas include islands , and they are often also ultraperipheral and mountain areas .
We talk about solidarity , and internal cohesion .
These fundamental principles require us to exercise due care and if necessary , provide adequate support for the people who live in the areas mentioned .
Transport difficulties , scarcity of raw materials , increased energy supply costs , difficulties in accessing the Internet , and telecommunications networks , difficult terrain , particularly in the mountains and the furthermost northern areas , depopulation , or illegal immigration - those are the major problems addressed by the report .
In support of the conclusions arrived at by the rapporteur , I wish to call to us all not to abandon these people to their fate .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to add my own congratulations to the rapporteur and thank him for his very constructive approach to our amendments as we were working on this in the committee .
I am very pleased to support his report today .
Coming from Scotland I have a particular interest and a particular perspective , as other Scots colleagues do , and I would remind colleagues firstly that peripherality is relative .
Brussels is actually pretty peripheral if I am looking for Scottish football scores on a Saturday .
Islands have a distinctive culture , a distinctive identity and a distinctive geography , which is something to celebrate , not pity .
If the playing field is level , there is nothing wrong with Europe 's islands that will not be put right by what is right with Europe 's islands in their dynamism , their innovation and their potential contribution to the EU 's objectives .
If Malta was in central Europe with good transport links and easy links to the rest of Europe , then it would not be Malta any more , it would be Munich .
We must celebrate Europe 's islands as well as recognise their distinctiveness .
Being an island means that there are specific issues which need to be dealt with and this report makes a number of solid suggestions .
I hope that our Commissioner will give us specific assurances today that this report will be acted upon because there are a lot of good ideas in it and I would hope that this would not become another wish list that the Commission pays lip service to but does not necessarily do very much with .
I would like to highlight a few specific points .
Islands have specific disbenefits in interaction with the European Union single market and we must have up-to-date , accurate statistics in order to inform policy .
Can our Commissioner assure us that we will work with Eurostat in order to make this happen ?
In paragraphs 12 and 16 of our report , we call for the creation of a specific cross-cutting administrative unit within the Directorate-General for Regional Policy to deal with islands .
This already exists in respect of outermost regions .
The case for a specific unit dealing with islands is very clear .
Can our Commissioner assure us that this will actually happen ?
On state aid , as other colleagues have mentioned , we must see a more realistic approach from the Commission in assessing state aid criteria for islands .
Islands have specific economic factors which are not currently sufficiently taken into account and I would welcome an assurance from our Commissioner that we will review policy on this .
Concerning state aid cuts , particularly in the field of transport to , from and within islands , in Scotland our own government has just squandered EUR 25 million on a very wasteful tender in respect of ferry services .
This mistake was largely domestic in origin , but the complexity of the interlocking EU rules did not help and we must take a look at this again .
We also need to look in particular at public service obligations and aid of a social character in terms of how they are viewed in respect of Article 87 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
The position of road equivalent tariff must also be clarified .
On energy , islands have a clear natural advantage and we would like to see the Commission use all means available to encourage sustainable energy communities , in particular the European grid , and the abolition of domestic constraints .
In Scotland with Shetland , Orkney , the Western Isles and Argyle and Bute we have the best wind , wave and tidal resources in the EU and a vast potential contribution to make to the EU 's energy and climate change objectives , but we are not developing these resources because we have seen insufficient investment in the grid .
If the EU is serious about meeting the climate change challenges , invest in interconnectors to the Scottish islands and the Scottish islands will make a vast contribution to our objectives .
Similarly , the UK Government is holding us back in terms of a discriminatory pricing system in access to the National Grid in the UK .
Simply , the further away from the main market , the higher the connection charge is to feed electricity into the UK National Grid .
I am firmly of the view that this is discriminatory under Article 7 ( 6 ) of the 2001 Renewable Energy Directive and I believe that the Commission must open formal proceedings against the UK for holding us back .
The islands have a vast contribution to make and they can make it .
There is nothing wrong with Europe 's islands that will not be put right by what is right with them , but we must ensure the playing field is level .
Your speech reminds us of an important fact : we are always on the periphery of someone .
The problem of centrality is not easy to define .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , we must , I think , congratulate the Committee on Regional Development for taking the initiative to prepare such a report .
The islands of the European Union truly are a crucial element within the framework of the cohesion policy for the period from 2007 to 2013 , because most face difficulties which they must overcome in order not to be at a disadvantage in relation to the rest of the European Union .
Thus , for an island such as Cyprus , for example , the difficulties faced are as follows : high prices due to the interaction of captive markets and additional transport costs , low wages due to the levels of demand and opportunity , a lack of raw materials , increased energy costs , shortcomings in infrastructures , a limited range of activities and greater vulnerability to environmental risks which can impact on tourism .
The report covers the broader framework of these problems in a satisfactory manner .
However , there is a problem in the report with which I do not agree , and that is the problem of immigration .
In proposing greater policing of external borders , the creation of a border guard and the stamping out of so-called illegal immigration , we are hiding our heads in the sand and we are not proposing viable solutions to a very big social problem , because we cannot advertise the European Union as a global economic power on the one hand and close our borders on the other .
As far as this is concerned , the islands have a positive role to play which , unfortunately , is not the role described in the report .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , so , we need another initiative do we ?
This time for island people .
Actually , island people are by nature resourceful .
They are all still there , but they need help where the EU has interfered .
Last year this Parliament approved the resumption of licences for EU fishing fleets to plunder the waters of Western Sahara .
Unable to compete with the modern vessels of the EU , these people sought work elsewhere , and the Canary Islands began to experience the trauma of massive illegal immigration .
Graphically displayed on TV , boatloads of West Africans were seen trying to make their way across the Atlantic , their misery compounded as dozens died when their inshore craft could not cope with the open sea .
Once this EU-inspired exodus began , people from neighbouring countries followed suit , making it worse .
Malta faces the same problem of mass immigration .
Of course it does : the EU 's high tariff barriers depress trade , with the poorer countries of northern and eastern Africa being hard hit , so off they go to try their luck in Europe using Malta as a staging post .
Pouring aid into Malta is not the answer .
It is the tariff barriers : bring those down , trade improves and most people in Africa will be able to make a living without moving home .
If you persist with a closed shop of 27 EU countries when there is a whole world out there just waiting to engage in trade with Europe , then the problems of your own making will continue .
Do I see in the report that EU islands , especially in the outermost regions , might be used as sources of renewable energy ?
I suppose that means we intend to plant these ridiculous wind farms on them .
Well , that is one way of driving the indigenous population away , and all for useless turbines producing insignificant amounts of power at unpredictable times , located on remote islands so as to ensure that much of their pitiful output is lost in transmission .
I notice that islands are said to be vulnerable to rising sea levels : another dimension of the hysterical , doom-laden warnings of the ' global warmers ' .
It is not happening on the scale that has been claimed .
And it is natural .
It has happened before .
The world experiences cycles of warming and cooling .
In the Medieval warm period it was hotter than now , and for decades .
There are enough records of these hotter events , such as certain crops growing where never before , but there are no records of islands disappearing beneath the waves .
It is about time we all calmed down and realised that minimal global warming is naturally occurring in a cycle that has no input from man .
We should simply adapt as nature intended .
In conclusion , let us stop interfering .
Leave successful islands alone .
Where help is needed , for third world islands or otherwise , let trade be their aid .
The EU 's protectionist attitude is no long-term help , it is just sticking plaster and that always peels off after a while .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , how can we not take into account the structural disadvantages of our islands in Europe ?
It was vital for this issue to be an objective in the EU regulations on State aid .
The own-initiative report on islands in the European Union and their undeniable constraints , presented by my highly esteemed colleague , Mr Musotto , is a milestone in recognising the importance of islands within the context of Europe 's regional development .
In this parliamentary term , this is the first time that I have found myself analysing and commenting on a report that is so valuable and worthy of endorsement .
It is worthy of endorsement because it considers all the aspects necessary and is very balanced in its approach , as well as being absolutely worthy of support on its merits and with regard to its aims .
I will be happy to vote for it and I hope that it receives full endorsement from all my fellow Members .
Is it possible for the EU not to take into account a statistically undeniable fact , which is that approximately 15 million citizens live on islands , and that over 90 % of these people have incomes lower than the European average ?
The main causes of this state of affairs are the undeniable structural deficits directly resulting from island status , and for too long the European Union has all but ignored this fact .

Now , the valuable Musotto report , as well as setting out in the observations reasons for this underdevelopment , and clearly describing the specific resources of islands , finally focuses on what action the Union can take , and through which specific tools , analyses and statistics , as part of the allocation of the Structural Funds and aid to disadvantaged areas , to accommodate the structural disadvantages of islands .
This course is one that we owe to island communities , acknowledging both their role in European civilisation and their current role as an extremely important environmental and economic resource for the European Union .
If the islands are sustained within the undeniable constraints on their development that they still face in the shape of obstacles associated with island status , and if due consideration is taken of this in the guidelines on the Structural Funds , the European Union will be making a significant contribution to removing inequalities , or , in fact , discrimination , which is not only unjustifiable in terms of the Community acquis but antithetical to the established objective of fair and consistent development of Europe 's regions .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite the pronounced objective of the European Union to achieve convergence between its regions , the peculiarities of island regions lead to divergence .
The resources of the Structural Funds did not have the anticipated results for these regions .
As such , new action needs to be planned and special measures need to be taken for the islands .
The systematic monitoring and recording of their development in comparison with the other regions of Europe will be a useful tool .
I welcome the incorporation of a series of issues in the report we are voting on today , such as a re-examination of the conditions of contracts in order to facilitate transport and public transport on lines of little commercial interest , the safeguarding of energy security with the emphasis and priority on renewable sources of energy , a study and measures to combat the effects of climate change which exacerbate existing problems such as drought , broadband coverage to facilitate the daily life of island dwellers and resolve important problems , proper , controlled development which protects the appearance of the islands and dealing with the problem of illegal immigration and border controls by introducing a European coastguard .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's report is a good start .
However , if we are to achieve the desired results , I call on the Commission to propose immediate measures and action so that what is set out in the own initiative report is put into practice .
To close , I wish to thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Musotto , on his important and consistent work .
Mr President , an island holiday may be the stuff of dreams in terms of getting away from it all , but living and working on islands can pose many difficulties , and we should acknowledge this in our policy-making .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Musotto , on his report , which outlines the natural and economic constraints faced by islands in the context of regional policy .
The report deals with the singular difficulties that many islands face in competing successfully with their counterparts on the mainland .
The report usefully identifies categories of islands : some are large - 5 island regions have populations exceeding 500 000 and account for 75 % of the European island population - whilst the remainder are much smaller .
I am more familiar with the problems faced by smaller islands , such as those off the coast of my native Scotland .
For example , only this week it has been reported that twice as many young women than men are leaving the Hebrides .
If this continues , the population will not be sustainable from 2019 .
As Mr Musotto 's report outlines , there are also common difficulties faced by islands , for example higher prices , difficult terrain , remoteness and poor infrastructure .
I support the call for these problems to be recognised in regional policy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by warmly congratulating Mr Musotto on his excellent work .
I have expressed my awareness of the specific features of islands when participating in the negotiation process on the new regulations on cohesion policy as rapporteur for the regulation on the Cohesion Fund and as shadow rapporteur on the general regulation and the regulation on the European Fund for Regional Development .
I am well aware , therefore , that Parliament has recognised the disadvantaged status of islands and has confirmed that they represent a natural and cultural heritage for us all as Europeans .
The European Union must be able to sustain and promote these areas , providing the resources they need for harmonious development while complying with the principle of territorial cohesion , allowing a more flexible implementation of policies on State aid and ensuring effective protection of special environmental features .
Special attention should also be paid to islands that are a long way from large population centres , which have great difficulties in accessing services , even basic ones , by developing an EU maritime policy that is able to establish stable economic and commercial relations with bordering countries .
I am very much in agreement with Mr Musotto on the need to improve transport connections and infrastructure - I refer to ports and airports - as well as the need to offset the greater costs , particularly energy costs , that result from their geographical locations .
I find the rapporteur 's proposal to set up a European coastguard body to monitor the external borders of the European Union an interesting one , since one of the problems from which our islands suffer most of all is illegal immigration via the sea .
In conclusion , I would like to say that I endorse Mr Musotto 's excellent proposal to designate 2010 as the European Year of Islands .
( PT ) In order to give real practical shape to the economic and social cohesion that has been announced , it is necessary not only to promote genuine convergence among the economically less developed Member States - the cohesion countries - but also to help reduce regional disparities , so encouraging the harmonious development of the territory of each Member State .
With this in view , it is now crucial - partly by increasing the financial resources allocated to cohesion policy - to support the disadvantaged regions and those with structural problems , so helping eliminate those obstacles to regional development that exist due to the permanent natural and geographical disadvantages that exist in , for example , the island regions .
Despite recognising the structural disadvantages from which islands suffer , the strategy adopted has been inconsistent , and that is why we approve of certain proposals emphasised in this report , such as an increase in the Community cofinancing rate on the basis of existing eligibility criteria , or flexibility in authorising State aids to the regions concerned , so as to alleviate the costs of fuel , transport and energy in a way that discriminates positively in favour of these regions .
Recognition of the obstacles , which have already been more than adequately highlighted , is not the main issue here . Nor is the disadvantaged regions ' competition over priorities .
Rather , it is the inadequacy of the financial resources allocated to cohesion policy , as shown in the current financial framework 2007-2013 , within which the Structural Funds were reduced from 0.41 % to 0.37 % of GNI and priority was given to the liberalising and privatising objectives of the Lisbon Strategy , which undermine the specific competitive advantages of these regions .
( FR ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on the basis of Article 158 of the Treaty and of the Declaration on island regions annexed to it , the European Union takes into account the handicaps and constraints suffered by these regions in adopting specific measures to encourage the integration of European islands within the internal market .
However , Mr Musotto , whom I thank for supporting my amendments in the Committee on Regional Development , has good grounds today for questioning the European Commission about the actual implementation of these provisions .
First , I should like to remind you that the concepts of ultraperipherality and of insularity are completely separate , whatever the ties of proximity or of solidarity that unite them , since the main characteristics of the outermost regions are their great distance from the European continent and their belonging to a geographical area that is composed , for the most part , of ACP countries .
Insularity constitutes both a geographical and cultural advantage that represents a potential to be developed within an appropriate development strategy and a permanent handicap that causes extra difficulty for the competitiveness of these regions .
The principle of territorial cohesion , which was strengthened in the Structural Funds Regulations for 2007-2013 , must aim at the polycentric integration of European Union territory so as to give all regions and their people equal opportunities .
In addition to the measures that you have mentioned , Commissioner , I would ask the Commission to further integrate the possibility afforded by the Treaty in terms of adjusting Community policies that could have negative repercussions for the economic and social development of these regions , in order to solve in practice the problems that specifically affect every island region or group of regions .
In conclusion , I think we should congratulate ourselves for holding this debate at a reasonable time and not at 11 p.m. , as is too often the case , Mr President .
I am delighted , too , because I have always thought that this matter is important and deserves to be tackled by the European Union , including in the Treaties .
In the past , I have attached great importance to it .
( PL ) Mr President , each enlargement of the EU involves a systematic increase of the role of islands in all Community policies , from territorial cohesion through to tourism and culture .
Unfortunately , the Union 's policy so far has not taken into account these specific constraints of islands , and the problems they face when trying to compete with mainland regions .
There is therefore an urgent need to establish statistical indicators to help identify the specificities of all areas with difficult geographical conditions .
It is also necessary to take account of the need of islands to enjoy access to the single market on equal terms with mainland regions , with priority given to the improving transport links with islands .
Each Commission should examine the possibility of granting aid also to island regions where fuel and energy costs clearly adversely affect their competitiveness .
Another priority is the energy security of islands and the development and implementation of relevant projects using renewable energy sources and new technologies .
In addition , the Commission should examine the impact of climate change on island regions .
Recognising the efforts made by the FRONTEX Agency it is nonetheless appropriate to highlight the need to monitor the impact of illegal immigration on island communities on an ongoing basis .
Member States must not overlook the need to provide effective measures to preserve the unique characteristics of island regions in terms of protection of the environment and cultural heritage and promotion of the sustainable development of tourism , which also affects the growth of other important sectors such as trade , fishery , and agriculture .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a very well-prepared document .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that it is useful to discuss a specific economic instrument to support islands , their special features and characteristics , and I believe that it is useful for cohesion policy to pay special attention to the outermost regions .
I believe that we must act to bring about a real improvement in the transport system and infrastructure , external and internal connections and also connections within the islands , for instance between the coasts and the interior , but that we should avoid wasting European resources on monumental , useless projects , often designed to connect islands with the mainland via enormous bridges , which would certainly mar the very idea of island status .
While I welcome the drawing up of Mr Musotto 's report , I think that it places undue emphasis on describing a relationship between islands and illegal immigration .
There is no relationship .
The vast majority of migrants to the Canaries arrive by plane , not by sea , just as the vast majority of irregular immigrants to Italy do not disembark at Lampedusa but also arrive by plane .
In my opinion , therefore , this argument is misplaced , and for that reason I believe that this aspect is probably not integral to Mr Musotto 's report .
We must also question whether the mobilisation of rapid intervention brigades on the borders may perhaps be more useful in preventing the deaths of emigrants in the Mediterranean rather than in stopping them from arriving .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take just one important area from my colleague Francesco Musotto 's very good report , an area whose importance not only for the islands concerned but for the EU as a whole should not be underestimated , namely the problem of illegal immigration .
This problem of illegal immigration must in my opinion be tackled more effectively , having as it does a highly disproportionate effect on the EU 's islands in the Mediterranean .
Even though progress has already been made with the measures the EU has taken - with the development of an integrated border management system and the establishment of a community code on the rules governing the movement of persons across any kind of borders , for example - the immigration figures nevertheless show that those measures are still not enough .
Even though the competence for measures clearly lies with the Member States and will have to remain with them in future , the islands cannot be made to carry the excessive burden alone simply because of their geographical position , because what is at first sight a Spanish , Italian or Greek problem subsequently becomes a problem for the whole of Europe and therefore also calls for a response at Community level .
Solidarity in action is what is required here and must be made reality .
In this connection , the creation of a European coastguard to monitor the EU 's external borders would certainly be no panacea for this island problem , but this proposal of Mr Musotto 's does deserve to be examined to see whether it could be one of many measures to combat illegal immigration and protect the islands and the EU as a whole .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr Musotto , as the elected Member for the Autonomous Region of the Azores - which , as our fellow Member , Mrs Sudre , capably pointed out , is an outermost region whose status is not to be confused with that of the island regions - I should like warmly to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Musotto , as well as the whole of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the excellent work they have done .
I should like most especially to draw attention to the proposal concerning a European coastguard body - a proposal crucial to defending the marine environment , monitoring fishing , supporting maritime trade and , in particular , monitoring compliance with international labour and safety standards and , of course , dealing with the problems surrounding immigration .
Opposition to , or approval of , immigration is not at issue in this case .
The fact is , there are people who take to the ocean in unseaworthy vessels , and they need support while they are on the high seas .
In this context , I should like to point out that - contrary to what is stated by some of my fellow Members - these plans for a European coastguard body do not conceal an agenda overly preoccupied with security .
What we do have is a vision of European maritime policy vital to all island regions and , most especially , to the outermost regions .

( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to thank Mr Musotto for the high quality of his report which we are now examining on the problems associated with the island regions .
The fact is that , as the report amply demonstrates , island status is an insuperable and permanent reality that seriously affects these regions ' ability to compete .
It therefore makes eminent sense for specific EU resources to be demanded within the context of the various common policies , given the fact that island regions are at a competitive disadvantage in relation to continental regions .
This need was recognised by the treaties but , unfortunately , never gave rise to consistent overall arrangements .
What is more , the need for a European response designed to mitigate the competitive disadvantage from which the island regions suffer is all the greater inasmuch as increased European competitiveness in an international context is demanded nowadays .
It is therefore important for the European Union to be innovative in responding to the problems specific to the island regions and affecting their competitiveness .
What is needed is a response by the European Union that helps island regions derive more benefit from dynamic , highly competitive developments such as Europe 's large internal market , Economic and Monetary Union and the Lisbon Strategy .
I should therefore like to support , in particular , the report 's recommendation that an administrative unit , charged with defining and promoting a European strategy for the island regions , be set up within the Directorate-General for Regional Policy on the model of what already exists for the outermost regions .
Only in that way will due account be taken of the very specific circumstances of the island regions in the context of policies relating , for example , to transport , energy , the environment , tourism , taxation and State aids .
( PL ) Mr President , I first want to thank the rapporteur and congratulate him on his thorough presentation of the natural and economic constraints of island regions with regard to regional policy .
The specific characteristics of these regions are generally recognised by the majority of Member States .
Despite the efforts made through regional policy , however , the relative position of island regions in rankings based on regional GDP has remained practically unchanged over the past 20 years .
I am glad the Commission has recognised that per capita GDP and unemployment rate are considered insufficient indicators with which to assess the socio-economic situation of regions beset with natural handicaps .
In these areas the ability to react positively to economic change is limited and island economies tend to be hardest hit by economic crises .
The economies of island regions are often dependent on a limited number of economic sectors .
The islands are heavily dependent on the public sector too .
Another important issue addressed by other speakers is illegal immigration .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Commission should undertake a special needs assessment study of island regions , propose solutions , and that this issue should be duly addressed in the Fourth Cohesion Report .
Mr President , I come from the United Kingdom and of course we have several large islands there .
But we also have the western islands of Scotland and these were briefly mentioned by my colleagues from the Scottish part of the United Kingdom .
You will know , Mr President , when you were President of the Malta delegation , as does Mr Busuttil , that Malta is suffering a lot of illegal immigration at the moment .
This is a matter that needs urgent attention , as Mr Berend pointed out .
I go each year to the Canary Islands .
They too have suffered enormous immigration .
Illegal immigration from Africa has already been mentioned this morning .
But I want to emphasise in my speech today two paragraphs .
One has the full support of the British Conservatives , that is paragraph 26 , which talks about the need to really home in on this very important matter of illegal immigration .
But there is another , paragraph 25 , which Mr Berend mentioned , where I dispute and disagree with some of the findings or recommendations put forward by the rapporteur in what is otherwise a very excellent report .
First of all , the report mentions rapid border intervention teams with the purpose of providing swift operational technical assistance to any Member State requesting it .
I agree that is very important , but when it goes on to say that it urges the Commission to examine the need for the creation of a European coastguard body to assist in parallel these regions and the Member States in monitoring the EU 's external borders , I think that is far too wide a remit .
If the isolated islands want a concentrated coastguard specialist brigade helping them , fine , but not for the United Kingdom , not for the bigger islands .
We do not want too large an agency .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I want to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his excellent report .
Coming from an island region that is also an outermost region and , for that reason , recognised and dealt with specifically in the Treaty on European Union , I can state that , by means of this initiative , Parliament is offering not only a useful perspective on the permanent structural difficulties peculiar to all the island regions and affecting the lives of their citizens but also a helpful view of what the islands , and by extension the EU too , have by way of potential .
Without its islands and , in particular , its outermost regions , which rightly benefit from special treatment , the EU would have a lower profile in the world . Nor would it have its current maritime area , associated of course with the advantages of the new European maritime policy , currently subject to public consultation .
Cohesion - which is one of the basic objectives of the European Union - will only be achieved if the regions concerned are able to count on across-the-board support in helping reduce and eliminate the obstacles to their development .
It is therefore necessary to help bring about an adjustment to EU policies , particularly when it comes to transport , energy , public service contracts and State aids , and this with a view to guaranteeing , for example , full employment , economic growth , integration into the internal market , the European model and the objectives of the renewed Lisbon Strategy .
Hence , I would ask the Commissioner and also the Commission to consider how best to transpose the policies to be adopted in future in the areas of development and regional policy .

( ES ) Mr President , I must express my satisfaction with this initiative report by Mr Musotto , since it represents a step forward in terms of viewing the islands , within the framework of the European Union 's regional policy , as disadvantaged as a result of the geographical , natural , structural and permanent limitations that slow down their socio-economic development .
I share the rapporteur 's view that the Euro-regions play an important role , both in local projects for exchange of good practices , and also in the field of cross-border cooperation .
For this purpose , the Balearic Islands form part of the Pyrenees-Mediterranean Euro-region .
Furthermore , I applaud the rapporteur 's special mention of the issue of illegal immigration .
I would like to take this opportunity to call upon him , when drawing up his compromise proposals , to take account of the amendments that Mr Fernando Fernández and myself presented to the paragraph in question of the report that we are discussing today .
We are insisting on those amendments and I must point once again to the islands ' great vulnerability in the face of illegal immigration , in view of their particular geographical situation .
It is therefore necessary to integrate emigration and development issues within the framework of the Union 's aid policies , and also in its programming , both through the funds making up the new framework programme on solidarity and management of migratory flows and through the regional policy instruments , in particular the European Social Fund and the European Regional Development Fund .
Annex 30 to the Treaty of Amsterdam recognised the special characteristics of the islands , but unfortunately this recognition in the Treaty has not been implemented by means of effective actions and specific measures necessary to alleviate and correct the inevitable extra costs resulting from the characteristics of islands .
I come from the Balearic Islands , the rapporteur is from Sicily , and many of our Members come from islands , and we are therefore well aware of our regions ' struggle to overcome the difficulties resulting from their island characteristics .
We therefore call upon the Commission , the Member States and the Council , in addition to specific measures to alleviate these disadvantages , to provide help and offer understanding in relation to this special situation .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank Mr Musotto for his excellent work in having highlighted the problems of island regions .
I have experienced these problems myself and know how complex they are .
The economic and social cohesion policy is essential in reducing the divide between differing levels of development in different regions , and on this point I would argue that special attention should be paid to the situation of islands , and I would like to thank the Commissioner for having mentioned this point .
Better development of our islands means strengthening infrastructure , improving connections , integrated transport and tackling problems and weak points in water and energy supply .
We need to make our island industries , such as agriculture , fisheries , craft and tourism , more competitive and more attractive .
It is necessary to focus on creating conditions to promote full employment , attracting private investment and , at the same time , securing a sustainable standard of living and a significantly higher level of development , including through the promotion and development of alternative energies and new technologies .
Finally , we must not underestimate the ever-increasing impact of illegal immigration on island communities , particularly in the Mediterranean .
This is a disproportionate burden that the islands cannot and should not bear by themselves .
It should be our priority to find a general , responsible solution , which includes ways of tackling the emergencies connected with mass arrivals of immigrants - who unfortunately do not arrive only by plane - across marine borders , while respecting fundamental rights .
As a matter of urgency , therefore , we need to reduce the development lag of the islands through a policy of real solidarity , which will encourage island peoples to support the new European Union .
I would like to congratulate Mr Musotto once again on his excellent work and on having placed the focus on the many issues that are important for our islands .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , it has been a most interesting debate .
Let me start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Musotto , on his report - which I did not do in my opening remarks -and for bringing this issue before us today in the first ever report dedicated to islands .
He has made history !
Much has been said this morning about state aids , and I should like to respond to that first .
Again , operating aid - aid aimed at reducing a firms current expenses - is normally prohibited .
It is prohibited in the Treaty and it is prohibited by the regional aid guidelines , because of its highly distortive effect .
That being said , it can be granted exceptionally in the poorest regions that are lagging behind in terms of regional development .
The regions that can benefit from operating aid are , as you are aware , the 87 ( 3 ) ( a ) regions , which are the outermost and sparsely populated regions , provided that a number of conditions are fulfilled .
In the poorest regions and , again , the 87 ( 3 ) ( a ) regions , operating aid can be authorised only on a case-by-case basis , provided it is limited in time , degressive , proportionate , and designed to tackle specific structural handicaps .
In reply to Mrs Sudre , as you are aware , the Commission accords a particular status to the outermost regions , given their remoteness and specific constraints on integrating into the internal market .
For islands other than outermost regions , a generalised approach based on the characteristics of these regions seems rather difficult .
Enormous differences exist between island regions in Europe , and you are an example of that .
They are characterised by a large diversity , and in terms of regional development and their GDP per capita , a significant number of large islands are rather wealthy , as some of you rightly pointed out .
Granting operating aid to an island that has a GDP per capita among the highest in the EU would completely distort competition in the relevant markets without any justification in terms of regional development .
Thus , the Commission cannot accord the status of assisted area to all European islands , given their extreme diversity .
In response to Mr Arnaoutakis , I note that subsidising fuel and energy costs constitutes operating aid .
Such aid can only be authorised if the general conditions - which I have just touched upon - are fulfilled .
It must not prop up structurally loss-making activities , particularly those that are very damaging , for example , to our environmental or climate change objectives .
Furthermore , regional operating aid is certainly not the best instrument to tackle the local problems of islands .
As I mentioned in my opening remarks , the islands ' main problems can be tackled more effectively with horizontal instruments .
For example , local services that are not economically viable can be supported through services of general economic interest .
Work and investment for all kinds of infrastructure can be financed .
They do not have an aid element and , in the case of very small islands in particular , the de minimis aid and the EUR 200 000 threshold can be sufficient , as I mentioned .
As regards Mrs Attwooll 's comment about the market investor principle , I believe that we can apply a more refined economic approach to assess situations of market failure in islands and proposed investments .
However , as I have mentioned already , making the rules more predictable and more transparent and reducing the administrative burden of state aid notification are objectives of the state aid reform .
I understand the specific concerns of smaller businesses , who have to try to pick their way through the state aid maze , and we agree upon this .
That is why I have followed up on the suggestion made by some of you that the Commission should provide user-friendly guidance explaining our rules clearly and simply .
My services have now almost completed a full update of a vade mecum offering a concise overview of the basic EU rules on state aid .
The vade mecum does not aim to provide an exhaustive description of the rules .
Instead , it focuses on the issues that are most relevant for people involved in regional development .
I hope to have this vade mecum on line on the DG Competition Europe website very shortly , in a couple of weeks time , and I would be happy to provide copies to interested Members .
I would now like to turn to four wider issues raised by some Members .
Mr Smith mentioned the need for statistics .
The Commission is working well with Eurostat on a regular basis .
This May we will publish the Fourth Cohesion Report , which will include more statistics .
Mr Smith also mentioned access to the transmission network for renewable energy .
It is indeed vital and that is why the Commission takes the view that full structural unbundling of energy markets is the best solution to the problems of concentration and foreclosure of new entrants we have experienced in these markets .
Several Members suggested the need for a specific unit on islands in DG Regional Policy .
I will certainly take good note of this , but , as you are aware , it is my colleague , Mrs Hübner , who is taking the decisions here and not me .
I am sure she will examine your idea carefully .
Finally , we will look carefully at your proposal for designating 2010 as the Year of Islands , but I assure you that the Commission will continue to pursue the best interests of islands in 2007 , 2008 and 2009 , so do not think that we are neglecting this important issue .
On the contrary .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - One of the contexts where Malta is concerned relates to illegal immigration : ' islands are in the front line of defence against this problem ; all are suffering under the weight of illegal immigration ' .
In fact , the Commission 's decision to set up four funds is giving visibility to the concept of ' solidarity in action ' .
In the case of Gozo , Malta 's sister island , we have a scenario of double insularity .
The Commission has highlighted the special situation of islands in the guidelines on ( i ) National regional aid for 2007-2013 and on ( ii ) state aid and risk capital for small and medium-sized undertakings .
But that does not address the issue where fuel and energy costs adversely affect the competitiveness of the communities living in such islands .
The economic activities prevalent in islands , notably tourism , agriculture , fisheries and crafts , need special attention .
Tourism represents one of the primary sources of wealth creation in islands with spin offs on other sectors - fisheries , agriculture , crafts .
But what importance do we give tourism in the European Parliament ?
Perhaps the prevalent thought is that it is a natural issue , as one very senior Commissioner put it .
On the contrary , it is about time that the European Parliament set up a separate committee on tourism , as at present it is part of the Transport Committee and hardly appears on any agenda .
in writing . - The report has quite a number of recommendations that go a long way to addressing a host of disadvantages which are very specific to small islands .
We expect the Commission to take on board and implement the recommendation outlined in Mr Musotto 's report .
Islands - whether in the outermost regions or not - suffer from natural geographical limitations that severely affect the inhabitants ' lives on a daily basis , both economically and socially .
Small islands like the island of Gozo in Malta are the first to feel the effects of high transport costs , lack of investment , problems of communication , high rates of unemployment , social separation , and a more restrictive choice in the opportunities available .
In theory it is well recognised and accepted in the EU that islands , especially small ones , have to be assisted to overcome these natural disadvantages .
It is time to translate the well meaning objectives into concrete action .
1 .
Nominations to interparliamentary delegations ( vote )
2 .
Community action on the provision of cross-border health care ( vote )
3 .
Illegal bird hunting in Malta ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 7 :
Mr President , for purposes of clarification , I wish to add the words ' at the time ' after the word ' Commission ' , so now Amendment 7 would read , ' notes that prior to the accession to the European Union , the Maltese Government stated that it had negotiated a derogation on spring hunting with the Commission ; regrets that the despite the fact that other political forces and segments of civil society in Malta had challenged the Maltese Government 's statements , the Commission at the time opted to remain silent on the subject , thus bringing about a potentially ambivalent situation ' .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on Amendment 12 :
Mr President , our group wanted to request a roll-call vote on amendment 12 , but unfortunately we failed to do so in time .
I therefore ask the House to allow a roll-call vote on amendment 12 , even though we did not request it in time .
I am sure that my colleague Monica Frassoni will not object .
( Laughter )
( Parliament adopted the motion )
4 .
Euro-mediterranean relations ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 21 :

( IT ) Mr President , I believe that Mr Tannock has withdrawn his amendment in favour of an oral amendment which - I refer to paragraph 21 of the French text - would read as follows : after the phrase ' aucun cas refouler une personne ' , add ' demandeur d 'asile vers un état où elle risque ... ' .
Mr President , I would like to take the opportunity to call on my group to vote in favour of the final text because there was an error on the voting list .
Mr President , I have not withdrawn the amendment that I submitted , but I would be prepared to do so in exchange for a change to that oral amendment adding words along the lines of ' for the duration within which the asylum seekers are having their cases considered by the authorities ' , because otherwise they could stay in our countries indefinitely .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendments )
5 .
Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 58 :
( IT ) Mr President , I would like to request that in the text that was tabled the words ' by extending ' be replaced with the words ' by considering ' .
( Parliament adopted the oral amendment )
6 .
Bosnia-Herzegovina ( vote )
7 .
Compliance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 15 ( 2 ) :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , shortly before the vote , my attention was drawn to a problem that is very easily solved .
Paragraph 15 reads : ' intends to this end to amend Rule 34 of its Rules of Procedure ' .
As we need a different majority for Rules of Procedure than for this vote , many Members find the word ' intends ' too strong .
I would therefore suggest amending paragraph 15 as follows : ' is to this end considering an amendment to the Rules of Procedure ' .
I hope the PPE-DE Group will also be able to agree to amending the Rule in this way .
( Parliament adopted the oral amendment )
8 .
Negotiation of an EU-Central America Association Agreement ( vote )
9 .
Negotiation of an EU-Andean Community Association Agreement ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 ( b ) :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , in agreement with several groups , I wish to present an oral amendment intended to replace , in the first line of paragraph 1 ( b ) , ' the aim ' , with the phrase : ' some of the aims ' , and to replace ' is gradually to liberalise trade ' with the phrase , ' should be the establishment in time of an advanced free trade area ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 ( s ) :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to table an oral amendment intended to introduce , in the second line of paragraph 1 ( s ) , following ' trade liberalisation under ' , replacing ' competitive conditions ' , the phrase , ' conditions of justice and mutual benefit based on complementarity and solidarity ' .
It is also proposed that the same paragraph should end with ' the parties ' economic and trade relations ' .
( Parliament adopted the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 ( u ) :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) This oral amendment is intended to replace ' FTA ' in paragraph 1 ( u ) with the expression : ' Euro-Latin American Area of Global Interregional Partnership ' .
( Parliament adopted the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 ( v ) :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) This oral amendment is intended to replace ' FTA ' in paragraph 1 ( v ) with the expression : ' Euro-Latin American Area of Global Interregional Partnership ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 ( x ) :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , this is the last of the oral amendments and it is intended to replace ' FTA ' in paragraph 1 ( x ) with the expression : ' Euro-Latin American Area of Global Interregional Partnership ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
10 .
Missing persons in Cyprus ( vote )
May I draw your attention to the fact that Mrs Resetarits and Mr Triantaphyllides have also signed this motion for a resolution ?

Mrs Resetarits on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and Mr Triantaphyllides on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .

Mr President , allow me to inform you that we have among us today the three members of the Committee on Missing Persons for Cyprus : Mr Christophe Girod , the Chairman of the committee , representing the UN ; Mrs Gülden Plümer Küçük , representing the Turkish Cypriots ; and Mr Elias Georgiades , representing the Greek Cypriots .
All the members of the Committee are here to obtain our support .
( Applause )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
11 .
Regional policy ( islands and natural and economic constraints ) ( vote )
12 .
Local authorities and development cooperation ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
in writing . I voted for this resolution and welcome the Commission initiative to launch a consultation procedure on the best form of Community action with a view to providing a framework for cross-border aspects of health-care .
( MT ) I would like to explain my vote on the resolution on spring hunting in Malta .
I voted against the resolution because I felt that it was both unnecessary and disproportionate .
There was no need for it , given that there are ongoing discussions between the European Commission and the Maltese authorities on the issue .
The resolution is pointless , considering that Malta has made great strides in tackling those who defy the hunting rules .
In addition , what should be kept in mind is that , during accession negotiations between Malta and the European Union , the European Commission recognised - in writing and not in words - an agreement whereby Malta could use a derogation to allow spring hunting .

( DE ) Mr President , unlike the previous speaker , I believe this resolution on bird hunting in Malta is a very important resolution .
The European Parliament has already shown on many occasions that animal conservation and compliance with the animal conservation laws we have in the European Union are very important to us .
That is why this resolution is very important , even if we have faced quite a strong headwind from the other side of this Chamber .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to say that I voted for the resolution concerning Malta because there has hardly been any progress on the part the Maltese Government .
We are still witnessing the killing of huge quantities of birds in Malta .
Many millions of birds are dying there , contrary to all the fundamental provisions adopted by the European Union .
I would also like to state that in the first roll-call vote , I voted for paragraph 2 of the Voggenhuber report by mistake , but I wanted to vote against , so please record this fact .
in writing . British Conservatives have voted against this resolution on purely procedural grounds .
We feel that this resolution represents an abuse of procedure .
Our vote should not be taken as an indication of British Conservative MEP views on the merits or otherwise of the particular case under consideration .
in writing . I voted for this resolution and wish to see an immediate ban on all illegal bird-hunting in Malta
The tabling of this resolution to the plenary meeting of this House could have easily been avoided had Malta simply cancelled the spring hunt and , in doing so , conformed to the provisions of the Birds Directive , but it persists in ignoring the countless parliamentary initiatives and the legal steps taken by the Commission , and looks set once again to permit its hunters to shoot a huge number of protected migratory birds .
Shooting them serves no higher purpose than as a hobby for the local hunters , and it has got out of hand , now threatening the diversity and preservation of the bird species in the whole of the European Union .
Representatives of the hunters have no qualms about calling those opposed to the spring hunt fascists .
They threaten their own government , their elected representatives and their police apparatus in an aggressive manner , and that is something that we in this Union of ours , cannot condone .

The Maltese Government may feel hurt by this resolution , but it could also feel invigorated by the support of the whole of Europe when taking measures to abolish the spring hunt , and it is for this latter reason that I am completely behind this resolution .
in writing . I will be supporting this report , despite the failure to include paragraph 21 in its original form : ' Points out that , under European Court Human Rights case law , the European States can in no circumstances send a person back to a state where he or she is likely to be subject to torture or cruel , degrading or inhuman treatment , including the death penalty . '
I am disappointed that there was a small majority in this House in favour of excluding this important human rights principle .
There is a lot I might have said about this resolution . However , I am allowed only 200 words , which I shall use to condemn the resolution 's silence concerning the unacceptable boycott of the Palestinian Authority ( PA ) proclaimed by the Israeli Government and the United States Administration following the Palestinian elections in January 2006 .
The EU joined in the boycott and also suspended its financial aid , so exacerbating the already serious humanitarian situation with which the Palestinian people is confronted as a result of Israeli occupation and aggression .
It was silent on the unacceptable , wait-and-see and follow-my-leader attitude of the EU , which still continues to make the re-establishment of relations with the Palestinian authorities , including the recommencement of financial support , dependent on their meeting certain conditions such as the ' commitment to non-violence ' , when it is Israel that is occupying Palestinian territories militarily ; or the ' recognition of Israel ' , when it is Israel that does not recognise the right of the Palestinian people to its sovereign and independent state ; and ' respect for previous agreements and obligations , including the Road Map ' , when it is Israel that does not comply with the United Nations resolutions , the Oslo Accords and the Road Map itself and is continuing with its construction of the illegal wall and the policy of settlements .
in writing . I voted for this resolution .
In particular , I am in favour of the Amendments in line with the European Court rulings which stated that no individuals should be sent where they are at risk of maltreatment , torture or capital punishment .
One of the major successes of the European Union is the effect of successive enlargements - an effect due partly to the fact that the prospect of accession has been one of the main factors in the democratisation and modernisation of our countries and societies .
Since unlimited enlargement of the EU is impossible and not something that I would champion , I am in favour of an arrangement that would help bring about similar results in the Mediterranean basin .
I am thinking of a new European project , devised in partnership with our Mediterranean neighbours and designed to create , in the medium term , an area of free movement in the Mediterranean region and one whose rationale would be as close as possible to that of the EU model .
Accession to this area would be open to surrounding countries that fulfil the basic Copenhagen criteria of being democratic , having market economies and respecting human rights .
It would be an enhanced partnership in return for reforms .
It would also have the incidental and subsidiary virtue of being a solution that , being perhaps of interest to Morocco , Israel or Tunisia , might also be of possible interest to Turkey if that country were to come to the conclusion that the accession process had reached a dead end .
To have prosperous and democratic neighbours , tied in by the potential benefits and with populations that would not need to emigrate at all costs , would be a constructive European project . Moreover , it would not even be a completely new one .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is clear that a genuine policy of cooperation with the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean countries is necessary in order to stem the migratory flows that Europe no longer has the means to accommodate , means that it has not had for a long time now .
It is also clear that a reasonable trade policy can be mutually beneficial to both shores of the Mediterranean .
This is not , however , what Mr Arif 's report is proposing , which is to do nothing more and nothing less than extend , to North Africa and to part of the Middle East , the European Union , its functions and its policies : integrated agricultural policy , free movement of people and goods and freedom of services , to name but a few areas .
For what purpose ?
We do not really know , since a study quoted by Mr Arif himself envisages negative social and environmental repercussions in the short and medium term .
It is therefore purely due to its free-trade ideology , and not in the interest of European Union countries , nor even in that of Mediterranean countries , that Parliament is supporting this project .
Despite containing a degree of reformist rhetoric , the objective of this report is essentially to promote the creation of a free-trade area ( FTA ) between the EU and the Mediterranean region and to do so , moreover , in the context of EU efforts to bring about the effective liberalisation of world trade through the signing of bilateral / regional agreements in an attempt to rise above the difficulties involved in negotiations within the World Trade Organisation .
For example , the report provides for the , albeit regulated , ' opening up of agricultural markets ' , with particular reference to the wine and the fruit and vegetable sectors ; the liberalisation of services , albeit excluding ( only ... ) those public services considered to be basic ( health , education , drinking water provision , the arts and audiovisual services ) ; the liberalisation of energy supplies through the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean market ; and the liberalisation of the industrial sector , specifically through the ' establishment of a Euro-Mediterranean production area ' for textiles and clothing , in that way basically encouraging a large proportion of production capacity to be relocated .
In other words , the intention is to promote the liberalisation of trade , to the delight of the multinationals and major European importers , which long to dominate new markets and natural resources and to create new opportunities for exploiting cheap labour .
What , basically , is being put in danger are the nations ' own development models based on specific national needs and circumstances , together with a project of cooperation between these different countries that is genuinely based on mutual support .
in writing . - ( EL ) In the 12 years since the Barcelona Declaration , the peoples of the Mediterranean have become poorer and more desperate , while some areas have been at war .
At the same time , capital - both local and foreign - is getting richer .
The report on the construction of the Euro-Mediterranean free-trade zone expresses the EU 's concern about the lack of progress in the Barcelona process .
It calls for action to be stepped up , in other words for blatant intervention by the imperialist European Union in the internal affairs of the countries of the south and southeast Mediterranean , to be targeted at all aspects of the social , economic and political life of these countries .
The EU spends huge sums in these countries subject to terms and conditions , so that economic development and political structures serve Euro-unifying capital and its profits and circumvent any national sovereignty for the states in the area .
The concern expressed about political instability in the south and southeast Mediterranean , about the material damage caused by war , is hypocritical .
The imperialist EU is equally guilty and equally responsible , as the thousands of soldiers in the area bear witness .
Prosperity for the peoples can only be possible if they have full national sovereignty and the freedom to develop their structures and production as they so choose .
That is why they need to be freed from any form of foreign intervention and their anti-imperialist fight needs to be stepped up , so that the real rulers are the people .
in writing . I voted for this report which puts forward several suggestions concerning the creation of a mutually beneficial Euro-Mediterranean FTA .
I believe that the implementation of economic and political reforms can be an opportunity for growth .
In particular I am pleased that the report stated that the FTA must look at countries ' specific economic and social characteristics to entitle them to protect their most vulnerable economic sectors , such as agriculture and public services .
in writing . ( IT ) The three main objectives set by the Barcelona Conference of 1995 - namely the creation of a free trade area by 2010 between the European Union and its African and Asian partners ; an area of peace and stability and the development of free , democratic societies - have not yet been achieved .
The conflict between Palestine and Israel is , unfortunately , light years away from a peaceful resolution .
Furthermore , since Israel 's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip a dramatic civil war has broken out between Hamas and Fatah supporters .
In some non-European countries in the partnership , although some of the fundamental human rights have been recognised they are often not fully applied .
The economic and social partnership too , fed by funds from the Meda Programme , has not produced the hoped-for results , and there is still a dreadful development lag , both because Europe has not taken enough care over the full implementation of the first and second Meda programmes , and also because the beneficiary countries have not always been able to create the economic and social infrastructure necessary to make themselves competitive .
Finally , in many Euro-Mediterranean regions , there is no effective transport system , Information Technology is still insufficiently developed and the telecommunications modernisation is still some way off .
For these reasons , I think it necessary to postpone the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area .
My comments with regard to Euro-Mediterranean relations apply fully to this debate , mutatis mutandis .
As I have said on previous occasions , I support the objective of creating an in-depth partnership between ' Europe ' and its Mediterranean neighbours .
Anything less than that - and a free trade area is less than that - is insufficient , in my view .
It is also clear , however , that anything that moves in that direction is positive and deserves my support .
That is essentially the case with what we are debating today .
I therefore voted in favour , but I would like our debate on these issues to move towards a broader view of the form our relations with our southern neighbours should take .
For the good of both sides of the Mediterranean .
On behalf of the Integrity , Tradition and Sovereignty Group and the Tricolour Flame Party that I represent , I say ' No ' to this unacceptable resolution .
This is not with regard to the creation of a free trade area , but because of the confusing contents of the proposal and the outlook for the future .
In the current context of political instability and institutional confusion , it is not possible for the free trade area to mean simply an opportunity for the countries of the south-east Mediterranean .
The delays that these countries have encountered in implementing the reforms necessary to create a Euro-Mediterranean market must not automatically allow them to be given the right to protect the most vulnerable sectors of their economies , to the detriment of the countries of the EU , whose only role , according to this report , is to provide assistance , and whose citizens have to pay the costs .
The only account taken of the need to adjust the speed and intensity with which the markets are opened up is through the timely supply of support for the integration of the south-eastern Mediterranean countries .
The plans made for the creation of a kind of integrated agricultural policy for the Mediterranean and corresponding financial support for the countries of the south-eastern Mediterranean are on such a scale as to prefigure the transformation of FEMIP into an outright development bank .
To complete this farce , the report sets out to facilitate the free movement of workers , through legal and administrative procedures to facilitate the granting of entry visas .
There is no benefit in this , but just more burdens for European taxpayers .
in writing . I voted for this report and am pleased that there is an emphasis in the report on police reform and education .
in writing . I support this report on the basis that it makes proper recommendations in order to pursue justice and uphold peace in the region .
I particularly commend the rapporteur for encouraging the authorities in BiH to pursue wanted war crimes perpetrators and bring them to justice .
I also welcome the recently submitted draft plan for the police structure reform as it lays down a balanced allocation of responsibilities at all levels , while ensuring transparency in selection of police chiefs and officers and for monitoring their work .
Here I also want to commend the work of the dedicated men and women of the Royal Ulster Constabulary who helped train the local police force .
( NL ) Mr President , I have voted against the Voggenhuber report , because this House is once again wiping the floor with the Dutch and French referendums about the European Constitution .
How else could this be described ?
Despite the fact that the Charter of Fundamental Rights has never been a legally binding document , and , following the rejection of the Constitution in those two countries , never will be , this politically correct catalogue is being smuggled back in via all kinds of backdoors .
This is both legally and politically unacceptable .
Official Europe 's obvious unanimous contempt for national democracies is the reason why the Dutch people were recently , and in their own country , instructed by Commission President Barroso to at last accept this Constitution .
The citizens are welcome to carry on voting , but it is ultimately the European mandarins who take the decisions .
Whoever thinks that this sort of arrogance is going to make the public less Eurosceptic can think again .
in writing . UKIP have supported this amendment because it states very clearly the factual position that the Constitutional Treaty has been rejected and therefore should be abandoned .
However , in no way does voting in this manner imply any support whatsoever for the political Group that have tabled the amendment .
in writing . Conservatives support the principle of having a Charter of Fundamental Rights in place as an advisory declaration to Member States .
However , Conservatives voted against this report as the issue was to make the Charter legally binding ( Justiciable ) across the whole Union , which we are wholly opposed to .
in writing . I have supported this amendment because it states very clearly the factual position that the Constitutional Treaty has been rejected and therefore should be abandoned .
However , in no way does voting in this manner imply any support whatsoever for the political group that tabled the amendment .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is a summary of the common European values with which all of the citizens can identify , providing them with an instrument with which to defend themselves , through awareness and understanding of their rights , and to better control the activities of national and European authorities when they adopt and apply the Union 's legislation .
I regret the fact that it has not yet been made legally binding , although it has become a reference text for the activities of the European institutions and for the European judiciary , as in the case of the Court of Justice .
It is crucial that we do everything we can to develop a genuine ' fundamental rights culture ' in the European Union , by creating a general system for monitoring fundamental rights and by actively promoting those rights , and by intervening in the event that Member States violate them or fail to uphold them properly .
There must therefore be rigorous and systematic monitoring with a view to finding the best solutions to ensure a fair balance between security objectives and restrictions of fundamental rights .
Furthermore , respect for the Charter of Fundamental Rights must be extended to the entire legislative process and to comitology .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr Voggenhuber 's report claims that all European legislation should be subject to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , that veritable ideological rag-bag , and therefore that this Charter should be made binding .
In other words , it is in favour of disregarding the people 's rejection of the European Constitution , of which the Charter formed Part II , and imposing a legal constraint that has not been adopted by either the people or their parliaments !
What is more , that would have three effects .
It would legitimise the intervention of the Luxembourg Court in areas from which it is excluded by the Treaties themselves , such as police and judicial cooperation , which is quite a paradox .
It would impose illegitimate constraints on Member States : Brussels could , for example , impose ' lock out ' , a right recognised in the Charter , but a practice that is banned in many States .
It would impose constraints on the direction in which the European Parliament votes : how could we amend , other than just at the margins , any legislation implementing a ' fundamental right ' ?
This text is very worrying : in the name of human rights , it pulls off the amazing feat of violating democracy , the Treaties and the rights of the European Parliament itself !
in writing . ( SV ) The report points in the right direction but contains a couple of unhelpful proposals , for example in paragraph 2 , all of which conflicts with the mandate we have from our electorate .
It is important for all the EU 's decisions to be taken with respect for fundamental human rights .
The report criticises the previous agreements on the transfer of passenger data entered into by the Commission with American authorities .
The rapporteur points out why the secret transportation of prisoners engaged in by the CIA on EU territory was illegal and emphasises how important it is that such human rights violations should not be repeated .
The report clearly shows that a European Constitution is unnecessary for the protection of human rights in the Member States .
There have been repeated manoeuvres to try to restore the so-called ' constitutional process ' , flagrantly disregarding the sovereign decisions of the French and Dutch people in their 2005 referendums .
The use of the ' Charter of Fundamental Rights ' , an integral part of that ' European constitution ' , has long been a ploy in this unacceptable game .
The rapporteur 's intention is to see the content of the constitution introduced via the back door , that is to say , to make this text binding when in reality it is not , and hence ' preserve ' the ( in ) famous ' central achievements of the Constitution '
If the objective is to defend rights , then we should observe those that are laid down in the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic , in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and in the European Social Charter , internationally valid texts , which are more complete and whose legitimacy is recognised , compared to the ' Charter of Fundamental Rights ' , the content of which is thin with regard to economic , social and cultural rights , for example .
Once again , the intention is essentially to make use of human rights ( now known as ' fundamental ' rights ) in order to ( re ) impose the so-called ' constitutional process ' , by hiding its unacceptable neo-liberal , federalist and militarist agenda behind statements manipulating the legitimate expectations and reasonable concerns of the different peoples of the EU .
We therefore voted against .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament has a very particular and partisan conception of the definition of fundamental rights .
These rights serve as a support in fighting against individuals whom Parliament sees as undesirable , against political opponents , or else in attacking embarrassing governments that are not politically correct .
Curiously , they are never invoked in the defence , for example , of the rights of political minorities within its Chamber . Minorities , whose error is not to belong to the great right-thinking mass of Eurofederalists .
In this area , the great principles of freedom of expression and equality are utterly despised .
The European Parliament puts that famous expression ' do as I say , not as I do ' into practice .
This breed of European politicians is prepared to do anything to impose its vision of Europe and to do so against the wishes of the people , if necessary .
Therefore , even though the European Constitution was rejected by referendum in France and the Netherlands , this breed of politician is still doing its utmost to try to get it through bit by bit .
Likewise , although the Charter of Fundamental Rights has no binding legal status , the text proposed to us here seeks to make it indispensable - worse , an essential reference text - for European courts .
Far from being innocent , this report is dangerous for the freedoms and rights of the people .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report which looks at ways of improving the mechanisms for checking all EU legislation conforms with international human rights standards and fundamental rights are considered via impact assessment procedures as early as the draft Commission proposal stage .
In particular I am pleased that the report looks at ways of increasing the role of the Parliament in the defence of fundamental rights and in ensuring EU legislation conforms with international human right standards .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Union is currently going through an institutional crisis .
By means of their vote , the people of France expressed their wish for a European Union , but a Europe that is not limited to the single market .
The citizens want a Europe that also confers social rights .
This proposal for a methodology for the effective implementation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Commission 's legislative proposals and , in particular , systematic and rigorous monitoring to ensure that all of the fundamental rights concerned are complied with at the time of the drafting of all legislative proposals , must lead to Europe 's wishes being fulfilled .
It therefore seems essential to me to find a way of not undermining the legally binding character of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights , so that it can have all the weight that European citizens want it to have .
in writing . ( SV ) The report contains a lot of drivel about the EU constantly having to be developed more and more , and a number of helpful wordings about the Constitution and about more power for the new agency .
None of this is to the benefit of democracy and development .
Rather , these are standard wordings that constantly crop up again and again in the reports by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
What is exciting in this case is the demand for the Subcommittee on Human Rights to be able to prevent EU legislation that threatens such rights .
That is extremely important when a constant stream of new anti-terrorist laws evermore threatens the society such laws are intended to protect .
I am therefore voting in favour of the report , despite its shortcomings .
in writing . ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on compliance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Commission 's legislative proposals methodology for systematic and rigorous monitoring .
Mr Voggenhuber prepared a very good report concerning the vital issue of fundamental rights .
It highlights the need to respect and comply with these rights , and also the need to create instruments for freedom .
It is essential for the Charter of Fundamental Rights to become legally binding .
Systematic control and scrutiny by the Commission in order to examine all Commission legislative proposals for compliance with fundamental rights would seem to be appropriate .
As the main legislative body , the Commission should be charged with checking compliance of legislative proposals with other international instruments regarding the rights and freedoms guaranteed to citizens .
I support the Commission position .
It intends to apply the Charter of Fundamental Rights in its legislative proposals until such time as this Charter enters in force .
The protection of fundamental rights and ensuring compliance with them should be one of the Union 's priorities .
It seems that early control of Commission acts to ensure their compliance with fundamental rights is a good sign , and indicates the direction of Union bodies ' activities .
Hopefully these will lead to the Charter of Fundamental Rights becoming legally binding .
in writing . - ( FR ) Making the European Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding is politically dishonest and irresponsible in practice .
This Charter has always been conceived as a document that is symbolic of political compromise influenced by powerful representatives of individual interests that do not promote the common good .
The Charter creates 18 new ' fundamental rights ' that are unwarranted but obligatory for national constitutions , without any government or nationally elected representative being able to oppose them .
This Charter is useless and pointless so long as we have not formally determined the legal instrument to be applied at the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg and at the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
Faced with doubts about double standards , I will not support the Charter , and I declare myself in favour of the Convention .
The only institution entitled to deal with the protection of human rights on the continent is the Council of Europe .
The only legal instrument in relation to human rights in Europe is the European Convention on Human Rights .
Our European super-agency on human rights is the European Court of Human Rights .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Meyer Pleite on the negotiation of an EU-Central America Association Agreement because I believe that the European Union must continue to play a fundamental role in protecting the environment and human rights worldwide .
This agreement must seek a balance among the three pillars - political dialogue , cooperation and trade - that makes it possible to consolidate the democratic processes in Central America , improve the efficiency of democratic institutions and administrations , combat violence , corruption and impunity , as well as human rights violations , and , finally , improve social cohesion and the living conditions of all of the region 's inhabitants .
in writing . I voted for this report as I support a balanced association agreement in which progressive trade liberalisation should be a tool ( and not a goal ) put at the service of the main objectives of the promotion of socioeconomic development , sustainable development and social cohesion .
The political , economic and social deficit suffered by the Central American countries deserves an agreement taking into account the asymmetries between both regions .
in writing . - ( FR ) Against the backdrop of the globalisation of finance , agriculture , migration and the market , the nations of Europe must form an alliance of civilisation with the countries of Central America .
Our farmers , for example , are basically confronted with problems similar to those of the campesinos in Mexico or of Latin American SMIs , faced , as they are , with the confiscation of their intellectual property , their expertise and , above all , faced with their gradual wiping out by a global trade system that pits our banana producers in the French West Indies and the Canaries against producers from Honduras or Nicaragua , solely to benefit multinationals like Chiquita .
The need for this alliance of civilisation between Europe and Latin America becomes all the more clear in the light of global migrations .
Therefore , if , in the 1970s , French manufacturers in the car , steel and building industries had turned to the Latin American workforce instead of to that of Aures , Anatolia and Kabylia , French society would have avoided today 's tensions and public budgets would have avoided heavy expenses .
By entering into an alliance with Europe , Latin America would find the allies it needs , within international and trade forums , to defend a concept of the management of human societies and economies that are different from the Anglo-Saxon ideology of the market 's being everything .
On being appointed rapporteur for this report , I drew up a text , in collaboration with Central American civil society and political organisations , that recommended an Association Agreement based on three fundamental pillars : political agreement and good governance , development cooperation , and trade between two regions under conditions of fairness and mutual benefit based on complementarity and solidarity .
Following the debate in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , a series of amendments were incorporated based on the opinion of the Committee on International Trade which entirely distorted the approach of my report , by indicating that the establishment of a free trade area was a priority strategic objective .
My view , which is shared by a majority in Central America , is that an Association Agreement dominated by neo-liberal formulae would be a mistake and would only lead to inequalities and poverty in Central America , benefiting the multinationals .
Within this context , the different political groups have reached a series of compromises that water down the neo-liberal nature of the report , but not sufficiently so in my view .
This report is still very different from the one I initially intended and I have therefore abstained .
in writing . ( PT ) There is no question that the current situation in many Latin American countries make a clear explanation of the true intentions of the Association Agreements promoted by the EU rather contentious .
This is why , at the last minute , in certain points of the resolution , the European Parliament has replaced a clear indication of its aim , the creation of a ' free trade area ' , with the phrase ' Euro-Latin American area of interregional partnership ' , while maintaining the content of the former as the objectives of the latter .
This piece of trickery does not disguise the fact that the aim is the ' establishment in time of a free trade area ' , providing in its ' negotiating guidelines for gradual reciprocal trade liberalisation ' ( which has been softened at the last minute by adding , ' in conditions of justice and mutual benefit based on complementarity and solidarity ' ) , aiming to ' negotiate a single and indivisible trade agreement which goes beyond the negotiating parties ' present and future WTO obligations , and establish over a transition period compatible with WTO requirements a Euro-Latin America Global Interregional Association Area ... without excluding any sector ... ' , developing a ' customs union ' and a ' common internal market ' , guaranteeing ' market access in agriculture ' and in services ( except health and education ) .
What more needs to be said ?
I will vote for the report on a negotiating mandate for an association agreement between the EU and the Andean Community if the asymmetries between the various member countries of the Andean Pact are taken into account when negotiating a free trade area ( attention must be paid to the different economic levels , demographic characteristics , different political courses , the great lack of modern communications and transport infrastructures between the individual Member States ) .
Another important point is the introduction of core labour standards and the fight against drugs and arms trafficking .
in writing . I voted for this report because it supports a balanced association agreement in which progressive trade liberalisation should be a tool ( and not a goal ) put at the service of the main objectives of the promotion of socioeconomic development , sustainable development and social cohesion .
Mr President , I want to focus on just one aspect of the Meyer Pleite and Yañez-Barnuevo García reports , namely their support for regional integration in Latin America .
In last night 's debate , Commissioner Mandelson told this House that such integration is the key to growth and stability .
He is entitled to his view , but no one in Latin America has elected Mr Mandelson to anything - nor , come to that , has anyone in Europe .
As colleagues know , some states in Central America in particular are complaining that Brussels is making its trade and aid agreements conditional on their participation in regional structures .
I do not question the sincerity of those in Europe who insist that supranationalism is in everyone 's interests , but is it our place to tell other countries to mimic what the EU is doing ?
Why is it that whenever we debate in this House say Iraq or Iran , Members are quick to denounce Washington for seeking to impose its values on the world , but when it comes to hectoring other states about the need to cede their sovereignty , Brussels is suddenly keen to impose its values on the world ?
We cannot have it both ways .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that when trade is freer , world prosperity is furthered .
The concept of free trade is based on the idea that the more parties there are involved with it , the better the results they will see .
This own-initiative report contains much that is worthwhile and that could give rise to increased prosperity .
Unfortunately , as is so often the case with reports from this Parliament , there are also extraneous and unhelpful wordings .
The report talks , for example , of the strategic external policy aspects of an agreement and of giving Parliament more power in relation to issues of both trade and external policy .
It is unfortunate that the aspects I have just mentioned overshadow the desirable things that could be achieved .
I have therefore voted against the report in today 's vote .
in writing . ( SV ) Free trade is the most important agent of prosperity in the world , and the more countries that participate in it , the more the prosperity of those countries will grow .
The incorporation of large parts of South and Central America into a free trade area with the EU would therefore represent a big step towards prosperity and the eradication of poverty .
This own-initiative report therefore contains many worthwhile proposals that could lead to increased prosperity if they were implemented .
As is so often the case with reports in this Parliament , however , it unfortunately also contains a number of points whose aim is to promote the development of the EU into a federal superpower and to increase Parliament 's power at the expense of the Member States .
The report talks , for example , of the strategic external policy aspects of an agreement and of giving the European Parliament more power over both trade policy and external policy .
Despite these strong objections of mine , it is my judgment that it is better for these Interregional Association Agreements to be entered into than for them to be prevented .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because I believe that the disappearance of people , which has a dramatic impact on everybody , on the people and on their families and friends , is unacceptable under any circumstances , and particularly in European territory .
The EU cannot shirk its responsibilities and must play a key role in resolving these problems .
Effective measures must be taken , backed up by effective cooperation amongst the parties involved , with a view to putting an end to the atrocities that have been going on for decades and which violate human dignity and the Declaration of Human Rights .
I am also delighted with the removal , on 9 March , of the wall which for decades separated ' the last divided capital in Europe ' .
Beyond the intrinsic merits of the proposals we are voting on , regardless of any particular view of the Cyprus issue , this resolution is important because it reminds us that in our ' Europe ' there is still a wall as shameful as the one we have called the ' wall of shame ' , even though in Nicosia the wall has been replaced with boarding .
The problem , however , lies in the line that separates an island , divides Europe and causes suffering on both sides .
We must always remember that , and this declaration is a reminder of it .
in writing . British Conservatives can welcome certain elements of this report such as the need to monitor the impact of illegal immigration on island communities .
However , we cannot support the creation of Rapid Border Intervention Teams .
Nor can we support any moves towards the creation of a ' European coastguard body ' .
For these reasons , we have decided to abstain on the final vote .
in writing . - ( FR ) The existence of this report on the integration , in regional policies , of the characteristics and handicaps of island regions in the European Union , in itself demonstrates that these special characteristics , while not having been completely hidden over the years , are not being properly addressed .
This is , no doubt , because of the very nature of the European Union , which is given to standardising and levelling .
I also regret that stress was not put on the unbearable restrictions that the application , or the threat of application , of ordinary European law represents for these areas , particularly in matters of tax and competition .
In France , dock dues , VAT rates or reduced excise duties , applicable to Corsica and to the French Overseas Departments , are periodically called into question and must also be periodically renegotiated in Brussels by the government .
Finally , I deplore the fact that the swamping of certain European islands by the influx of illegal immigrants is seen , almost clinically , in this report as a purely local matter , when it is an extremely serious problem .
The removal of internal borders and the immigrationist proselytising of the EU are , it must be stressed , one of the major causes of this problem .
I have just two points to add with regard to the resolution in question :
I would like to stress that we agree that the issue of being an island should not be confused with the issue of being an outermost region , and that we must therefore bear in mind that the outermost regions are doubly disadvantaged . This is due , firstly , to their distance from the European continent , and , secondly , to the fact that they suffer structural disadvantages due to their island characteristics , in particular , and to other natural and geographical obstacles ;
I would like to emphasise our complete disagreement with the points of the resolution backing the current immigration policy , in particular with regard to immigration from North Africa , in that it supports the creation of ' Rapid Border Intervention Teams ' and of a ' European coastguard body ' within the framework of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders ( FRONTEX ) , with the aim of alleviating ' the immediate pressure to deal with this problem ' .
We believe that this is a repressive policy , which criminalises immigrants , who are merely seeking better living conditions for themselves and their families , in the same way as thousands of Portuguese people who emigrate each year .
It is a policy that sidesteps and fails to tackle the underlying causes of immigration , which have been identified for a long time , particularly by the United Nations .
Hence our decision to abstain .
in writing . I voted for this report .
The importance of islands in major Community policies is increasing with the expansion of the Union .
I am pleased that this issue remains on the agenda as it is still a challenge for the EU .
This report has identified the main problems of islands , such as higher prices , lower salaries and difficulty of access to the single market .
in writing .
While fully supporting the calls for greater consideration to be given to the plight of islands in the context of regional development I felt I had no choice but to vote against today 's report by Mr.Musotto because of its endorsement of a " Fortress-Europe " approach .
The economic and social development of islands is very important and requires special measures such as the flexibility requested in terms of competition regulations .
The islands off the coast of Ireland have played and continue to play an important role in preserving the Irish culture and economy .
Sinn Féin will support any measures which contribute to the support of such islands .
in writing .
( IT ) The islands of the European Union , whether they are extremely remote or not , almost all have to deal with the same difficulties . These include a lack of infrastructure , higher prices caused by additional transport costs , higher energy costs , emigration and immigration .
For these reasons I have on several occasions called on the European Commission to give an opinion on some issues that are vital for the development of islands , and specifically Sicily , my region of origin .
I believe , first and foremost , that it is vital to grant all islands special lower rates of taxation , as has been done for other European Union regions .
This would make it possible to attract more capital , generating development and employment .
With regard to incentives for investment , I have asked the Commission to look at the development of a policy that will encourage , in particular , foreign investment , particularly from outside the European Union , at a zero tax-rate .
Finally , with regard to the lack of infrastructure , which constitutes one of the greatest obstacles to socio-economic growth in the islands , I am in full agreement with the call upon the Commission to review its policy regarding failure to grant State aid for infrastructure projects that improve transport connections .
On this point , I would like to emphasise the need to build a bridge over the Straits of Messina .
The island regions face great difficulties as a result of natural and economic constraints .
Higher transport and energy costs , lack of natural resources , depopulation , poor infrastructures and illegal immigration make it necessary to adopt specific Community measures to respond effectively to the characteristic problems of these regions .
The Structural Funds are therefore the principal instrument for Community action in this field . They can respond to the Union 's political will not to abandon its islands .
Specifically , we must ascertain precisely what their characteristics and needs are .
The Commission must then ensure that the specific problems faced by the European islands are always taken into account , and accordingly it must take border control measures to tackle the illegal immigration that threatens them .
It must also draw up an integrated development policy , which is able to ensure the sustainability of economic activities , such as tourism , on the islands .
Finally , this whole package of measures is essential in order finally to create the conditions to allow these regions to enjoy the same access to the single market as the continental regions .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
( PL ) Mr President , I welcome the fact that the European Union is acting along the right lines by increasing the role of local authorities in our cooperation with individual countries , in particular with third countries .
I am glad it is focusing on decentralisation of both cooperation and aid .
Local authorities play an important part in local and regional development , because they understand the needs of local communities , are locally based , and have usually been democratically elected .
They play a particular role in combating poverty and inequality .
Their role as institutions mainly involves issues related to education , health , the environment and entrepreneurship .
It should be highlighted that they do not usually have enough financial resources at their disposal .
This is true in particular for poverty-stricken regions with high unemployment rates .
These local authorities do not receive appropriate support from Member State 's budgets .
Empowering local authorities to act in their own right in the framework of our development policy therefore deserves our full support both now and in the future .
This is confirmed by our experience of cooperation with local authorities in Union countries , including my country - Poland .
in writing . I voted for this report as I believe it is crucial that communities have their aid delivered by the structures closest to them in order to achieve their Millennium Development Goals .
In particular , I am pleased that the report contains concrete suggestions for actions to be taken by the Commission , most notably by increasing dialogue with local authorities on development aid , improving decentralisation of aid delivery and supporting structured dialogue between local authorities in the developing world and the EU .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Banning seal products in the EU ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Commission on banning seal products in the EU .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , thank you for giving me this opportunity to formulate the Commission 's position on the ban on seal products in the European Union and to comment on the action already taken or planned .
Seal hunting has been the subject of dispute and intense debate for many years now .
I absolutely agree that there are reasonable questions in connection with seal hunting , irrespective of where it takes place .
Nonetheless , it is encouraging that most seal populations appear to have stabilised and their survival is not endangered in their natural habitat .
This opinion is based on the scientific statistics available on the development of populations of grey harp seals and blue hooded seals .
There are no scientific indications of serious adverse repercussions from the hunt on the survival of these species of wild fauna .
The seal population in the northeast Atlantic has increased significantly since the beginning of the 1970s from just 2 million to about 5.8 million grey harp seals , which are the main target during the annual hunting season .
In other words , the seal populations in question are endangered at present and , consequently , they do not come under the CITES Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora .
In order for these species of seal to be included in the CΙΤΕS Convention , international trade would have to threaten their survival in their natural habitat .
This should not of course dissuade us from addressing the other important issue which arises in connection with seal hunting in numerous countries , including certain Member States of the European Union , by which I mean the issue of whether the importation and exportation and the marketing of seal products should be banned where the seals are not hunted in a way which complies with the specifications we have laid down on the proper treatment of animals .
This is the reason why I agree that , even if we have not yet taken legislative measures at European Union level , the concerns formulated by the European Parliament on the proper treatment of animals and , in particular , on seal hunting , need to be examined in detail .
In order to do this , we need to have the relevant information and statistics needed and that is why we have asked for an independent study to be carried out .
On the basis of the results of this study , which has been prepared mainly by the European Food Safety Authority , we shall decide to propose to the Council and Parliament that measures be taken .
According to the principles of good governance and lawmaking and the clear rules of procedure for the Commission , we must work on the basis of solid scientific data and the relevant impact study must be carried out before examining whether any measures should be taken .
I have also issued instructions to my services to examine the possibility of the Commission 's sending a mission to inspect and observe seal hunting during the 2007 hunting season .
The Members of the European Parliament may examine the possibility of taking part in this mission .
A full and objective evaluation of all aspects of this issue will enable us to take the right decisions .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , our Commissioner is a reasonable and a humane man .
He asks for time for research .
We grant him that , but in return he should impose a moratorium on any imports of such seal products during that time .
He says that the seal cull in Canada is sustainable .
It may be , but in 2006 , 330 000 harp seals were killed and 95 % of those were under three months old .
A large number of those were then skinned alive , because 79 % of sealers do not check adequately as to whether the pup is still conscious .
The cull is cruel and it is not worthy of a civilised country .
It is certainly not sustainable in a country like Namibia .
In Namibia , which has the second largest seal hunt in the world , the quotas increase each year .
In 2007 the quota was 91 000 and a combination of high quota and natural mortality of seals means that the entire pup population could be annihilated this year .
Seals are not killed for food ; they are not really killed to protect fish stocks .
They are killed for fashion , and Europe is the market for that fashion .
It is the key market for seal skin imports from Canada .
Belgium has banned it .
Italy and Luxembourg have temporarily banned it .
The United Kingdom and Germany have called for an EU-wide ban .
The European Parliament in its written declaration has called for a permanent ban and the majority of Members of this Parliament have signed it .
So please , Commissioner , ' yes ' to research , but ' yes ' also to a moratorium now .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) I would like to express my agreement with what Mr Bowis has just said .
In reality , there is no reason why the moratorium should not go ahead immediately and the studies that the Commission sees fit be carried out subsequently .
There is already plenty of striking information about this issue .
Furthermore , a clear example has already been set by other countries , such as the United States and Mexico - the United States banned any use of seals more than three decades ago - and I do not understand why the Commission believes that we do not yet have sufficient information to act immediately .
As our fellow Member has already explained very well , this is not just a question of sustainability .
It is essentially a question of ethics . The question is whether it makes sense , simply in order to satisfy certain fashion tastes , to kill in an entirely barbaric fashion - as reported last year by a delegation from the Intergroup on the Welfare and Conservation of Animals , including our fellow Member Carl Schlyter , and as we have been shown in many different ways .
If the Commission wants to see what is happening on the ground , a mission from this Parliament is going to Canada next week .
We shall go directly to the places where this hunting is taking place .
The Commission is welcome to come . It can certainly take part in that mission and it will be able to clear up any doubts that it may still have with regard to this problem .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , sometimes I wonder how it is possible not to see the blindingly obvious , and then I think of the Canadian Government 's persistence in allowing an annual festival of blood-spilling carnage to be carried out on hundreds of thousands of defenceless baby seals .
Other times I wonder how it is possible not to have any feelings in the face of extreme cruelty , and then I think of the thousands of fashion-mad individuals who pay through the nose to wear seal fur , taken in many cases by skinning still-conscious animals .
However , at no time do I wonder how it is possible not to hear what is deafeningly loud , neither do I ever wonder how it is possible not to understand what is comprehensively simple , because , with respect , Commissioner , I have seen this happening only too often when it comes to the way in which the Commission sometimes deals with the European Parliament , and the subject matter under discussion here today is a good example .
In September 2006 , Parliament called on the Commission very clearly and very loudly to introduce an EU-wide ban on the trade of all seal products .
Six months later the Commission is before us today telling us that , with seal killing being notoriously at the forefront of senseless cruelty to animals for so many years , it still needs more time to consider the matter further .
Being a close friend and ally of the Commission and stretching our patience generously , I think we should give the Commission more time , if that is what it wants , but , as other speakers have said , on the condition that , in the meantime , an immediate moratorium banning all seal products in the EU is put into effect .
This is dictated by our firm conviction on the matter , the need to act quickly and the fact that some EU Member States have already proceeded with national bans .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , last year I went and saw the seal hunting in Canada on behalf of the Animal Welfare Intergroup .
The seal hunters used violence to try to prevent me from seeing what was going on .
They forced our car off the road , they climbed onto our helicopters so that we could not fly in them and they threatened to kill us if we left our hotel in order to try to document the seal hunting .
In spite of these methods , we succeeded in obtaining photographs and we saw how incredibly cruel seal hunting is .
The hunters knew that they had something to hide .
The seals are skinned alive , clubbed and left to choke on their own blood . They are wounded and either drown or have to suffer still more , as a second shot , designed mercifully to finish them off , would cause a two-dollar fall in the value of the skin .
It is not for conservation reasons that we should ban such hunting . It is for ethical reasons .
I would nonetheless point out that the population declined the last time there was a huge hunt .
We are now also faced with climate change , and the Greenland seal needs the ice sheet in order to be able to suckle her young .
Many young seals are at present aborted in the water .
Through being the world 's largest market , the EU supports such hunting , and Parliament has clearly said that we do not want our market to be a party to it .
As Mr Bowis said , many countries have introduced national bans .
When it was cat and dog fur that was at issue , the Commission said that the internal market was not working and that it would introduce an EU ban .
The same logic applies in this case .
Does the Commission want studies to be carried out ?
There are many studies indicating the problems mentioned here in this House , especially the Bird and Veterinary Report , but these should not mean a delay in taking necessary measures .
If you want more time , we can give you that time , but in that case we want a temporary ban in place until you are ready , and you must determine the legal basis for such a ban .
Thank you for choosing the European Food Safety Authority 's animal protection committee to carry out the study .
That decision has led to it being accepted and to it being independent and representative of the will of the countries concerned .
I want to point out that seal hunting is not of vital interest to the economies of any of the countries that hunt seals - Canada , Norway , Russia and Namibia .
We see in the case of whale hunting that when this was abolished and replaced by whale watching , the latter was more profitable , so we can also help the seal hunters themselves improve their financial position if they manage to give up their cruel practice .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , seals have been a threatened animal species for years .
Their numbers have not only diminished as a result of illness or pollution of the sea water along densely-populated coasts , but also by the increasing hunt for them .
For a while , it looked like seals were set to die out completely in some coastal areas .
Even now when seal quotas seem to be restored to some extent in some areas , there is a continued need for sustained protection .
There is evidence of the opposite of protection where people 's possessiveness is given free rein .
Seal skin is a sought-after material for the decoration of clothing and toys , and the craving for this is satisfied by the disgraceful means of clubbing young seals to death and skinning them alive - an abhorrent activity on which some coastal residents have become economically dependent , and a system perpetuated by the possibility of exporting seal skins and finding buyers for them far from the scene of the crime .
This is why it has been vital for many years to ensure that products of this kind are no longer for sale , particularly in the richest parts of the world , such as Europe .
The first part of Commissioner Dimas 's statement shows that he shares this House 's , and the public 's , disquiet at this .
The subsequent outcome , however , is disappointing .
There would be no objection whatsoever to an impact study , and increased inspection in Canada and Namibia would be welcomed .
This cannot be a justification , though , for continuing with a policy of ' wait-and-see ' .
Some EU Member States have already followed the USA in taking action against imports , but why are some European countries lagging behind in this ?
There is every reason for an immediate moratorium .
Even if we introduced one tomorrow , it would come years too late given the seriousness of the situation .
I would therefore urge you not to use the study as an excuse for further procrastination .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the speakers for their very constructive contributions to this afternoon 's discussion .
First of all , I would like to repeat that from the conservation point of view there is no basis to take any action , because in 1970s we had 2 million seals of the most hunted species , and now we have 5.8 million of these seals .
We are looking only at the second issue - it is very important .
As regards the study , firstly I have to repeat that the Commission fully recognises the high level of public concern regarding the application of humane killing methods , and in line with its commitment to high animal welfare standards , we will examine all available information .
There are reports - which are partly contradictory - that seals are being hunted and killed in some regions in an inhumane way .
The assessment that I referred to - and which one of the speakers found to be necessary - will present balanced , objective and operational conclusions and recommendations .
The overall outcome should enable the Commission to draw some conclusions and to come back with possible legislative proposals if this is warranted by the situation .
Regarding the moratorium , in legal terms the Commission does not have available an immediate remedy to impose a moratorium on the import , export and trade in seal products .
It would not be possible to refer to the safeguard measures provided for under the public health and animal policy that would allow for a temporary ban when public or animal health is threatened .
For example , the decision to temporarily suspend imports of wild birds was adopted in order to protect animal and public health because of the risk of a worldwide spread of avian influenza .
Furthermore , under the trade policy there is no immediate remedy possible .
Any measure the European Union decided to adopt would need to be necessary and proportional and would need to be notified to the World Trade Organization .
At this stage it is therefore not appropriate , nor is it feasible , to impose an immediate trade ban .
The Commission first needs to carry out an objective assessment of all available information .
The outcome of this assessment should enable the Commission to draw sound conclusions and to come back with possible legislative proposals if this is warranted by the situation .
Reference was made to the United States , and its Marine Mammal Protection Act was enacted in 1972 , which was before the International Convention on Trade in Endangered Species entered into force in 1975 .
Furthermore , Member States have the opportunity to impose measures according to the case law of the European Court of Justice , but the Community has no such legal basis .
I would ask you to urge your governments in your Member States to impose bans - they have the legal means .
We need to have the appropriate legal basis before we can impose bans at European Union level and that is what we are trying to do by having an impact assessment and by gathering information .
However , if you show your concern in your countries and urge your governments to impose bans , this will facilitate internal market reasons for the European Union to take steps .
Finally , I wish to reiterate that the Commission is strongly committed to high animal welfare standards , both within the European Union and at international level .
A full objective assessment of the animal welfare aspects of seal hunting will allow us to see the whole picture and have a solid basis before drawing any conclusions .
We shall examine all available information and take the necessary steps .
If it is established that seals are being hunted and killed in an inhumane way , a ban on the import and export , as well as the placing of products derived from the seal hunt on the market , will also be considered .
We will report back to the European Parliament within the shortest possible time .
I repeat that we have already asked the European Food Safety Authority to conduct the scientific part of the study , and I have written to the Canadian Government to ask that we be allowed to participate in a mission , and the European Parliament is also invited to participate in order to see how the hunt is being organised .
What you said previously about your experiences is very interesting .
The floor is yours Mr Beazley .
I understand that this will be a formal motion .
Mr President , before the Commissioner speaks , I just wonder if it is in order to put a supplementary question to him on the timing of his statement .
It is over 25 years since the European Parliament first raised this issue .
When the Commissioner very helpfully said that he would report back in the shortest possible time , could he be more specific as to exactly how long he anticipates that time might be ?
Member of the Commission .
I saw in your letter that you fear the study will take years .
That is not so .
It is a matter of months .
The debate is closed .
The attack on Galina Kozlova , member of the board of the Mari national organisation Mari Ušem and editor of the literary magazine Ontšõko ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the attack on Galina Kozlova , member of the board of the Mari national organisation Mari Ušem and editor of the literary magazine Ontšõko .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission regrets the violent attack on Galina Kozlova which took place on 25 January in the capital of the Mari Republic , and I express my sympathy to her and her family and my best wishes for her speedy recovery from her injuries .
The Commission expects that the incident will be thoroughly and speedily investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice .
In this context I note that an investigation has been opened and that the President of the Mari Republic has reportedly demanded that it be given special priority .
More generally , the Commission is aware of the situation of Finno-Ugric indigenous peoples , such as the Mari-El people in Russia .
We are also aware of the concerns raised by a number of Members of the European Parliament concerning the treatment of the Mari-El , notably with regard to the Mari language in school teaching and the harassment of journalists and the presidential elections in December 2004 .
The Commission took good note of Parliament 's resolution of May 2005 .
The Commission sees common values , including the respect for human rights , as a cornerstone of its relations with Russia .
The Commission participates actively in the EU-Russia human rights consultations , where we aim to discuss the most important issues with Russia in an open and constructive manner .
It would be useful if we could , on issues such as these , move away from mutual recriminations and focus on exchanges of experience and best practice on how to deal with these problems , which can arise in many modern societies .
It is for that reason that the Commission has suggested that the participation in the human rights consultations should be widened to include not only diplomats but also experts from line ministries and agencies responsible for tackling these issues on the ground .
The next round of consultations with Russia on human rights - including the rights of people belonging to minorities - and fundamental freedoms will take place on 3 May .
The Commission has raised the issue of the rights of the Mari population bilaterally with the Russian authorities .
In response , they have given information on the activities which have been undertaken , financed by the government of the Mari Republic , to promote the development of art and culture in the Mari Republic , to encourage multilingualism as well as to foster traditional arts and crafts .
Support is given to publishing books by authors in the Mari language , as well as their translation into Russian , for newspapers in the Mari language and for study at the University of Mari El and other institutions of higher education .
Finally , I should add that , in the roadmap for the common space on research and education , including cultural aspects , the EU and Russia have agreed to work together in order ' to strengthen and enhance the European identity on the basis of common values , including freedom of expression , democratic functioning of the media and respect of human rights , including the rights of persons belonging to minorities and promotion of cultural and linguistic diversity as a basis of civil society in Europe without dividing lines ' .
We are now working together with Russia on an action plan for cultural cooperation which will aim to translate these principles into concrete action .
Exchanges in this field should help to build a better climate in which the cultures and traditions of minority populations are respected .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her understanding and quick reaction .
Parliament has already voiced its concern about the situation in the Mari El Republic : that was two years ago back in May 2005 after Mari national leader Vladimir Kozlov was brutally beaten up .
Alarmingly , no improvement has been noted since then .
Clamping down on attempts to revive Mari national culture and language has continued .
Therefore , we cannot be satisfied with the fact that an investigation into the beating of Mr Kozlov has produced no results in two years and now there is a new incident .
I think that the most alarming fact in today 's Russia is that politically motivated killings , deaths and physical attacks continue unabated and that not a single perpetrator has been caught or tried .
The latest case is that of Ivan Safronov , who happened to fall from the window just before he was to publish an article about illegal Russian arms sales to Syria and Iran .
Sadly , the robust revival of widespread xenophobia , militant movements of neo-fascists and Stalinists have become part of Russia 's reality .
If a government has for several years been unable or unwilling to guarantee the basic right to life and security for all its citizens and to bring contract killers to justice , then such a government necessarily undermines its own position as a credible international partner .
Our message today should be the following : there can be no further progress in EU-Russia relations until the Kremlin decides to intervene and stop this vicious cycle of killings and human rights violations .
Clearly , if Russian citizens cannot have confidence in the justice of their own state , how can Russia 's partners abroad have trust in future gas deliveries and Russia 's compliance with the international code of conduct ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) On behalf of the European socialists , I am very grateful to the European Commission for its rapid reaction , for we face a very serious situation that gives much cause for concern .
As my fellow Member Tunne Kelam has already implied , the 2005 decision had its result , and the situation in the Mari Republic improved temporarily .
Now , two years later , once again we see a peaceful female activist , Galina Kozlova , brutally attacked , in an incident that rightfully attracts the attention of the European Commission and the European Parliament .
We know that the perpetrators of the attack on Mr Kozlov in 2005 have still not been found , and in fact this is also grounds for the current decision .
As President of the Minority Languages Intergroup within the European Parliament , and of the Finno-Ugric forum - which is a cross-party initiative - I was able in September 2006 to invite Mr Kozlov here to Strasbourg .
I was able to determine first-hand this is no radical , unmanageable individual , but rather a remarkably moderate man .
The purpose of today 's resolution is to take note of and draw attention to the fact that the European Commission and the European Parliament are paying attention to what is happening there .
We ask the Russian federal authorities to exert pressure on the local authorities of the Mari Republic , because this examination is far from reassuring .
The case is being treated as one of light bodily injury , whereas in fact Galina Kozlova suffered a fracture of the skull base , which is a serious bodily injury !
Today 's resolution is important for this reason as well , and it is similarly important that at the next EU-Russian summit , the situation be raised along with the situation of other Finno-Ugric peoples , and that it be discussed within the context of the EU-Russian dialogue as well .
I wish to thank Mrs Neelie Kroes and the Commission for their cooperation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( HU ) On 25 January of this year , Galina Kozlova was seriously injured by an unknown attacker in Yoshkar-Ola .
Mrs Kozlova suffered skull , brain and eye injuries .
She was treated in hospital for several weeks , and is still recovering at home .
The perpetrator or perpetrators have not yet been caught .
This is not so surprising , of course , in light of the fact that , as we know , serious incidents against activists struggling on behalf of the rights of the Mari minority occurred regularly between 2001 and 2005 , and not a single perpetrator has been brought to justice since that time .
This situation does raise the fear that these serious incidents occur at the behest of the local authorities , or at least with their tacit support .
Our parliamentary resolution of 2005 had tangible results , as my fellow Member Mr Tabajdi has suggested , since for a year and a half no such incidents occurred .
It is true that the situation of the Mari minority did not improve significantly , but small steps forward are being taken , and therefore I am glad that the Commission is now also addressing these questions and putting them on the agenda .
But I also request both the Commission and Parliament to devote much more attention to resolving the problems of the Finno-Ugric minorities and of minorities in general within Russia .
We encourage the Union to speak up within the context of the European Union-Russian human rights dialogue on this matter .
This is not simply a matter of an isolated event , but at the rights of the Mari minority and indeed of the Finno-Ugric minorities in general .
At the same time I also urge that within the context of the cultural cooperation between the European Union and Russia , subsidised programmes at last be launched in support of the education , language training and maintenance of cultural institutions of minorities , and especially of the Finno-Ugric minorities .
If we are not successful in moving forward , then this matter will have to be put on the agenda of the European Union-Russian summit , for it is intolerable that despite the will of the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council , there should be constant violations of civil rights in Russia .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , from this Chamber we protest against those who breach human rights and violate the rules of law .
We should , however , ask ourselves what effect our activities driven by solidarity with people of good will are having .
I do not believe it is the effect we would wish .
Nonetheless , this is one of the ways to hinder social processes that adversely affect us all such as disrespect for human beings , violence and the struggle to be able to present one 's views , something every citizen of a democratic state should be able to do .
Galina Kozlova , who is a member of the board of the Mari Ušem organisation and editor of the literary magazine Ontšõko is an example .
She is married to Vladimir Kozlov , President of the Mari-El Republic 's Council .
She has given distinguished service to the republic , but unlike many journalists , she does not share her opponents ' political views .
As Europeans it is our duty to monitor , raise , and condemn the discrimination of Mari citizens , and attacks on their representatives and journalists .
We support Galina Kozlova in her struggle for the interests of Mari citizens and democracy .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , in the 1920s , the Soviet Union tried to find a fair solution to the problem of nationalities .
The large Russian empire , with its many minorities , made way for regional self-government for the other peoples , with education and administration in the people 's language .
It is to this decision that 11 countries , including Ukraine , Georgia and Uzbekistan , now owe their independence .
The many smaller peoples , such as the Chechens , Tatars , Ossetians , Karelians or Mari , on the other hand , were given only autonomous areas within Russia or one of the other federal states .
These peoples have been in a bad way ever since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
Nobody has recognised their right to independence and they all hope that they , despite everything , can retain the rights that were granted to them 85 years ago .
Unfortunately , the continuation of these rights is threatened by resurgent nationalism in both Georgia and Russia .
The bad political climate in Russia is the price for holding onto Chechnya , against the wishes of the Chechens , by extremely violent means .
Intimidation and murder are , in fact , promoted within the army in which young soldiers are systematically abused by older soldiers , and obliged to keep quiet about it .
In Putin 's Russia , there is less and less room for protest , critical investigation and change of power .
The stability of the regime in power and the ever-increasing concentration of authority over the different regions in Moscow are given absolute priority .
Opponents are put behind bars , beaten up or excluded from elections .
Even more drastic is the sudden death of critics , in particular people who are suspected of disclosing important information .
Europe must help Russia not to slide down further towards a situation that is becoming intolerable for more and more people .
It is in this light that the protection of the people who stand up for the right of the Mari Republic should be seen .
( LT ) First I would like to thank my colleagues Tunne Kelam , Vytautas Landsbergis and Charles Tannock for their initiative in arranging for us to hear the Commission 's report on Galina Kozlova today and adopt a resolution .
This resolution is yet another European Parliament document , concerning human rights abuses in Russia , which is linked to the EU through a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement - currently in force - and through a strategic partnership that it now appears is based not on shared values but on pragmatism , seeking economic and other benefits .
To me , as a member of the European Parliament 's Human Rights Subcommittee , one avenue of EU-Russia cooperation is particularly important - the ongoing EU-Russia consultations on issues of human rights , minority rights and basic rights .
In this context the brutal attack on Galina Kozlova , editor of the literary journal Ontšõko and wife of Mari Council chairman Vladimir Kozlov , an attack with precedents in the Mari Republic , not only deserves our attention and consideration , but it forces us to return yet again to the general human rights situation in Russia .
Considering the latest data , Russia is now the second most dangerous place in the world for journalists ( after Iraq ) .
Therefore , I fully support the spirit of our resolution , in which the European Parliament urges the Russian Federation and local governmental institutions to honour their commitments under international law , not just to guarantee freedom of the press but to implement legislative provisions relating to the protection and support of minority languages and cultures .
I think the problems of Finno-Ugric minorities in Russia could be raised by the Commission during the ongoing EU-Russia dialogue on human rights issues , and during the EU-Russia leaders ' summit .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Parliament expresses its concern about the attack on Galina Kozlova , member of the board of the Mari Ušem national organisation and editor of the literary magazine Ontšõko in the Mari-El Republic in the Russian Federation .
Galina Kozlova is married to Vladimir Kozlov , President of the Mari-El Republic 's Council , who was also nominated for the 2006 Sakharov Prize .
We should recall that this prize was presented by the current President of Estonia , Toomas Ilves , who was formerly a Member of the European Parliament .
The question arises as to what Russia is aiming at .
There is a growing number of attacks on independent activists and journalists .
More and more incidents remain unexplained .
Issues such as repression , violation of human rights , and of the rights of minority national groups in the Russian Federation are being raised ever more frequently .
Perhaps what is happening is that President Putin 's regime is becoming increasingly authoritarian ?
This case should be food for thought for us , and we must demand a thorough investigation by the Russian authorities to identify the perpetrators of the attack .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , this has been an impressive debate and I have taken good note of all the points raised .
It is good to focus our attention , from time to time , on issues which do not necessarily make the headlines in the EU .
The attack on Mrs Galina Kozlova was one such event , and I hope very much that she will make a full and speedy recovery and continue with her responsibilities .
As I have said , the Commission would like to have a constructive dialogue with Russia on such matters .
We are aware both of the criticism of the present situation regarding the Mari people and of the efforts which have been made at official level in Russia to safeguard their rights and their culture .
Modern societies need to find ways of addressing the situation of minorities to encourage peaceful and harmonious social economic development .
We all need to continue making efforts in this respect .
We shall aim , therefore , to use our contacts with Russia , and in particular the human rights consultations , to identify ways in which we can work together to improve the situation .
I have already mentioned that 3 May is one of those meeting days .
The Commission will continue to raise concerns about human rights at all levels , from the summit down .
For a more detailed discussion , the best forum for an exchange of views with Russia is the human rights consultations .
Pursuant to Article 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received three motions for resolutions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5 p.m.
1 .
Guatemala
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Guatemala .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , in recent months in Guatemala there have been a number of unexplained murders , unexplained threats , cases of intimidation of trade union activists , politicians , and of society as a whole .
Human Rights Watch published its recent report on human rights in January 2007 .
This report states that during the 36-month dirty war in Guatemala , which ended in 1996 , some 200 000 people were killed .
I repeat , 200 000 people were killed during the 36-month dirty war in Guatemala .
Over the last 20 years we have witnessed the process of democratisation in Guatemala , including many achievements concerning the rule of law , and the development of democratic institutions .
However , Guatemala still remains a country where the rule of law is compromised , and where democracy has not yet taken root .
We are faced with a whole series of unexplained murders and disappearances in the past , together with current incidents involving powerful gangs , and international crime .
Let me remind the House that in 2005 between 70 and 80 million documents linked to the dissolved national police were found .
These documents contain information regarding the so-called ' disappeared ' during the dirty war .
An appropriate storage place for these documents has so far not been found .
It is high time for Guatemala to resolve these issues in a democratic manner .
Mr President , today in this House we have voted through recommendations for the Commission regarding the Association Agreement with Central American countries .
My political group has stressed that we believe trade liberalisation should be seen in a political perspective .
Trade liberalisation in Latin America cannot be separated from democratisation .
The European Union must make every effort to help the people of Guatemala to reinforce democracy , investigate all murders that happened during the dirty war , and strengthen the peaceful transition so as to establish genuine , truly democratic structures in that country .

author . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Pinior for pointing out that in Guatemala terror is a tradition extending back decades , on both sides .
When we were dealing with Guatemala in the urgent debate in the last session a few months ago , I reminded the House that in the early 1970s , that is more than 30 years ago , a German diplomat , Karl Graf von Spreti , was abducted and murdered by terrorists in Guatemala ; he was a prominent Bavarian politician who always spoke out for freedom and we shall shortly be marking the anniversary of his death again in Bavaria .
Even then , terror was used both by the regime and by those opposing it .
Since then , the country has still not found rest , despite a degree of democratisation in the last 20 years .
There is violence on the extreme right , there is violence on the extreme left and , as Mr Pinior has rightly pointed out , there is unfortunately also the violence of organised crime , which is in many ways mixed up with the political extremists .
That is why we really must pursue an intensive and offensive policy on Latin America .

I am very grateful to Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra for taking this initiative on behalf of our group , and also to Mr Dess , who is particularly concerned with relations with Latin America - in his case mainly Brazil .
We want to make clear , however , that Latin America is of concern not only to our Spanish and Portuguese colleagues but to all of us , and that the continent is an important partner .
Only when democracy and the rule of law are at last firmly rooted in Central and South America and all forms of extremism are brought under control will that continent be able to play the role which its economic and cultural weight actually demands .
That is why - and I agree with Mr Pinior here - we must use all the commercial policy instruments at our disposal to work for democracy and the rule of law .
Democracy and the rule of law are not a luxury , neither are they a flourish that might perhaps be applied to what are really economic relations .
In the long term , there can be no successful economic relations with regimes and forces that flout basic human rights .
That is why this human rights debate is indispensable and we must apply pressure accordingly .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , in distant Guatemala , three members of the national Parliament were killed .
Then , just like in a crime movie , four policemen involved in the case and placed under arrest , including the chief of the anti-Mafia department in Guatemala , were murdered in prison .
This really sounds like a thriller screenplay , but it is not just a movie , it is life , and part of the pattern of everyday life in Guatemala .
It is right for the European Parliament to react .
We are reacting to the situation in a state whose President has publicly acknowledged that his country 's police force is riddled with corruption .
We are referring to a country in which several thousand murders take place every year , and which , like Colombia , is involved in the drugs trade .
Now , as the House will be aware , the authorities of the Central American Parliament are discussing with Daniel Ortega , the re-elected President of Nicaragua , the possibility of moving the seat of the Central American Parliament to Nicaragua from Guatemala where the danger is so high .
What can things have come to , if Ortega is now offering a safe haven .

I believe that in such a situation Mr Posselt and Mr Pinior are right , we must adopt an explicit and firm position .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , the human rights situation in Guatemala is frightening .
Mr Czarnecki has referred to the specific case on the basis of which we are dealing with the subject today .
The situation in Guatemala is of course marked by the strong influence of social groups outside the political parties , especially the military and business .
In some parts of the country , the Indian population in particular has little confidence in the state legal system .
Human rights experts in Guatemala say that several thousand people are murdered every year , but only around 2 % of cases are actually solved or lead to arrests .
Yesterday , a German citizen was shot dead in Guatemala .
Trade unionists , like Pedro Zamora in Puerto Quetzal , or farmers ' leaders and their families were killed at the start of this year .
Witnesses of murders or their legal representatives are threatened and attacked and their homes broken into .
If the security situation is to improve , there needs to be a political solution , not further arming of the security forces .
That is why it is essential to note that these very ' security forces ' are part of the problem in Guatemala .
Now the European Union has announced that it intends to support these selfsame security forces and unfortunately also to continue backing an intensification of free trade .
The response from thousands of people from Guatemala is relatively clear ; we saw that when US President George W. Bush visited Guatemala .
There were large demonstrations against his visit .
There is a free trade agreement between the USA and the countries of Central America , the CAFTA , and Bush told Guatemalan President Oscar Berger yesterday that it was advantageous for all sides .
Bush also promised Guatemala further support in fighting organised crime , especially drug gangs .
As in Brazil , Uruguay and Columbia , however , the first stops on Bush 's journey , the president 's visit was repeatedly accompanied by protests .
It is good that it was .
If the European Union follows the US policy example , that could therefore become highly problematical .
What is needed is not free trade and arms for the security forces but real steps to prevent poverty and an improvement in the legal situation of the majority of the population .
author . - Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the European Parliament has passed a number of resolutions on Guatemala in the past .
They have had some effect , but it seems that we are still a long way from achieving our aim of helping to bring true democratic reform to this country .
The callous murder in mid-February 2007 of three members of the Central American Parliament and the alleged involvement in this and many other crimes of police officials is a reminder that impunity and police corruption in Guatemala are still very much in existence .
Such gross deficiencies in democracy , along with attempts to curtail freedom of the press , are cancerous inflictions in the body of any society and drastic action must be taken urgently in order to remedy the situation .
The Guatemalan authorities have a lot to answer for and a huge responsibility to act decisively in order to protect their citizens ' rights and freedoms .
We shall await and watch closely with a critical eye to see and be convinced that they have the will and the stamina to stamp out the criminals from the police force and from other state institutions .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , we debated Guatemala in one of these urgency debates not so long ago , when we discussed the extradition of Ríos Montt and others .
Today we are debating it again , this time in relation to the murder of three El Salvadorian members of the Central American Parliament , as well as the people suspected of the crime , in their case in prison .
Nevertheless , this worrying episode is not an isolated one within a context that is becoming increasingly tense and dangerous .
Lack of security is a serious and growing problem in Guatemala , but so is the impunity following certain acts , some of which are carried out directly by public institutions or at least with their consent .
The Guatemalan Government itself , in the person of its Vice-President Stein , has acknowledged that organised crime is becoming increasingly ingrained in the public institutions , including the police .
As previous speakers have said , the statistics are striking .
Thousands of people are murdered each year in Guatemala , but arrests have been made in just 2 % of cases .
One of the most recent cases has been the murder of the campesino leader , Pedro Zamora , in Puerto Queztal , which we reported to the Commission and the Council .
Nevertheless , in view of the new episode that we are discussing today , we must reiterate some of the demands that this Parliament has made previously .
Firstly , we must repeat Parliament 's appeal to the Guatemalan Parliament that it ratify the Statute of Rome regarding the International Criminal Court , and also that it ratify the agreement signed on 12 December 2006 between the Guatemalan Government and the United Nations establishing an International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala ( CICIG ) .
Secondly , we must call upon the Guatemalan authorities to adopt measures to protect witnesses and victims of human rights abuses in judicial processes .
Thirdly , we must call upon the Commission , in the strategy for cooperation with Guatemala for 2007-2013 , to enhance the promotion of the rule of law , the fight against impunity , full respect for human rights and support for the government in increasing the security forces ' capacities to safeguard human security .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Guatemala is one of Latin America 's poorest countries .
Out of Guatemala 's population of 11 million , more than half live on the verge of poverty .
The civil war certainly contributed to the present situation .
We should remember that the war spanned 36 years and is estimated to have cost the lives of more than 200 000 civilians .
The people of Guatemala are still suffering particular and permanent violence , intimidation , corruption , and breaches of their civil rights .
As long as politicians and government officials responsible for maintaining public order are brutally murdered , there will be no democracy .
A society continually affected by violence cannot develop and function normally .
Police corruption makes it impossible to attempt to settle accounts with the bloody past .
It is commonly known that the army is largely responsible for crimes and serious violation of human rights .
Corruption of the state , politicians , administrative authorities , and public services stimulates the development of inappropriate behaviour and poverty .
Society is intimidated and is effectively being held hostage by criminals .
Many international organisations report that Guatemala is a paradise for organised crime .
This Latin American country is listed as a part of the world where human trafficking , involving children in particular , is conducted on a large scale .
Every effort must be made to support and protect all those who dare to say ' no ' to illegal structures , and to the links between state structures and organised crime .
Putting an end to impunity by prosecuting those responsible for outbreaks of political violence is an indispensable step in this process .
The Union should therefore ban politicians who go along with the corruption of public institutions for the sake of political correctness from entering EU territory , as it has already done in the case of other countries where flagrant violation of human rights takes place .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , our resolution on the murder of three El Salvador members of the Central American Parliament and their driver near Guatemala City , the capital of Guatemala and seat of the administration of the Central American Parliament , is a protest against banditry affecting innocent people .
Guatemala is a country that became a fully independent state in 1839 .
It is inhabited by Indians with links to the Mayan culture , 80 % of which are Catholics .
Sadly , the population has not been fortunate in its governments .
Undemocratic governments , military coups , civil war , drugs , corruption , poverty , have all created favourable conditions for those who spread the culture of violence and ride roughshod over human rights .
Guatemala is a presidential republic , in which legislative power is vested in the Congress .
The institutions of centralised power should make a determined effort to wipe out inappropriate behaviour that destroys democracy and violates human rights .
I believe this resolution will contribute to speeding up action in support of values that are fundamental to all of us .
Member of the Commission .
Sadly , Mr President , Guatemala is once again on our agenda following the horrendous murder of three El Salvador members of the Central American Parliament and their driver .
The assassination in prison of the four police officers suspected of the crime provided an extraordinary example of the country 's institutional weakness .
Despite genuine efforts in the last three years to reinforce the rule of law , the Government has had to recognise that insecurity and impunity were deeply rooted in Guatemala .
The Commission , together with the Member States , has called for a rapid and independent investigation into this very serious affair .
We have pressed for decisive action to strengthen the judiciary and security-related institutions .
Furthermore , the Commission has reiterated the importance of establishing an International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala .
This project has been in discussion for too many years .
The Government 's efforts in this respect are to be commended .
However , the project is still to be validated by the Constitutional Court before it can be endorsed by Congress .
The Commission therefore welcomes the fact that this debate is on the agenda today .
The European Parliament is very well placed to press its peers in Guatemala to support the much needed reforms .
The visit by my colleague Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner to Guatemala in April will be an additional opportunity for such messages to be shared with the Government .
The European Commission will continue to stand by the people of Guatemala as it has done since the signing of a Peace Accord 10 years ago .
However , for our partnership to be fully effective , the country must take decisive steps for an all-inclusive long-term security policy , addressing all the aspects involved .
It should be supported by adequate national resources for the funding of the government institutions and programmes .
It is now more important than ever that a consensual political commitment is made to a courageous fiscal pact , including tax increases .
It is hoped that the recent events will mark a turning point in the security debate in Guatemala .
As part of its new strategic framework for 2007-2013 , the Commission will be ready to offer support for security-related issues as part of a ' social cohesion and human security ' focal sector .
Finally , the Commission will continue , together with EU Member States , to engage in EU demarches with the local authorities .
The recent ratification by the Guatemala Congress of the 2003 EU-Central America Political Dialogue and Cooperation Agreement , as well as the perspective of an Association Agreement between our two regions , will allow intensified dialogue which will undoubtedly include security-related issues .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
2 .
Cambodia
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Cambodia .
author . - ( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , two years ago , I was already speaking about the human rights situation in Cambodia .
Two points in this joint resolution of six parliamentary groups particularly hold my attention .
The first , on which I intend to focus today , is the assassination , on 24 February last , of Hy Vuthy , President of the Free Trade Union of Workers in Cambodia .
This assassination is in addition to the murders , in 2004 , of Chea Vichea and of Ros Sovannareth , who had been Presidents of the same Union , and in addition to the acts of intimidation and physical attacks of which other trade unionists have been victims in recent years .
The right to form a trade union is recognised in Cambodia , but incidents that have taken place recently lead one to think that this right is being flouted .
It is , of course , inconceivable that people should not be able to belong freely to a trade union without having to suffer the consequences .
The murder of Chea Vichea remains unexplained to this day .
Born Samnang and Sok Sam Oeun have been arrested , found guilty of the murder of the trade unionist and sentenced to 20 years ' imprisonment without any proof of their guilt having been produced .
Our wish is for the real perpetrators of these murders to be found and brought to justice and for Born Samnang and Sok Sam Oeun to be given a fair trial .
The second point on which I wanted to focus today is the Khmer Rouge Tribunal .
During the mission that I conducted in Cambodia in April 2006 , I came to realise the Cambodian citizens ' expectations in relation to this Tribunal .
Now , a year after our visit , the Tribunal has still not been set up .
It is vital for it to be set up without delay so that all the unpunished crimes of the Khmer Rouge are at last brought to justice .
Finally , we welcome the efforts towards stabilisation and the smooth running of the electoral process .
It would seem vital for the Kingdom of Cambodia to continue its efforts and place particular emphasis on the proper functioning of the courts which , at the end of our mission last year , we deemed to be the weak link in the system .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , we have been considering the situation in Cambodia regularly for years and repeatedly find severe setbacks followed by small signs of progress .
At best , everything has been moving forwards with the speed and method of the Echternach dancing procession .
We currently have the major problem that there are two opposite trends .
On the one hand , we are grateful to find that ASEAN has at last begun to put human rights questions at least tentatively on the agenda .
There is within ASEAN a gentle but nevertheless effective pressure to develop democracy and the rule of law further in Cambodia .
On the other hand , however , the necessary process of setting up the Tribunal to try the horrendous crimes of the Khmer Rouge has ground to a halt .
That is not necessarily the fault only of the Cambodians . The Cambodians have slowly started to move .
Some sections of the international community are no longer so enthusiastic , however .
This is because considerable quantities of oil have been found in Cambodia and we are now experiencing something we often have to deal with in human rights debates , namely that the Chinese and Japanese - the Chinese above all - are prepared to invest there and produce oil whatever the political conditions , ignoring questions of human rights , and that western groups - the United States of America in particular in this case - unfortunately then also join this negative race .
The USA , which has been a powerful driving force behind the Tribunal up until now , is threatening to lose its zeal in this area .
We Europeans certainly have the crucial task of safeguarding the economic and strategic interests of our part of the globe here , but - as we have already said in relation to Guatemala - that will not succeed in the long term if democracy , human rights and the rule of law are neglected .
That is why there can only be a stable Cambodia if the country also continues to develop politically .
This means putting an end to the currently prevailing state of lawlessness and impunity .
The murder of the trade unionists clearly shows that they are not even trying to hide what has happened there and that no serious attempt is being made to actually find and punish the perpetrators , but that there is a prevailing climate of absolute lawlessness .
We cannot accept that .
There can be no economic stability without political stability and no political stability without the rule of law .
This must be our clear and unequivocal message to the Cambodians .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , ever since the Americans invaded it during the Vietnam war , Cambodia has not managed to find its feet .
Since then , relations in that country have become unyielding and extremely intolerant .
Initially , with American aid , a Right-wing regime was put in power with no goal other than to sabotage China and Vietnam .
This was followed by years of domination by the Khmer Rouge , which laboured under the illusion that people would become happier if city residents were forced into the country and intellectuals became farmers .
This regime enjoyed Chinese backing and cost a huge number of lives .
All those intolerant regimes have transformed a traditionally relatively peaceful and tolerant society into a land of murder and violence .
Even now that Cambodia is a parliamentary democracy , various political parties are carrying on this old tradition .
Given the chance , they would ban each other and rule out any possibility of the others gaining power from the outset .
People are being attacked while the true perpetrators get off scot-free .
It is still difficult for that country to come to terms with the crimes from the recent past .
These crimes are suppressed as much as possible .
In this climate , violent forms of intimidation are given free rein , something that could even culminate in the murder of people who stand up for other opinions and other interests .
Recent attacks have targeted trade unionists , particularly in the clothing industry , seeming to be directed against the right of workers to organise themselves and to stand up for their interests .
It is important for Europe not to keep quiet about this , but to stand up for human rights in a consistent manner .
The Council and Commission should in this respect bring their contacts with Cambodia into play and should not under any circumstances make them secondary to any economic considerations , such as oil off the coast .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , there are a number of countries where trade unions are something more than mere unions .
This was once the truth in my country - in Solidarity 's Poland - and is true in present-day Cambodia .
A quarter of a century ago in Poland communists murdered trade unionists - just as this Cambodian trade union leader was murdered .
To date , no one has been charged with the crime , even though 10 years ago , in a special agreement signed with the European Communities , Cambodia undertook to respect human rights and democratic principles .
This is of course a part of a larger picture , which was ably described by preceding speakers .
I would simply remind the House that for the last three years we , as the Union , have been calling for an anti-corruption law consisting of eight sections to be adopted in Cambodia .
We must speak out loud and clear on the situation in Cambodia now , so that we do not have to do so in the future .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it appears that the Cambodian regime has a nasty habit of eliminating trade union leaders : it has already been pointed out that this is not the first time .
Today , we learn of the assassination of Hy Vuthy , again in mysterious circumstances .
I believe it is necessary for the European Union to make its voice heard in no uncertain terms , particularly in view of the elections due in April .
We must avoid arriving at the last minute and being forced to note the irregularities that are bound to be found .
Another fundamental issue is that of the tribunal for crimes committed by the Khmer Rouge : for months now , there has been a stalemate , and I believe that the European Parliament as well as the Commission and the Council must now propose a public hearing to the president of the tribunal , in order to gain a proper understanding of what the problems are that are holding up the tribunal 's work and to try to resolve them .
We would like to express our solidarity , as the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , with our comrades in the same political family in the Sam Rainsy party - many of whose members , including 24 parliamentarians , are also members of the Transnational Non-violent Radical Party - and we also express our solidarity with the Montagnard refugees in Cambodia .
I hope that this Parliament will adopt the two amendments that we , the ALDE Group , have tabled .
It is true that the United States is adopting , to an increasing extent - for reasons which Mr Posselt pointed out - a policy of appeasement and good relations with the Vietnamese regime , and thus it is not highlighting with the same firmness as before the problems of the human rights of refugees .
The European Union has the chance to distinguish itself in a positive way and to raise the human rights clause within the framework of the agreements with the Cambodian regime : this is a good opportunity to do so .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this is another country on which numerous European Parliament resolutions have previously been passed with , unfortunately , only limited success .
Cambodia has been plagued by human rights violations of extreme proportions and severity over many decades .
The nightmare period of the Khmer Rouge rule and the mass-extermination massacres of civilians are still sickeningly vivid in our minds , but even today in Cambodia respect for human rights and proper application of the rule of law are theoretical aspirations rather than applicable practical realities .
The killing , on 24 February of this year , of the President of the Free Trade Union of Workers at the Suntex garment factory and the apparent immunity that seems to be afforded to the psychopathic Khmer Rouge murderers are examples of the lack of will on the part of the Cambodian authorities to take drastic action to correct the abominable situation as regards human rights abuses that still prevails in the country .
It is hoped that these authorities will , on this occasion , take what the European Parliament tells them very seriously indeed .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission has been closely following the situation relating to trade unions in Cambodia .
The murder of Mr Hy Vuthy , who was shot dead in the early hours of 24 February while going home after a night shift in a textile factory , is the latest in a very disturbing series of attacks on trade unionists in that country .
Mr Hy Vuthy is the third official of the Free Trade Union of Workers of the Kingdom of Cambodia to be killed in three years .
This campaign of intimidation against trade unionists is aggravated by a weak police force and judiciary , local power struggles , political interference in the judiciary , corruption and impunity .
Furthermore , the mix of fierce competition for membership , the low level of professionalism , political influence and a low degree of control over members have made for a tense atmosphere in some of the garment-manufacturing establishments .
The Commission recently raised this issue with the Cambodian authorities to ask for a thorough inquiry into this murder and that appropriate and effective action be taken to follow up the results of the inquiry and bring to justice those responsible .
The EU also called on the Cambodian Government , as a party to all major International Labour Organisation conventions , to abide by the commitments it has taken .
The Commission has also raised , and will continue to raise , the issue of the Khmer Rouge Tribunal , and has urged the parties concerned to come to an agreement on its rules of procedure so that the trials can get under way as soon as possible .
The Commission is providing EUR 1 million towards the costs of the Tribunal .
A successful Khmer Rouge Tribunal will contribute significantly towards eliminating the climate of impunity in Cambodia .
As recommended by Parliament in a previous resolution on Cambodia , the Commission has recently established a working party to deal with matters relating to cooperation in the areas of institution-building , administrative reform , legal and judicial reform , governance and human rights in order to engage constructively the Cambodian authorities on these issues .
I would like to assure this House that the Commission , through its Delegation in Phnom Penh and together with the missions of EU Member States in Cambodia , will continue to monitor the situation very closely .
The international community - especially the EU - which had such a vital role in the establishment of the new Cambodia , should ensure that human rights are upheld in that country .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
3 .
Nigeria
The next item is the debate on five motions for resolutions on Nigeria .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , quite honestly I think a debate about the developing situation in Zimbabwe would be more urgent than all three topics we are debating this week .
The detailed reports I am receiving are deeply distressing .
That is not possible today , however , because we have limited ourselves to three topics in the urgent debate .
I hope that we in the Working Group on Parliamentary Reform will abolish this self-imposed restriction for the urgent debate .
So far as the situation in Nigeria is concerned , we believe it is reasonable to look at the human rights deficits as a whole , especially in the light of the forthcoming elections , and not to confine ourselves to one topic .
We also believe , and have said as much , that the present Bill in Nigeria contains violations of fundamental human rights .
We are against any form of discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation , and we also believe that a person 's private life is an exclusively private matter , which must not be criminalised by the state .
We consider it a violation of the freedom of opinion if a person is sent to prison for advocating more liberal legislation .
We believe , however , that a resolution on Nigeria must also take a stance on the other problems affecting people there as a whole , namely the widespread violence , the corruption , the immunity of those who violate human rights , the political intimidation in the run-up to the elections , possibly involving the security forces , the threat to the independence of the national electoral commission , the fact that the death penalty is still in force there , that there are still - especially in the parts of the country where sharia is practised - degrading physical punishments , and also that the problem of child labour is very much alive .
Because we want to consider these points as a whole , we prefer to vote for our own resolution and not for the joint text .

author . - ( NL ) Mr President , Nigeria is a land of diversity , peopled by many peoples with different languages and cultures .
Only colonisation by the British brought them all under one national roof .
Separatist movements , such as that in Biafra , were quashed with enormously superior military strength a long time ago , and that has contributed to the country 's militarisation .
A current development is that the Christian south , where European standards have managed to take hold , and which has enjoyed a relatively high degree of individual freedoms , is being subjected to the strict life rules from the traditionally isolated orthodox Islamic north .
To an even greater extent than in the United States , where President Bush made unsuccessful attempts to introduce a ban in the Constitution on marriage relations between people of the same sex , attempts are being made in Nigeria to discourage homosexuality .
The word ' discourage ' is , in fact , too weak to describe what is in fact an attempt at the extermination of homosexuals .
As a consequence , not only marriages , or legal positions that are more or less equivalent , between same-sex partners are banned , but all people involved in organised pressure groups of homosexual men and lesbian women are liable to be punished for it .
Rights that seem rather self-evident are at risk of being abolished in new legislation .
Homosexuality will not be driven away by banning and persecution that will lead only to the justification of violence and oppression against any given section of the population .
This violence is consistent with previous attempts to sentence to death raped women who gave birth to children while unmarried .
Injustice in legal form is on the march , and it must be fought against .
We must make it clear to those forces in Nigeria who insist on such rules that these lead to unacceptable situations and in this case also to the further spread of venereal diseases , including AIDS .
Europe should not brush this under the carpet , not even if we are keen to import Nigerian oil .

author . - ( NL ) Mr President , I share Mr Gahler 's view that there are far more problems in Nigeria and also in other countries , but that problems are sometimes so emotive and so complex that we really need to turn the spotlight on them and that we need to make a special effort to resolve them once and for all .
The situation of homosexuals is problematic all over the world .
In Nigeria , since fundamental human rights are being violated , it is really important for the European Parliament and the European Union to take the lead in the fight against the criminalisation of homosexuality .
This is why I am delighted that this resolution is before us , and I hope we will draw the necessary consequences , that is to say , if Nigeria does not respond to the call of this House , we really will review our relations with it , for it is unacceptable that we should keep promoting human rights and then turn a blind eye our partners ' failure to observe them .
We must be really consistent about this .
I should like to finish off by addressing a few words directly to President Obasanjo , who once received the Liberals ' Freedom Prize for his work in aid of democracy in his country , and to urge him once again to make an effort on behalf of all Nigerians , including those who are homosexual .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , there is no doubt that today we should refer also to the situation in Zimbabwe , and to recent acts of repression against the political opposition in that country .
My political group is putting forward a resolution on Nigeria .
The situation in Nigeria is currently being carefully monitored by us because of the so-called ' same sex marriage prohibition act ' , which has been approved by its parliament at first and second reading .
Nigeria enjoys enormous prestige and importance in Africa itself , and in the context of the contemporary global order .
At the same time we are still aware that violence , infringements of civil rights , or even such violations of human rights as forced child labour and trafficking in children are commonplace in Nigeria .
The law I refer to now is causing particular concern .
I would like to point out that the law does not only prohibit same sex marriages .
It will also mean that even talking about the rights of different sexual minorities , and organising into clubs , societies , and cultural organisations will be punishable by detention and imprisonment .
There is no doubt that if the Nigerian Parliament passes this bill , very serious violations of human rights and civil rights in Nigeria are likely to ensue .
It should be noted that in its statement of 28 January Human Rights Watch stated that this bill was an expression of homophobia .
The European Parliament must ensure that human rights , civil rights , and contemporary culture are to be respected in all countries , especially in countries that enjoy such prestige and respect as Nigeria , and which we deem to be an important point of reference in establishing the international political order .
author . - ( SV ) Mr President , in spite of many problems , the situation has improved since the fall of the military dictatorship in 1999 .
It is odd , therefore , that a law impairing human rights is now suddenly being devised .
Homosexuality is already banned and can be punished by means of everything from fines to 14-year prison sentences . We also know that , at the level of the constituent states , there is sharia law that condemns unmarried people convicted of homosexuality to 100 lashes and even imposes the death penalty on married people so convicted .
Now , there is a desire to introduce a ban not only on homosexual marriages but even on being a witness to , or helping plan , such a marriage , with up to five years ' imprisonment for those convicted .
Can anyone in this House explain to me how it might fatally undermine society to witness a declaration of love between two people ?
I cannot understand how it could be a punishable offence .
Because it is also illegal in any way to help homosexuals organise themselves , lawyers and human rights activists are also in danger of being affected , a state of affairs that makes a debate on homosexual rights impossible .
One thing that does in actual fact exist at present is sufficient tolerance of homosexuality for the largest daily newspaper , This Day , to carry contact ads for lesbians .
The law banning homosexuality has nothing to do with combating the spread of AIDS , as some people maintain - the large majority of those infected are heterosexual - and even if there were in fact such a reason for this law , it would be a stupid one because settled relationships reduce the spread of infection .
Given the situation , marriages between homosexuals should be encouraged and facilitated . Nigeria needs more love and kinship , and to approve laws of this type would be to begin a retreat to dictatorship and oppression .
I would call on the President to abolish the law concerned .
of behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to the bill on which we are focusing here today , and which is expected to be approved at the third and final reading before the end of the current legislature in Nigeria .
The bill obviously infringes fundamental civil rights and freedoms , and it clearly discriminates against a section of the population .
It may also result in increased homophobia amongst the general public .
The ban on registration of any association or group bringing together persons of a different sexual orientation , is accompanied by prison sentences for any attempt at public or even private presentation of similar content .
Moreover , there is a risk that such policy will result in limiting access by LGTB individuals to medical care , and impact negatively on the effectiveness of measures against AIDS already being implemented .
In view of all this , the Member States and the Commission should take strong measures to prevent the bill in its current form from being passed by the Nigerian authorities .
The European Union must also draw conclusions for the future , and place greater emphasis on the importance of the provisions prohibiting any form of discrimination in agreements signed with ACP and third countries .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we should answer the question from Mr Gahler , who wonders and asks us if there are more serious and more important issues outside and inside Nigeria .
I believe that there are , and in this I share the opinion of my fellow Member Mrs in ' t Veld , but I also believe that this resolution should be backed for two important reasons : the first is that we have the opportunity to act before something serious happens .
Instead of having to chase after events for the next 15 or 20 years and lament the penalties to which this law would give rise if it were applied to thousands of individuals - as has occurred on numerous occasions in Nigeria itself , for example with death penalties - we have the opportunity , as the European Parliament , to take action in advance .
I believe that this is a golden opportunity .
The same might be true of the signs that President Obasanjo is yielding to radical Islamic fundamentalist pressure in the northern states .
Our friendly relations , as well as harsh criticism , where necessary , could help the president to withstand a catastrophic victory by extremist fundamentalism , which in Nigeria , too , is showing signs of taking root .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I have come across many pieces of legislation I did not approve of in this House .
This is normal in political life .
However , this is probably the time I have disapproved of one so very strongly .
My deep disapproval is due to the incredible insincerity of the document concerned .
My judgment is based upon five facts .
Firstly , the European Parliament intends to interfere in the affairs of others .
It actually intends to interfere in affairs that are not crime-related and not criminal , but simply legislation a sovereign state intends to adopt in order to regulate internal social matters .
Secondly , the joint resolution tabled confuses criticism of the proposed legislation with hypothetical offences that might ensue from such legislation .
Thirdly , Nigeria has been conducting a dramatic struggle against AIDS .
Its intention is both to limit the ways in which AIDS has been commonly spread , and sexual tourism , European sexual tourism .
We want to prevent Nigeria from adopting this law on the pretext of protection against AIDS .
Fourthly , an outrageous proposal is being made .
The fourth point refers to sanctions .
Sanctions have not been imposed against crimes of genocide in China , Tibet , Sri Lanka and Sudan , yet we seem to be treating Nigeria as we should have treated the states that perpetrated the most serious crimes , though we failed to do so .
Fifthly , I believe it is extremely inappropriate for this matter to have been included under the item on human rights .
Sixthly , I am against this joint resolution .
I am going to vote in favour of the resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
I disagree with it , but I believe that doing so will increase the chances of the original resolution , which is an affront to common sense , being rejected .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) I disagree , Mr Libicki .
This is a fundamental issue of human and fundamental rights .
While in several countries of the world common sense and rationale are prevailing and laws are being adopted not just to eliminate discrimination but also to make it punishable when it is directed towards lesbians , gays , bisexuals and transsexuals , in other countries , such as Nigeria , and the United States , and even within the European Union , legislative initiatives are being promoted that represent a creep backwards .
We therefore had to act .
In a country in which Chapter 42 , section 214 of the Criminal Code stipulates that mere sexual relations between persons , adults , of the same sex are punishable by 14 years in prison , the Nigerian Justice Ministry now intends to go somewhat further and make same-sex marriages , and the performing of such marriages , punishable by 5 years in prison .
It would appear that the United Nations ' Human Rights Commission 's repeated calls for States to eliminate any law that discriminates against lesbians , gays , bisexuals and transsexuals , nor the fact that these people are entitled to exactly the same rights as heterosexual people , are not sufficient .
I therefore believe that this Parliament needed to respond to this outrageous situation . It has done so , and we are pleased about that .
Mr President , Nigeria is a huge African country which , since the end of military dictatorship in 1999 , has been struggling to accomplish modern-day democratic reforms .
The forthcoming elections have once again brought issues relating to respect for human rights to the forefront of political debate .
In this respect , the Africa Director of Human Rights Watch has very pertinently commented : ' Nigeria needs leaders who will tackle the country 's appalling human rights problems . '
The issue of freedom of sexual orientation and the decriminalisation of homosexuality , albeit a sensitive one , is regarded by the developed world as important in relation to an individual 's freedom , as long as it does not infringe on other people 's freedoms .
We call upon the Nigerian authorities , and in particular the Nigerian parliamentarians and senators , to bear this in mind when considering a relevant bill presently before them .
This motion for a resolution should in no way be taken to mean that the homosexuality issue is regarded by the European Parliament as taking precedence over other areas of concern , such as Nigeria 's corruption epidemic or the abominable state of affairs with respect to the abusive behaviour by government security forces .
Nigeria needs to remedy these areas quickly too .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the European Commission has been following the evolution of the Same-Sex Marriage ( Prohibition ) Act submitted early last year to the Nigerian Federal Executive Council .
The Commission shares the deep concern already expressed by international organisations , including the UN , through the Secretary-General 's special representative on human rights defenders , concerning the heightened level of discrimination , violation of individual rights and restriction of the right of free association that this bill would introduce , if approved .
The Commission equally shares the analysis by Nigerian and international human rights associations concerning the potential repercussions on persons engaging , or being suspected of engaging , in same-sex relationships .
The same is true for human rights defenders advocating against the negative human rights implications of this homophobic bill .
The bill would put them at greater risk of arbitrary arrest , detention , torture and ill-treatment .
It would also restrict and silence the action of local human rights organisations .
The bill reinforces the excessively severe provisions already in place .
Nigeria 's criminal code punishes consensual homosexual conduct with up to 14 years ' imprisonment , while the shariah penal code adopted in 11 states in northern Nigeria lays down the death penalty for livat [ ' sodomy ' ] .
The bill would also infringe a number of international human rights laws and treaties that Nigeria ceded to and ratified , possibly its own Constitution and key articles of the Cotonou Agreement .
In view of the above and of the conclusions on EU relations with Nigeria adopted by the General Affairs and External Relations Council in 2003 , the Commission would like to confirm its readiness to contribute to the implementation of the resolution this House is about to adopt .
The Commission is prepared to actively participate , along with the Member States , in the political dialogue foreseen under Article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement .
This political dialogue will fully address the specific issue concerning the Same-Sex Marriage Bill as well as the essential elements regarding human rights , democratic principles , the rule of law and good governance listed in Article 9 of the Cotonou Agreement .
Finally , the Commission encourages the European Parliament to follow up last year 's visit by its former President , Mr Josep Borrell Fontelles , to the Nigerian Parliament , with a view to establishing a regular dialogue between the two parliaments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates , that is , in a moment .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
1 .
Guatemala ( vote )
- Before the vote on recitals B and C
Mr President , a couple of small but important wording errors have managed to creep into the resolution .
I propose to correct them as follows : in recital B , to replace the word ' authors ' with the word ' perpetrators ' , and in recital C , to replace the words ' intellectual authors ' with the word ' instigators ' .
Are there any objections to the inclusion of these oral amendments ?
( The oral amendments were accepted )
2 .
Cambodia ( vote )
3 .
Nigeria ( vote )
4 .
The attack on Galina Kozlova , member of the board of the Mari national organisation Mari Ušem and editor of the literary magazine Ontšõko ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Mr President , when I spoke during the discussion on the Galina Kozlova case , I expressed my gratitude to our colleagues from the PPE-DE Group Mr Kelam , Mr Landsbergis and Mr Tannock for initiating that resolution .


I was informed later that the original initiative came from our Estonian colleague Mr Savi from the ALDE Group .
I should therefore like to express my respect and gratitude to him .
( PL ) On Nigeria , I voted in favour of the resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
I do not consider it a good one , but I believe that adopting the joint resolution tabled by the Left would bring far more discredit on the House .
I believe the resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party is a better way forward .
I would remind you that there are no explanations of vote concerning emergency matters .

( FR ) Mr Pr