Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday , 7 July 2000 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , once again it is my sad duty to open our plenary sitting against the background of the violence in the Spanish Basque Country which has intensified dramatically over the summer .
A further seven victims have been murdered by an organisation whose strategy is clearly , henceforth , one of attempting to defeat democracy by the use of terror .
Let me give the names of the murder victims : José María Martin Carpena , a Popular Party municipal councillor in Malaga , whose widow and daughter are to visit the House tomorrow morning at 9 a.m. ; Juan María Jauregui , the former Civil Governor of Guipuzcoa ; José Maria Korta , president of the Guipuzcoa employers ' association ; Francisco Casanova , a Second Lieutenant in the Spanish army ; Irene Fernández Pereda and José Angel de Jesus Encinas , members of the Guardia Civil in Sallent de Gallego ; Manuel Indiano , Popular Party municipal councillor in Zumarraga .
On each of these sad occasions , I expressed our solidarity with the victims .
I have expressed our condemnation of these unspeakably barbaric acts .
I have also offered the Spanish authorities our support .
Today , Parliament as a whole , unanimous in spite of the range of our political affiliations , is honouring their memory , affirming loudly and clearly that terrorism is the very antithesis of democracy .
To deny the right to life is to kill liberty .
Not only is violence a solution to be condemned , it is also inefficient , as it isolates and excludes the perpetrators of such actions .
I propose a minute ' s silence as a last tribute to these victims , as an expression of our support for their families and friends and , indeed , to all democratic men and women in Spain , and particularly in the Spanish Basque Country , who , despite the climate of terror , continue to believe in political dialogue , the fundamental values of civilised society and the ultimate victory of democracy .
Please stand and observe this minute ' s silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
- Madam President , unfortunately I cannot agree with what you have said .
There is no truth except the whole truth .
A part of reality is not sufficient by itself .
The whole is the only real truth .
This is much more than a metaphysical quotation from Hegel .
We in Euskal Herritarrok also regret profoundly the loss of human lives and share with all Basque citizens the shocked feelings of our people at the moment .
Bertrand Russell denounced the obscenity of deliberately humiliating a nation , of making people crazy so that a straitjacket would be needed .
This is actually the Spanish Government 's strategy towards the Basque country .
The action of ETA is a righteous expression of the struggle for recognition of something quite elementary .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso , in view of the circumstances , I must say , personally , and this is perhaps not quite in keeping with my duties as President , that I find your contribution quite unacceptable here .
( Loud applause )
Tribute
Addressing more particularly those Members of Parliament that were members of the previous legislature , it is my very sad duty to inform you of the deaths , this summer , of Vassilis Ephremidis and Staffan Burenstam Linder .
Many of you will have very clear memories of their time with us , of their particularly dynamic presence , and I have taken the liberty of sending condolences to their families on behalf of the House as a whole , of course .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
Madam President , on a point of order .
In a letter I sent to you on 1 September , I referred to various allegations in the British Press about one Member of this House , Mr Hannan , and the fact that he is alleged to have raised over GBP 100 000 for the ' no ' campaign in the Danish referendum on the euro .
Could you launch an investigation into this matter to establish that Mr Hannan did not use Parliament premises or the staff to which he is entitled as a Member of this House to raise that money ?
Could you also ensure that Mr Hannan states the position in his declaration of financial interests in advance of the referendum in Denmark so that the citizens of that country can see where the money came from ?
Mr Murphy , I note your statement .
I have indeed received your letter , and I have forwarded it to the quaestors , who will see what action needs to be taken in response to it .
Madam President , could I ask you to invite colleagues , when they make declarations of that type , to assure themselves that the Member concerned has been informed of such a declaration ?
It is very discourteous to make that sort of remark , openly in the Chamber , when the Member concerned is not present .
Mr McMillan-Scott , the problem I have is that I never know what subject the Member is going to raise .
In fact , that should really have been a procedural motion .
Madam President , I rise on a point of order on the issue of the recent industrial action at the French Channel ports , which caused major disruption yet again to EU citizens legitimately travelling between the United Kingdom and other Member States .
Is the House aware that the Strawberry Regulation permits expedited procedures for the owners of goods delayed by this type of action to receive compensation , but does not give the same rights of compensation to tourists and other travellers ?
Are you aware of the anger felt by citizens of this Union who seem to be regularly disrupted by these wildcat actions which are now taking place for the sixth summer running at the Channel ports ?
Would you , Madam President , undertake to raise with the President-in-office and the Commission what action can be taken forthwith to stop this happening in future by strengthening the regulation , which I believe is No 2679 / 98 .
Thank you , Mr Bradbourn , I shall happily take note of this comment .
Madam President , I am sorry to take the floor to raise an issue which is not a point of order , but I feel that I should explain what happened today to some interpreters , officials and MEPs .
All of us here today know what a problem it is to get to Strasbourg .
I , for example , need to take three flights , starting at half past seven in the morning , to get from Asturias to Strasbourg .
However , given that we arrive in Paris at 1.20 p.m. and the plane for Strasbourg leaves at 1.30 p.m. , it is not acceptable to have a situation where , if the Madrid-Paris flight is delayed , we are left behind .
Some interpreters were due to work at 4.30 p.m. and were unable to do so , and some MEPs , such as Mr Medina , left the Canary Islands yesterday evening to arrive here today at 5.00 p.m.

If we arrive an hour late , they clearly cannot be expected to wait for us .
However , if we arrive in Paris ten minutes late , it is not right that nobody bothers to tell the next flight to wait for us .
This cannot continue , Madam President , because some of us have enormous problems getting here , specifically those of us who come from outlying regions .
I would ask you to speak to Air France .
Mrs González Álvarez , as you know , I am well aware of all these problems .
Believe me , I am continually informing the relevant authorities , both governmental and airport , of our problems .
You all received a questionnaire .
I should like to thank the 300 Members who sent in their completed questionnaires .
These will enable us to get an overview of the situation , as the saying goes , and indeed , I have every hope of achieving tangible results , which is what we really need , not another committee or some other such thing .
We need real results which will change the conditions governing Members ' travel to Strasbourg and I shall fight at your sides , believe me , in order to obtain them .
Madam President , during the last Strasbourg part-session I communicated to the Presidency the enormous concern in the Bay of Algeciras and the Campo de Gibraltar about the presence of an English nuclear submarine suffering from a serious fault in the cooling system of its nuclear reactor .
I am yet to receive any reply in this regard .
Madam President , we Andalusians are proud to receive this broken-down vessel in our waters , but we are very concerned about the United Kingdom ' s stubborn determination to repair the fault there .
It is common knowledge , from the Royal Navy ' s own documents , that this port is not sufficiently equipped for the repair of this type of fault .
We would therefore ask for your help so that a section of the European Union ' s population may be protected from any possible risk .
To this end , I would ask you to take the necessary steps so that the said submarine may be towed away and repaired somewhere where there are sufficient safeguards , and so that we can thereby prevent the social alarm which is being caused .
Mr Bautista Ojeda , I should like to point out that next Thursday , in the topical and urgent debate , the safety of nuclear submarines will be discussed .
The Conference of Presidents specifically wished to widen the debate beyond the tragic accident of the Kursk .
This will be the appropriate opportunity for you to state your case .
Madam President , I would like to point out that this House has on many occasions condemned the death penalty , and has also made representations to the United Nations requesting moratoria .
Furthermore , it has given its opinion on specific cases , including the case in question - the execution of Derek Barnabei which was announced in July .
The execution is to take place in ten days time on 14 September , and I therefore feel that it is important that you , Madam President , who are well-known for your sensitivity , write to the Governor of the State of Virginia on behalf of this House and request a stay of execution .
I shall be happy to do so , Mrs Napoletano .
Indeed , we have already made representations on several occasions and , even if we were unsuccessful in changing the course of events , I believe we must continue to do so , and I shall do so wholeheartedly .
Madam President , as other Members have said , there is indeed a problem with air services to Strasbourg .
I should , however , like to remind those members that are such devotees of free competition , that since we deregulated airlines , it is no longer possible to subsidise them and to class services to and from Strasbourg as public service operations , and hence , many invitations to tender have failed to bear fruit because no airline has been prepared to offer flights which are considered to be unprofitable .
Madam President , I am not about to enter into this debate , but I would just like to draw your attention and my fellow Members ' attention to another matter concerning this city , which is the extremely sensitive and worrying situation of a group of Hungarian gypsies who arrived in Strasbourg on 24 July , following persecution and racial discrimination in their own country , and who are seeking political asylum not only in our country , but also in other European Union countries .
I do not wish to go into the details of the situation , but the essence of the problem is of very direct concern to us since , on the one hand it provides a very tangible and specific illustration of the problems involved in applying the Copenhagen criteria , which require urgent solutions , and on the other hand , the problems that certain countries that are candidates for membership of the European Union have in fulfilling the terms of the treaty .
Then again , it also forces us to state , once again , that respect for minorities and human rights must be assessed in the same way and on a par with compliance with the economic criteria .
So , Madam President , and I believe you are in complete agreement with this opinion , which is also in line with the opinions adopted by this House on these issues , I should like to see the matter referred to the joint parliamentary committee , in this case the EU-Hungary Joint Parliamentary Committee , at your request , as a matter of urgency .
The group of 46 people who are here , Madam President , the Zamoli gypsies , are placing all their hope in the ability of this House to achieve progress in these matters .
Thank you , Mrs Gillig .
I shall write this evening to the Chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee , so that he can look into the situation .

Madam President , Mr Murphy was speaking about Mr Hannan ' s ill-timed interference in the Danish election campaign .
It is not a problem for us Danes that the Conservatives have nothing to do in England , but are acting the fool in Denmark .
We just smile at them and say , " Heaven knows why they do not just mind their own business over in England and leave us to get on with our own business in Denmark . "
Madam President , given that the Chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee is present , I should like to respond immediately to my fellow Member by saying that we are indeed going to hold a meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Committee this week , and I shall immediately contact the Ambassador , who is scheduled to visit us on Thursday , to see if he can offer some response to these questions as early as the Thursday sitting , and I am perfectly willing to invite my fellow Member to take part in our proceedings on Thursday morning .
Thank you , Mr Desama , you have pre-empted us , so I do not need to write to you .
Madam President , I am one of those MEPs who need to travel for 24 hours in order to be here by 5.00 p.m.
I say this because I have spent half an hour trying to talk about the Minutes of the sitting of Friday , 7 July of this year .
On Friday , 7 July , on behalf of the ELDR Group , I tabled an amendment to Mrs Peijs ' s report , which was fortunately accepted .
However , the amendment has not been correctly translated into Spanish since , where it talks about the peripheral regions , I wished to refer , and I in fact did refer , to the outermost regions of the European Union .
Mr García , I apologise . We shall make the correction .
We had not understood that you wished to speak regarding the Minutes .
Madam President , since a colleague has mentioned the name of Gibraltar could I remind the House that Sunday , 10 September is the national day in Gibraltar and some of us will be there .
But I am surprised that the House is not debating Burma on this day .
Yesterday , the ministers of the 15 imposed sanctions on Burma , and there has been a siege of the elected leader of Burma , Aung San Suu Kyi , and an outburst of violence around her home .
The British Ambassador was beaten up this morning , and the European Parliament should take strong action towards Burma , just as the ministers are doing .
Lord Bethell , I have , myself , already made a statement on this subject because we are extremely concerned about the highly insecure situation of the winner of the European Parliament Sakharov Prize and we are monitoring this situation extremely closely .
Indeed , it is on the agenda for the topical and urgent debate on Thursday , i.e. the day after tomorrow .
Madam President , I also refer to the point of order that was raised about the nuclear submarine in Gibraltar .
I would ask you and other Members to bear in mind , when considering this issue and when it comes for debate that , although Gibraltar is part of the European Union , the residents of Gibraltar do not themselves have direct representation in this Parliament .
I would ask this House to give urgent consideration to the exclusion of those citizens and to secure their representation in this Parliament so they can bring their concerns to this House themselves .
Mr Perry , Members of Parliament will be able to express whatever opinions they see fit in the course of the debate .
They do have freedom of speech .
Madam President , some MEPs will probably be surprised to hear the reality of the situation , which is that Gibraltar is a British colony .
It is very odd that there are still colonies within the European Union in the year 2000 , but that is the case , Madam President .
Madam President , I am afraid I must raise this issue again .
In your letter of 14 July it appears to me that this House is putting Members ' health below that of the state of the carpets .
I was quite shocked to receive the letter to say that ashtrays will be put outside the Chamber , along with no smoking signs , because you have always been helpful in the past on this matter of smoking in this building .
It is incredible to me that there are Parliament rules stating that there are no smoking areas yet we do not have a safe passage into this Chamber .
I have just been diagnosed with deep vein thrombosis and the medication I am taking makes my asthma worse .
I plead for a safe route from my office into this plenary session , not only for me but for other Members here who suffer from other breathing problems .
I hope this will be put into place immediately because , otherwise , my health and other people 's health will suffer .
I hope you will look into it as a matter of urgency and remove all ashtrays from all the no smoking areas as a matter of course .
Mrs Lynne , thank you for making this point .
I noticed a number of quaestors applauding heartily , and so I do not for an instant doubt that they are going to draw up regulations along the lines you suggest .
To reply to what you said to me , the regulations are already in place .
European Parliament rules have been drawn up , and we are not abiding by them .
Mrs Banotti will give you an answer , but if the regulations have already been drawn up , then they must and shall be applied .
Madam President , I fear that I must say something that might upset some Members , but the ushers outside are afraid - and I use the word advisedly - to ask some Members to stop smoking , because of the kind of abuse they get when they try to do that .
I need hardly say that I am totally against smoking as an ageing ex-nurse .
I have personally gone round to both Members and visitors to ask them to put out their cigarettes .
The ushers themselves have tried their very best to be diplomatic , but they are subjected , and I use the word advisedly , to abuse by some smokers when they ask them to stop smoking outside the doors .
Members ought perhaps to be aware that this is not a very nice way of behaving towards the staff of Parliament .
Madam President , I should like to express my respect for those who do not smoke and to state there must indeed be routes which allow them to move through the Parliament building without being affected by smoke .
I should also like to express my respect , however , for those who do smoke , and to defend their right to smoke .
It is important for my mental and physical wellbeing that I smoke , and I must point out that if there were no ashtrays , we would be creating even more unpleasant situations .
There must be ashtrays , just as there must be separate areas in which smokers can smoke and non-smokers can feel comfortable .
Mr Graça Moura , what we need is for non-smokers to respect the rights of smokers and for smokers to respect the rights of non-smokers .
We will have a calm discussion with the quaestors in order to designate areas where Members who wish to smoke , and feel a real need , may do so reasonably while respecting the rights of those who are bothered and even made physically ill by the smoke .
I promise you that this is something that we shall certainly sort out .
Madam President , as a rule of thumb , when a person wishes to condemn irregular behaviour they should state the name of the offender and specify when the event occurred .
This complaining about the rude behaviour of entire categories - whether smokers , non-smokers , reds or whites - is disgraceful !
In my opinion , if a Member of the European Parliament is asked to put out his cigarette by an usher , it is his duty to acknowledge civilly that the usher is doing his duty and thank him for it .
These are therefore important matters .
Would Mrs Banotti , who has complained of such incidents of irregular behaviour , like to state the names of those responsible and those affected , for I will be the first to request that measures be adopted to protect ushers and officials who are doing their duty .
Having said that , it goes without saying that if some of the general rules are stupid or petty , then it will , of course , be much more difficult to uphold them .
For example , it would appear appropriate to place an ashtray at the point which marks the end of a smoking area and the start of a non-smoking area in order to avoid cigarette butts burning the floor , but this is a question of common sense .
In conclusion , Madam President , it would also be sensible for us to stop complaining and to behave in a manner befitting Members of Parliament .
Just as you do over the issues of flights and Strasbourg part-sessions , you are whining like the hoi poloi instead of behaving with the dignity of representatives of a sovereign Parliament !
Mr Pannella , let me reassure you straight away . The quaestors are not lacking in common sense , believe me .
Agenda
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents , has been distributed .
Relating to Monday :
The Group of the European People ' s Party have requested that the vote on the report by Mr Valdivielso de Cué , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the MEDA programme , be postponed until the Brussels part-session in order to enable a number of technical problems to be resolved .
Madam President , the rapporteur , Mr Valdivielso , has just informed our group that the amendments are not yet all available in translation .
I do not know when they will be available , but if it were to be before tomorrow then - in accordance with our agenda - the vote would have to be taken as early as tomorrow at noon !
This is simply impossible because we need to discuss this in our groups .
Hence our request : if the groups still have sufficient time for discussion then the vote could be taken at the end of the week .
But if this is not guaranteed then it will just have to be taken at the mini-session in Brussels .
In any case , we insist , or at least we ask - as we have , of course , already decided - that the debate take place now without delay . After all , the Commissioner is here !
Madam President , I would like to speak against this proposal .
We had initially heard that it was not possible to vote on the Valdivielso report because Commissioner Patten was not here .
It now turns out that Commissioner Patten is here and it seems to me that any technical problem that there may have been , and I am aware of that possibility , could be resolved by the Parliament services within no more than 2 or 3 hours .
I would therefore ask that the vote on the MEDA regulation be included in this part-session and if the services really need one more day to resolve the technical problems , that the vote be delayed for one day .
However , it seems to me that the groups have debated this sufficiently , it has been on the table for too long now and I believe that there is no reason why it cannot be voted on during this part-session and in the presence , as we had asked so many times , of Commissioner Patten , whom I would like to thank for being here .
Mrs Terrón , there is clearly a technical problem here .
I have received confirmation that the amendments are not ready today because some of them still have to be clarified .
All the language versions will be available tomorrow morning .
It will not therefore be possible to vote tomorrow at noon because not all Members will have had time to see the amendments .
I think it would be reasonable if the House were prepared to postpone the vote until Wednesday . This would be in accordance with our Rules of Procedure , which stipulate that Members must have received the texts in their own languages .
I see that Mr Poettering agrees with this .
So , if the texts are indeed available tomorrow morning , we shall vote on Wednesday .
Relating to Tuesday :
Madam President , it is with regret that I must rise this time to address the following point : we have been astounded by the content of a statement made by a Member of the Commission - Commissioner Verheugen - on the issue of the enlargement of the European Union .
Commissioner Verheugen has made the enlargement of the European Union to incorporate the countries of central Europe conditional - this is the impression which he gave - upon a referendum , or at least he is recommending making it the subject of a referendum in one Member State of the European Union , the Federal Republic of Germany .
Now , although I am German , it is certainly not my concern - I am speaking here not as a German but as the chairman of my group - to debate the constitutional situation in Germany , but in the countries of central Europe , the unfortunate impression has been given that new conditions have been attached to the enlargement of the European Union .
We need to refute an impression of this kind in the strongest possible terms !
That is why this statement from Commissioner Verheugen - and I do not know whether it was made deliberately as part of a predetermined strategy or whether it was simply a rash comment - is not only incomprehensible but also damaging .
My group is asking - and I have heard similar noises from other groups - for the Commission to make a statement on this .
A suitable time for it to speak on this matter would be tomorrow morning when the Council and the Commission make their statements on the Union 's external action priorities .
Should the Commission feel that tomorrow morning is too soon , because it usually meets here on Wednesday mornings , and would prefer to make a statement at a later stage , then the appropriate time would be on Wednesday afternoon at 5 p.m. when other Commission statements will be made .
But I would ask the Commission to ensure that our position on the enlargement of the European Union is the one which we have always held , namely that by the year 2003 we in the European Union wish to be capable of enlargement , and to ensure that these principles are upheld here !
If the Commissioner gives the impression that this is no longer the case , then I believe that this is irresponsible , and the Commission as a college must set the record straight !
I have received several requests to speak on this subject , which is perfectly understandable , but I can see that Commissioner Patten is asking to be given the floor and , if you permit , I shall give him the floor immediately before allowing other Members to speak because he may well have some explanations to give us .
I will tell my colleague , Commissioner Verheugen , of the views that have just been expressed , which I know are held by other Members of Parliament .
I am sure that he will want to respond fully and rapidly to the concerns which have just been raised .
I want to make two points absolutely clear .
These are the strong views of the Commission , including my colleague Mr Verheugen .
First of all , in our view , the enlargement of the Union , the incorporation of other European countries in the liberal order of Europe , is the number one priority that we face in the next few years .
In my view and the view of other members of the Commission , there is not only a strategic and economic argument but also a moral argument for enlargement .
We want that message to go out loud and clear to all the enlargement candidates .
Secondly , all of us have the task in the next few years of convincing public opinion of what I have just said .
Mr Verheugen was trying to make that point very strongly .
We have to go out and sell the case for enlargement to public opinion in all the Member States of the European Union .
It would be wrong if it seemed to some of our voters in the fifteen Member States that enlargement was an issue for the political elites of Europe .
We have to convince them that it is in their interests that we enlarge and that there is an obligation on us to press the case for enlargement .
That is certainly a cause about which I feel very strongly and which I know President Prodi and the rest of the Commission will be arguing with vigour and passion over the next few years .
The point that the honourable Member raised expresses a legitimate and understandable concern .
I will relay it to Commissioner Verheugen .
( Applause )
Madam President , I am very grateful to the Commissioner for his statement .
To some extent it addresses the matter and to some extent it fails to do so .
I think it is very important as a matter of public record that we should have a declaration in the clearest terms from the Commission in a body , that it is continuing to act as the essential European prime mover of enlargement .
I applaud the view expressed by the Commissioner that we all share the task of selling this historic challenge but I deplore the fact that someone as pre-eminent as Commissioner Verheugen , at least according to a number of newspapers today , should say the Member States should not leave the Commission to do the dirty job alone .
This language is not appropriate to the sensitivities and subtleties required in this historic debate and it constitutes loose talk which opens up an appalling prospect , not least in the hearts and minds of those who support enlargement , and especially in candidate States and in their capital cities .
That is why this matter is of exceptional political importance this week .
It is important to understand that a Commissioner , Commissioner Verheugen in this case , has a role to speak for Europe .
Of course he is a German politician , but the German Government is empowered and in a position to speak for Germany .
I believe it is entirely proper that Mr Poettering should demand that this issue be dealt with here this week and I would urge the Commission to give the necessary assurance , not only because I agree with the sentiments of Commissioner Patten , but because the world at large wishes to be reassured that there is no dysfunction at the heart of Europe on the question of enlargement .
Madam President , there was a lot of animated discussion in our group about the position Commissioner Verheugen has adopted , and our main conclusion was that transparency , more than anything , is now required in the negotiations on enlargement .
Our citizens need it and so does Parliament .
It seems to me that Mr Poettering ' s proposal would serve the purpose well if we were now to create a little transparency , for it is just as Commissioner Patten says : enlargement must not be allowed to be merely an issue for the elite .
I can well understand why Commissioner Verheugen is somewhat vexed by the fact that candidate countries are being toured in the name of the Council and the various Member States and being promised that they can definitely join our club one year or the other .
Perhaps we can also talk a little about what part the Commission , the Council and Parliament should have in the talks that are now going on .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Poettering spoke here as a group chairman and not as a German .
I am speaking here as a German and as the acting chairman of my group .
Commissioner Patten has already outlined the Commission 's views on Mr Verheugen 's comments .
For me , that would actually suffice as a Commission position .
My group has always believed that not only the Commission as a whole but also all of the individual Commissioners must justify themselves before this Parliament , and this regardless of their nationality and regardless of any affiliation to a political party .
That is why we would welcome Mr Verheugen 's being given the opportunity this week to clarify his remarks here before the European Parliament and , if necessary , also to amend them .
Madam President , I should like to declare myself in favour of Mr Poettering ' s proposal .
I should like to say that my own group is in favour not only of " selling " enlargement or other major projects to public opinion but also of getting our fellow citizens closely involved in all the major phases of European construction , including by means of referenda .
We are , however , totally opposed to the idea of using the referendum as a sort of threat which could be abused by some " stirrers " , exploiting fears and , in particular , unwillingness to open up to others .
Consequently , in order to ensure that enlargement is a success in the eyes of public opinion in our respective countries and in the eyes of the citizens of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , I am in favour of dispelling any misunderstanding , and thus of giving Commissioner Verheugen the opportunity to offer Parliament a clear explanation .
Commissioner Verheugen should indeed come and address the House to offer some explanation .
We are not about to start a debate on this matter . I shall put this proposal to him .
I think the most suitable time would be on Tuesday , when the Council and Commission will be making their statement on the European Union ' s priorities for external action .
Commissioner Verheugen was not scheduled to attend at that time , he was not expected , but Commissioner Patten and I shall insist that he makes himself available and comes before the House to offer some explanations .
Madam President , we would of course welcome a statement from Mr Verheugen .
Since this is a very important issue , a statement from the Commission President would obviously be even better .
But we do not insist on this .
What we do insist on , however , is that the statement which Mr Verheugen eventually makes is unequivocally a declaration by the Commission as a whole , and that any misunderstandings are then cleared up .
This is not then a private , personal statement by Mr Verheugen , but a clarification by the whole Commission acting as a college .
Let me remind you , as if I needed to , of the formal sitting at 11.30 tomorrow morning on the occasion of the joint visit by Mr Avraham Burg , the President of the Knesset , and Mr Abu Ala , President of the Palestinian Legislative Council .


There is no need for me to stress the importance of this joint visit . The fact that I am stressing it should show you , as you might imagine , that I should like to see the Chamber as well attended as possible .
Let it be understood I am counting on all Members of this House , men and women , to attend .
Relating to Wednesday :
President .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has requested that the statement on human cloning should not conclude with a motion for a resolution being tabled .
Who wishes to speak in support of this request ?
Madam President , my group believes that the issue of biotechnology - because we are not only talking about cloning - is an issue which not only concerns various Member State governments , but is one which is also of considerable concern to public opinion .
This is the case not only because of the advances being made in this area , but also because of the scientific , industrial , ethical and religious consequences of this matter .
We pointed out at the time in the Conference of Presidents , and we have said so publicly , that we believe that this is a debate which cannot be resolved through an urgent resolution .
We believe that it requires well-considered and serious work , and proof of this can be seen in the drawing up of the directive on biotechnology which has been going on for a long time . An attempt was made to finish it , for the second time , during the previous parliamentary term , and it is yet to be finished because it is still facing certain problems .
We believe that we must ensure that the work requested by Parliament of the Ethics Committee - which advises the Commission and Parliament - is speeded up and we believe , furthermore , that an issue as important as this , which involves various committees of this Parliament and which is generating enormous concern in many areas - frozen embryos , the patentability of cells which may be multiplied for the purposes of transplants etc. requires a temporary committee .
We have therefore accepted that this declaration should be made .
However , we do not believe that it is appropriate at the moment to vote on a resolution , drawn up as we go along , which may create problems and be divisive .
Madam President , I would like to speak in favour of Enrique Barón Crespo 's proposal for the reasons he has outlined so eloquently .
Madam President , my group takes the opposite view , to the effect that it is important to vote upon a resolution .
In the first place , it is not the first time that Parliament has given an opinion on the subject of human cloning .
On several occasions since the advent of Dolly we have voted on a number of resolutions .
If anyone adopted a unilateral stance on these occasions , it was the British Government which , without any prior consultation whatsoever , adopted a position in favour of therapeutic cloning .
We therefore consider that a reaction from the European Parliament which does not close the door on the debate is a useful move .
When I say we must not close the door , clearly the suggestion of a temporary committee must not be rejected out of hand .
I am not saying that I am for or against that , but I do think that it would be a good idea for Parliament to deliver its opinion by some means other than an inconclusive debate .
Mr Lannoye , I can confirm that the Conference of Presidents did decide to set up a special committee to deal with all these matters .
Madam President , before the vote I should like to make a point of order .
I refer to Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure .
This is about all Members of the House having access to all the necessary documents .
With a view to the vote , which will probably take place on Thursday , I should like to confirm the substance of what Mr Lannoye said on this issue .
There are Parliament resolutions in which we have made our views on cloning very clear .
That was also true of therapeutic cloning !
People are acting now as though the proposals put forward by the British Government were something entirely new .
In actual fact we have already discussed this and Parliament has always been opposed to it .
The votes were always controversial .
Those who now want to prevent the debate and a resolution have always represented a liberal standpoint .
But a majority of Parliament has always adopted an uncompromising position .
It would not be very consistent if now - since the issue is topical - we were not to stand by our earlier statements .
Mr Liese , you very cleverly associated your speech to one of the Rules of Procedure to make it look like a procedural motion , but I have to say the connection was tenuous .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
Relating to Thursday : President .
I have received several requests for amendments to the agenda relating to topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
On the subject of Item 3 , ' Human rights ' , and Item 4 , ' Burma ' , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has requested that the current Item 4 ' Burma ' be replaced by a new item entitled ' Temelin ' and that the item on ' Burma ' be brought forward into item 3 ' Human rights ' to replace the sub-item ' Fundamental freedoms in Iran ' .
Madam President , I support this proposal and justify it on the basis of the fact that quite a lot has been said about Iran recently .
The situation is very delicate and a lot is happening there , but there has been discussion about it .
We would very much like to see a place on the agenda to discuss the nuclear power plant at Temelin , as in many Member States , especially in Austria , obviously , as it is next door to it , the situation is very tense .
I would like this proposal to make it possible to include the Temelin resolution on the agenda .
I shall therefore put the request from the group of the Greens to the vote .
We are talking about adding the item on the Temelin nuclear power plant . The item on ' Burma ' would , however , be retained as this has been moved forward into item 3 , ' Human rights ' .
Instead , it would be the item on ' Fundamental freedoms in Iran ' which would be taken off the agenda .
( Parliament gave its assent )
Still on the subject of item 3 , ' Human rights ' , I have received two identical requests from the Technical Group of Independent Members and the group of the European People ' s Party to replace the sub-item entitled ' Turkish bombing in northern Iraq ' with a new sub-item entitled ' Higher education and universities in Macedonia ' .
Who wishes to speak in support of this request ?
If you are looking for support , then I would be pleased to support this proposal from the PPE because it concerns an extremely positive development in Macedonia , which could in fact be further consolidated by a swift endorsement from Parliament .
I believe this to be a matter of great importance .
( Parliament rejected the request ) President .
The order of business is adopted thus amended .
MEDA
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
Report ( A5-0204 / 2000 ) by Mr Valdivielso de Cué - MEDA , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1488 / 96 on financial and technical measures to accompany ( MEDA ) the reform of economic and social structures in the framework of the Euro ­ Mediterranean partnership [ COM ( 1999 ) 494 - C5-0023 / 2000-1999 / 0214 ( CNS ) ] ;
Report ( A5-0205 / 2000 ) by Mr Piétrasanta - MEDA ( annual report 1998 ) on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission report : Implementation of the MEDA programme - 1998 annual report [ COM ( 1999 ) 291 - C5-0117 / 1999 - 1999 / 2120 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , certain circumstances could have justified postponing this report to a time when everything was available , including the amendments .
However , in any event , I believe that we , as MEPs , must take the work forward so that the MEDA report is not delayed at any time , with the resulting harm that that could mean for the countries concerned .
Having expressed these reservations , I shall summarise the MEDA programme .
I shall then give my opinion of the proposed regulation , as well as the report as a whole .
As is well known , the MEDA programme comes within the framework of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , which was created after the Barcelona declaration of November 1995 .
The Foreign Affairs Ministers of the European Union participated in that meeting .
This is an initiative which encompasses 27 countries from both sides of the Mediterranean .
On the one side , there are the 15 states of the Union and , on the other , Algeria , Cyprus , Egypt , Israel , Jordan , Lebanon , Malta , Morocco , Syria , Tunisia , Turkey and the Palestinian territories .
As for Libya , for obvious reasons , it only has observer status .
Our main objective , through this cooperation , is to forge links , especially in the numerous areas of common interest which we share with our Mediterranean neighbours .
To this end , around EUR 3 500 million have been invested over the last five years , shared between two broad cooperation formulae : bilateral and regional .
Specifically , this economic and financial aid must facilitate the completion of a free trade area by 2010 , to which end aid programmes have been implemented , both for macroeconomic reforms and for sectoral reforms and structural adjustments .
We must remember that the ratio between the per capita income of the European Union and the MEDA countries is 1 to 10 , that is to say a very considerable gap .
Therefore , in my judgement , it is logical that the sustainable economic development of the area should be our main goal .
In this regard , I must add that the commercial balance between these two blocks favours the European Union to the tune of EUR 21 billion .
Meanwhile , measures are also being considered to facilitate private investment in these 12 countries , which in 1994 amounted to EUR 3 500 million , particularly by means of updating legislation and administration , as well as by means of meetings between companies belonging to the MEDA countries and the European Union .
We should also remember that we are discussing an area of the world which is particularly affected by military conflict .
There is no point in listing the different wars being waged by many of the countries which are members of this partnership .
The MEDA programme seeks to clear the way towards a definitive and lasting peace in that part of the world by means , amongst other things , of economic stability .
We are talking about a population of around 230 million people which , given the current rate of growth , will reach 300 million in 10 or 12 years time .
There is a significant diversity of religions and traditions in all of those countries and this is one of the pillars on which the European Union ' s work is based .
As you know , MEDA also includes a short- and medium-term action programme for the environment , which aims to reverse the current environmental deterioration in the area .
Turning now to an analysis of the Commission ' s proposal , I think the proposal as a whole is insufficient , partly because of the criticisms made about the implementation of this programme .
The Commission principally defines three initiatives for achieving greater efficiency : on the one hand , making the decision-making process more dynamic , focussing the activity of the " MED Committee " on strategic planning and programming .
The national and regional funding plans will be adopted annually on the basis of indicative programmes .
It also proposes an increase in programming and implementation abilities , for which greater human resources must be provided .
Lastly , the Commission intends to scale down procedures in order to achieve more effective implementation and increase the percentage of programmes that are implemented .
Specifically , the intention is to develop common harmonised procedures for all aid programmes .
Finally , I wish to say that I believe this report is important because anything that helps the countries to the south of us , in turn , helps us .
Mr President , MEDA represents the practical implementation , the instrument of our Euro-Mediterranean policy , as defined following the Barcelona Convention in November 1995 , followed by a number of forums , particularly those in Malta , Naples and Stuttgart .
We are now presenting the first progress report , or annual report for 1998 , but which , in fact , summarises the initial implementation period , 1996-1999 , and prepares the way for the implementation of the actions for the second period , 2000-2006 , in the form of the regulation proposed by our fellow Member , Mr Valdivielso de Cué .
Given that this report is subject to the Hughes Procedure , we have included all the proposals adopted unanimously not only by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , which was chiefly responsible , but also those of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
The context is this : approximately EUR 4 billion over the last four years , plus the considerable appropriations contributed by the EIB , have been allocated .
The Barcelona Agreement signed by 27 countries , those of the European Union plus the 12 countries of the southern Mediterranean : Algeria , Cyprus , Egypt , Israel , Jordan , Lebanon , Malta , Morocco , the Palestinian Authority , Syria , Tunisia and Turkey .
The three main objectives involve the political and security dimension , the economic and financial dimension and the social , cultural and human dimension .
The following observations have been made : this is a programme still in its infancy which has experienced implementation problems and has suffered from various administrative problems , as highlighted by the European Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
There has been particular criticism of sub-contracting associations such as RTM .
In the final analysis , implementation has been virtually paralysed and , despite the almost 100 % commitment of appropriations , only 26 % have been paid to date , and that only with difficulty , with payment taking , on average , four years .
We presented the ins and outs of the matter in sufficient detail in our report , so I am now able simply to summarise our conclusions , which are as follows : firstly , there is a need to simplify the regulation in order to enable the process to be speeded up , while ensuring greater transparency by providing the resources necessary for the Commission to plan the programme and for the Council to monitor it .
Above all , the European Parliament must take part in the process and must be kept informed more regularly , particularly through the Euro-Mediterranean forum .
It would be appropriate to speed up the signing of the association agreements , which to date have been signed only with 7 countries .
This particularly concerns Lebanon , Algeria , Syria , etc .
Secondly , project selection must be more democratic and must , to a greater extent , involve greater participation by civil society and NGOs , who continually expressed this desire , especially at the European Parliament round table held in Brussels on 29 June this year , entitled ' Towards a sustainable MEDA ' .
Thirdly , respect for human rights must be monitored more carefully , for cooperation is not only targeted at economic progress , but is fundamentally related to democracy , freedom , peace , the eradication of inequality , and sustainable development .
We would therefore ask that a report on the human rights record of each of the signatory or candidate countries be presented to Parliament annually to be taken into consideration in the selection of projects .
Fourthly , we consider that the 10 % of appropriations allotted to regional cooperation are inadequate as compared with the 90 % allocated to bilateral cooperation .
We must therefore comment on the volume of appropriations dedicated to regional schemes which , we acknowledge , are harder to negotiate and implement but which correspond to the objective of efficiency , particularly in improving South-South relations and , above all , in safeguarding more extensive action for decentralised cooperation , which we all consider to be an important goal .
Fifthly , on the subject of the six priority areas of partnership , the environment , water policy , industry , energy , transport and the information society , we think it essential to reactivate programmes disregarded until now , the SMAP adopted in Helsinki in 1997 on the environment .
At least EUR 10 million must be allocated annually for water .
Action must be undertaken to promote renewable energies and to provide support for SMEs and for transport .
We should support each country ' s sustainable development plans .
We therefore consider it absolutely essential to implement the proposals for regulations suggested by Mr Valdivielso de Cué , particularly those on simplifying procedures in order to increase the transparency , efficiency and speed of payments and on deploying more Commission staff in order to ensure better administration of the programme , which must cease to be a poor relation in comparison with the cooperation programmes for Asian or ACP countries .
At this point I should like to thank not only the many participants , particularly the countries concerned and the NGOs that helped me to finalise this report , but also our European Commissioner , Mr Patten , who has a clear overview of the situation and whose external relations departments should contribute towards improving Mediterranean projects from now on .
Thanks , too , to Mr Patten ' s colleagues , especially Mr Patrick Laurent .
I should also like to stress the interest which Commissioner Busquin has taken in our work , reactivating Mediterranean cooperation in the field of research , particularly at the forthcoming informal summit on Capri , on 29 September .
Thanks are also due to all our fellow Members of Parliament , particularly Mrs Terrón , Mrs McNally and Mr Sami Naïr who are working on this issue .
It is crucial to implement our proposals in order to achieve the necessary revitalisation of the Euro-Mediterranean process .
Above all , the appropriations for 2000-2006 should not be penalised because of the programme ' s earlier problems . Instead the programme must be the spearhead of our policy , which we shall be discussing again at the Marseilles Conference in November .
We wish the French Presidency every success . I know that they are extremely concerned to resolve all difficulties and determined to achieve their objectives .
.
( FR ) Mr President , I too would like to thank Mr Valdivielso de Cué and congratulate him on his excellent work .
Broadly speaking , his report makes all the points which I , personally , consider important and also those which the Socialists consider important .
I should also like to thank Mr Piétrasanta , who has just given us a highly clear and pertinent outline of both the content of this report and the points which we were hoping that he would stress and mention .
The points which were missing from the Commission proposal and which were added by Mr Valdivielso de Cué are important ones .
Firstly , Mr Valdivielso de Cué added , and I congratulate him on this , a fundamental idea , namely the need to make a real commitment to the Mediterranean by granting this region aid comparable with that granted to the countries of Eastern Europe .
The countries of the South , rightly or wrongly , have the impression that they have been rather overlooked , even though everyone knows that the Mediterranean is one of the most sizeable divided regions existing in the world today .
The second idea which was restored was the harnessing of financial resources that were adequate to the challenges .
Reference was also made to the overall approach defined in Barcelona ( and not just , as the Commission thinks , the structural adjustment dimension ) , the intensification of regional cooperation , particularly South-South relations , the importance of decentralised cooperation ( contrary to the wishes of the Commission which would apparently like to do away with it ) , the maintenance of support for micro-projects , i.e. for NGOs and civil associations and the need to finance initiatives for industrial cooperation , particular for SMEs .
Mr Valdivielso de Cué has done excellent work on all these points .
I do , however , feel that one fundamental matter , immigration , has not been sufficiently taken into account by this proposal for a regulation .
The Commission ' s proposal looks at the question of migration from a strictly negative point of view .
They make a very serious connection , and I say this weighing my words carefully , drawing a parallel in the very same indent between , on the one hand , the campaign ( which I consider to be legitimate and necessary ) against illegal immigration and in favour of repatriation and , on the other hand , the fight against drug-trafficking and international crime .
This intolerable attitude is an insult to the millions of immigrant workers who contribute to the wealth of Europe .
A distinction has been made , as I requested , but it is still insufficient .
I believe the time has come to consider a genuine policy of movement between the two sides of the Mediterranean , north and south .
Europe must , I feel , today establish a genuine co-development policy related to migratory flows , which should , Mr President , centre on a few simple proposals , such as the framing of aid policies for projects by migrants , devising instruments for channelling the savings of immigrants , the placement of students in training and the placement of young trainees .
Voting in favour of the amendment I have tabled would therefore , I feel , be a contribution towards giving immigrants legally resident in Europe the opportunity to be acknowledged as vectors of co-development for their country of origin .
Let me , in conclusion , quote Mr Prodi who said that immigration must become a factor in development .
Mr Valdivielso ' s work has gone some way to achieving this , and I would like to see us go further still .
Mr President , we very much welcome these two positive reports and congratulate the rapporteurs and fully support the vital importance of the MEDA programme .
In this respect it is critically important that the funding should be properly applied .
I would urge the House to support the two amendments tabled to the Piétrasanta report in the name of this group .
As a member of Parliament 's delegation to the Mashreq countries and Gulf States , I am concerned that the association agreements with these countries should be ratified as expeditiously as possible ; the Jordanian agreement in particular is only slowly proceeding through the ratification process .
Our amendment urges the Member State parliaments which have not yet ratified the agreement to hasten this process .
Our other amendment refers to a degree of hypocrisy in our approach to developing a fully free-trade zone in the Mediterranean area .
As Mr Valdivielso pointed out in his speech , the EU has a large trade surplus with this area .
Yes , we call for a free-trade zone but when it comes to those products which these countries could most readily export into Europe - i.e. agricultural and food products - we maintain trade restrictions .
Our friends in these countries understandably question our sincerity .
I accept that free access to Europe for Mediterranean products poses problems for producers in our southern Member States , but surely this problem could be compensated at least to some extent in the CAP .
So our second amendment calls for the acceleration of progress to free trade for all products including food and agriculture .
I would appreciate the Commission 's estimate as to the likely timing for achieving a full free-trade zone in the Mediterranean and how it intends to implement this .
I would urge my colleagues to support these amendments along with the two excellent reports under consideration .
Mr President , firstly , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Valdivielso and Mr Piétrasanta , and say that I share the views of Mr Piétrasanta and Mr Naïr .



The deep schism that divides the Mediterranean world is obvious .
The Conference of Barcelona was the European Union ' s reaction to it .
We should now be working at a steady speed to achieve the aims established there , but that is not the case .
Many reasons have been given for this .
The MEDA programmes have always been surrounded by too much fuss , and they still are .
It is totally pointless to return dwell on this fuss .
I prefer to look forward .
The Commission has proposed a new MEDA regulation and in it asks us for speedier decision-making procedures .
We agree absolutely with this .
My group and Parliament - if we reflect the vote of the relevant committee - proposes to place more trust in the Commission so that it may decide on projects of less than EUR 5 million and we also ask that the Commission be accompanied by a Council advisory committee .
Of course , the Council and Parliament cannot expect the Commission to do things which they do not give it the power to do .
In this regard you have our support , Commissioner .
You also have our support - and this is expressed in the amendments we are tabling - in order to solve any problems relating to staffing and to management ability that you may have .
I would like to remind you , Commissioner , that the Barcelona agreements talk about an area of free trade and economic cooperation and of security and they also talk a great deal about the cultural and human dimension .
Commissioner , I believe that in order to develop these three pillars on an equal footing with one another , we must continue to show our confidence in Mediterranean society and , far from ending decentralised cooperation and small projects , we should implement these effectively and by incorporating all the players : entrepreneurs , unions , cities , NGOs , immigrants - as Mr Naïr pointed out - professionals etc .
I wish to believe that we share the aim of reducing the gulf between the , at least two , Mediterranean worlds .
To this end , Commissioner , we ask , and my group will act in accordance with this request in the budgetary debate , for the restoration in the regulation of the amounts allocated to MEDA , so that these will remain at least equal in real terms to those allocated during the previous period .
While the problems in the Mediterranean remain serious , and there has been considerable delay in implementing the Barcelona decisions that were designed to tackle them , we cannot accept a reduction in investment .
Mr President , I am pleased to announce that the Liberal Group ' s vote is favourable to the reports by Mr Valdivielso and Mr Piétrasanta . However , I must admit that there are certain reservations in our group with regard to future budgetary proposals as a result of the difficulties which have arisen up until now in the employment of funds intended for the MEDA programme .
However , this issue would lead us into a discussion of the budget , which is not the main subject of this debate . The main subject of this debate is political and the issue is the fact the Mediterranean is one of the essential elements in ensuring the peace , stability and progress of the European Union itself .
Eliminating tension and promoting balanced development in the Mediterranean third countries leads to greater security , prosperity and prospects for the European Union .
Therefore , Mediterranean policy must be a fundamental pillar of the Union ' s external action , which will benefit the European Union itself .
Furthermore , I believe that we must consider that officially , there are at least three Mediterranean candidate countries , and that , with regard to the conflicts which Mr Valdivielso has mentioned , the European Union has made a very significant contribution in recent years to solving them .
We are very close to reaching peace agreements to solve them definitively and this obviously requires a significant economic contribution for which MEDA is the main financial instrument .
The different aspects mentioned in each report must be taken into account because they make a wonderful contribution to achieving this .
Mr President , the imbalance highlighted in the Piétrasanta report regarding the limited participation of decentralised operators and NGOs shows just how difficult it actually is for civil society to take hold of and take over this development instrument .
The report also condemns the fundamental political imbalance between structural adjustment measures and free-trade measures and the other dimensions of the partnership ( social , cultural and democratic ) .
Such obvious imbalances stack up , distancing us from the objectives of peace , democracy and sustainable development contained in the Barcelona Declaration .
The case of Tunisia , signatory to the first association agreement and the first recipient of appropriations , is an edifying one .
In an increasingly overt way , the international partners delight in describing countries involved in harsh repression and widespread corruption , where increasing social instability prevails , as stable and successful .
We should be wondering whether accelerated economic liberalisation , in the guise of free trade , is not an aggravating factor in this deterioration .
Democracy and respect for human rights must not continue to be officially declared theoretical principles which are ignored in practice .
Is respect for these principles compatible with the repatriation of illegal residents even though this represents the very success ...
( The President cut the speaker off . )
Mr President , the MEDA programme is a crucial instrument for enabling us gradually to establish a genuine area of shared prosperity , as stated in the Barcelona Declaration .
The difficulties in setting it up , the impatience and even the disappointments it has caused our southern partners should nevertheless encourage us to look more deeply into the state of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership as a whole .
The southern Mediterranean countries need European aid , aid that demonstrates solidarity and which contributes to the development of their society . This aid must also reduce the disparities between the two sides of the Mediterranean , by putting an end to the existing relationship of economic domination , the most obvious and most unfair example of which is perhaps the system maintaining national debt .
What role does MEDA have to play in this ?
With more than EUR 3 billion in commitment appropriations for 1995-1999 , MEDA I actually committed just over EUR 2 billion in its first four years and actually paid out EUR 553 million , or scarcely a quarter of the credits committed .
What a discrepancy between the aid promised and the aid actually provided !
This discrepancy is largely due to the fact that , as Mr Patten has often told us , the Commission lacks the human resources to deal with all the tasks that are assigned to it .
I am sure that I will not be the last person to call for further human resources if that will enable the European Union to shoulder its responsibilities .
The Commission proposals , moreover , are aimed at simplifying and speeding up procedures under the new regulation , even though removing from the outset individual States ' ability to supervise projects would not necessarily be the best solution to achieve greater transparency .
More credit should be provided for smaller-scale projects .
Too frequently I meet people who have extensive experience of the local association movement , who feel let down by the procedures they have to follow in order to receive subsidies .
The Euro-Mediterranean partnership can only really be built by and for the general public , who themselves wish to achieve a partnership that is of real benefit to all citizens .
The MEDA programme also raises fundamental questions about our Euro-Mediterranean policy in general .
First and foremost , cooperation is concentrated essentially in the economic and financial dimensions and marginalises the social and cultural dimensions .
It is also time that we took greater account of the growing dissatisfaction with the practices of out-and-out free trade .
The social consequences we are seeing in the free trade area are cause for deep concerns , which cannot be ignored .
The social budgets of southern countries risk seeing the budgetary resources raised from customs duties cut to a dangerous level .
The growth in competition could eat away at the industrial fabric of these countries , which in some cases consists of vulnerable small and medium-sized enterprises .
Rather than so-called ' accompanying ' measures , the economic systems in the South need real technological support .
The purpose of aid , furthermore , should be not only to convert businesses to comply with the criteria of profitability , but also to respond to the employment needs of the population .
While private sector development is heavily supported by MEDA , the public sector is largely forgotten , even though it responds to genuine needs .
To conclude , I should like to concentrate on two aspects of the reports which I support : really encouraging the participation ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , whilst appreciating the mental efforts of the two rapporteurs and the draftsmen of the opinions , I would like to emphasise how important it is for the EU to set political priorities .
In concrete terms : the laborious and monumental undertaking of EU enlargement simply does not allow for a similar tour de force within the European-Mediterranean partnership .
That is certainly not to say that there is no room for improvement in the Union ' s Mediterranean policy as matters stand .
An evaluation of MEDA I and the wording of MEDA II clearly demonstrate the need for this .
In particular , this programme lacks cohesion and has been insufficiently implemented .
For example , to date , only a quarter of the commitment appropriations has been paid out .
It is right that a streamlining of the programmes and implementation should be proposed with a view to resolving the aforementioned shortcomings .
The sluggish pace of implementation is not the fault of the committees , in any case .
They are responsible for a delay of five months at most .
No , it is the procedures within the Commission that are largely to blame for the delay .
Giving the Commission more financial latitude is not , therefore , the most obvious solution worthy of recommendation .
Transparency and control are important aspects that will enhance the quality of MEDA projects .
And the standard of quality required varies from project to project to this day .
It would appear from the conclusions of the European Council of Feira ( 19 and 20 June 2000 ) that the EU ' s Mediterranean policy is founded on ' the partnership ' .
I will quote in full from this document : " this partnership should be actively supported by both sides " .
Cooperation with a view to becoming good neighbours , increasing prosperity and eliminating poverty , and , not least , promoting good government and the constitutional state .
May these reports and this debate help to realise these lofty ambitions .
Mr President , I too wish to stress how important relations with the southern countries are for Europe , in particular with those in the Mediterranean Basin .
I share the view that enlargement of the Union to the East is causing us to underestimate the South and the crucial nature - crucial for our future , that is - of our relations with these countries .
We have been working in this area for almost ten years and for the last five , the significant MEDA programme has been available to us .
The way this programme has been implemented is far from ideal - to say the least - and that is why I share and approve of the objectives of the Commission reform .
That is also why I support the calls made by Mr Valdivielso and Mr Piétrasanta to redress the balance , for regional cooperation , for support for ' micro-projects ' and for projects involving civil society .
It must , however , be clearly stated - and also made clear to the general public - that the financial objectives must match up to our speeches and there should be no question of accepting a reduction in credits relative to the previous period . This holds true whatever arguments and quibbles are put forward .
Lastly , looking beyond MEDA , we must not lose sight of the urgency of the problem of cancelling the debts of poor countries , the need to speed up the implementation of bilateral agreements and the need to promote new multilateral agreements .
To conclude , we must therefore improve the systems that are already in place . Above all , however , we must ensure that the proposals that have already been made , the positions that are adopted in our debates and the way we vote tomorrow are not seen and perceived by our Mediterranean partners as just so many negative messages .
There is a serious risk of this , and , if we wish to maintain a political presence , in the region , in conflict management and risk prevention , we must do more and better in the future than we have done in the recent past .
Mr President , in the development of relations with the Mediterranean , Europe cannot fail to give due importance to this geographical area of the world .
The economic boom in Far East Asia has changed all the parameters , and the Mediterranean Sea has become an important element in international trade , assuming major importance .
Trade and cultural relations have to be given priority for economic reasons ; a cooperation process needs to be set in motion , but the development of countries which are developing at a slower rate than Western countries also needs to be promoted .
There must be political and commercial dialogue and cultural and financial cooperation .
This is what is important for the development of relations between the European Parliament and the countries of this area of the world .
The Mediterranean Sea is the testing ground for the European Parliament ' s capacities to act outside the borders of the Union .
It is a well-known fact that the great Europe which is a dream of so many cannot be achieved without the political and economic involvement of this major , fundamental part of the Union .
Mr President , now that all the honourable members ' wishes have been voiced , I feel we must resolve to make urgent changes to the way in which the implementation of the MEDA programmes is organised .
In particular , not only is there a need for transparency and streamlining , there is also a need for efficiency .
This requires ongoing dialogue with the regions that are lagging behind .
These regions must be able to prosper on the basis of their own potential .
That is why it is so important to have local sub-offices that can pursue this dialogue with universities , NGOs and local authorities .
That is preferable to having expensive technical assistance offices , and is also preferable to the divide and rule policy of the governments , who often put their own interests first , whereas we regard MEDA as an instrument for peace and democratisation and not just for economic well-being .
Mr President , while discussing the MEDA programme it might also be important to consider the balance that is supposed to exist throughout the Union .
It is obvious that the main instrument of the MEDA-Euro Mediterranean programme is a programme of tremendous benefit to the whole of the EU .
In the same way , we should recognise that cohesion between the Union ' s central and northern regions and the neighbouring regions should be strengthened by means of a comprehensive solution similar to the MEDA Programme .
New initiatives to support cohesion policy , such as the Union ' s northern dimension that stepped into the limelight during the Finnish presidential term , must also be seen as important projects for the Union as a whole , especially with regard to the challenges of eastward enlargement .
It is encouraging to see that , after a long period of twisting and turning , appropriations have been set aside in next year ' s budget for the northern dimension .
It would be good to move on from here .
We need an enormous amount of additional financing , however , to be able to guarantee , in particular , the future of the small-scale programmes to strengthen cooperation with neighbouring regions .
The objectives of the MEDA programme were unfortunately not realised in the financial period that has just ended .
For various reasons , there have been problems with the implementation of appropriations , and the monitoring arrangements to prevent misappropriation have proven inadequate .
The European Parliament should concentrate on ensuring that the under-use of resources that has gone on for years should come to a stop and the internal monitoring of programmes made more effective .
This cannot be guaranteed merely by swelling administration .
Cooperation between the Commission and the agencies that implement programmes in the Member States must also be able to be made more effective through other means , for example , through water-tight cooperation between the European Investment Bank and the European Anti-Fraud Office , OLAF .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have two things to say . The first is that I should like to thank both rapporteurs for their reports , which were well worth reading .
Secondly , I should like to say directly to the Commission : stick to your guns , stick to your guns with the Council !
Because the real problem is that the Council , that the Member States , are forever wanting to have their say on a matter which the Treaty says is your responsibility .
Just imagine that the Americans had implemented their aid under the Marshall Plan after the war in such a way that for each sub-programme they had asked the Member States of the USA whether they , for example , ought to fund a reforestation project in the south-western part of Bavaria or not !
It would probably have taken until the end of the last century to disburse the Marshall Plan aid .
This is not what I want to happen to you .
Mr Patten , stick to your guns !
Parliament ought to support you on this .
The Council or the Member States have a right to be consulted , but they do not have a right to co-decision .
I suspect that this will also be the decisive issue for the Commission when history judges it one day .
You will be judged on enlargement towards the east , but also on whether you create your own room for manoeuvre in external policy .
Now we are not demanding a voice for the Commission alongside the United Kingdom or France on nuclear capabilities for example .
But where the budget is concerned , the European Union 's own budget , you are the executive .
We should secure this position and defend it !
In Parliament you should have an ally here !
Mr President , as someone who lives in the Mediterranean , under the Mediterranean sun and who enjoys Mediterranean traditions and culture , I would like to speak up for the countries of that area .
The MEDA programme , which largely failed in the first stage , perhaps did not appreciate that the situation of the Mediterranean countries , given the direction that European politics are taking , is extremely difficult .
Many Mediterranean countries are less highly developed than other countries , and they face the threat of a single agricultural market , which they will not be able to cope with .
In this respect , I would like to refer to the wonderful article by Mr Riccardi of two or three months ago , in which he spoke specifically of the fact that , for reasons of scale , the Mediterranean countries do not attract investment .
It is extremely difficult in those countries to change the agricultural system and , nevertheless , they have to share their products with other countries of North Africa , of the mare nostrum , which belongs to everyone at the same time .
Meanwhile the greatest migratory impact originates from these countries .
Therefore , we must have a fair policy , and to this end the MEDA programme may be a start , although I believe that , in many cases , it is based on criteria that are important to the northern countries .
Firstly , it is not possible to set up a project without highlighting the great weaknesses of those countries such as , for example , water and desertification .
What European policies do we have to combat desertification ?
We have no clear policy on this issue .
Secondly , as far as culture is concerned , more importance is being attached to intermediaries than to the actual beneficiaries and producers of culture .
The same thing is happening with many other industrial projects .
Numerous NGOs have been created , forming networks with no obvious beneficiaries , when what southern Europe really has to do is wake up .
I therefore support a process of industrialisation based on innovation - we must not turn to the old industries but to innovation - and of supporting projects relating to technological innovation and training .
In this respect , I believe it is a mistake to turn to large projects .
They would simply make a few people richer . What Mediterranean Europe needs is to wake up , to leave behind its self-absorption and to exploit its own human resources .
This will only happen if we support multiple initiatives which together create awareness , a critical mass and a basic system so that , on that basis , many other small initiatives and businesses of all types may be created .
Some will be successful and some will fall by the wayside , but if we do not create a policy of multiple initiatives of many types , allowing society to express itself and take advantage of its resources , we will not achieve anything .
Mr President , Commissioner , the two reports in question , particularly Mr Valdivielso ' s report , deal with one of Europe ' s problems in great detail .
The Mediterranean ' s location as a major geographical point in terms of the stability and security of our continent has already been mentioned .
This is all very well , but there is another issue underlying many of the points made in Mr Valdivielso ' s report : a gap is forming between the absolute priority status of enlargement and the development of relations with the Mediterranean countries , which gives cause for concern .
The Mediterranean is , in actual fact , an area which is still marked by zones of real poverty , and it is an area where the standard of living and quality of life are such as to require a major European presence .
Whatever we are able to do to boost development of the private sector , to improve the conditions under which small and medium-sized enterprises operate , to modernise infrastructures and encourage the promotion of investments , industrial cooperation and trade , will be gratefully received , for hitherto there has been no support for the economic and production networks of the partner countries and industrial cooperation has played an extremely minor role due to the lack of direct support programmes and joint initiatives between European companies and partner countries .
Therefore , we need simpler administration , a more strategic approach and rapid execution of programmes , for this might actually benefit the small and medium-sized enterprises rather than consultancy firms or financial brokers .
I would like to end with a reference to the agricultural sector .
The establishment of a free-trade area in the Mediterranean is , of course , a goal to strive towards , but first we must analyse carefully the plight of Mediterranean agriculture and Mediterranean farmers , and , before we do anything else , we must use the common agricultural policy to rectify an extremely dangerous drop in the income levels of our farmers in precisely the poorest area of Europe .
. I am extremely pleased to be able to comment on these two important reports on one of the most significant programmes for which we are responsible .
It is clearly going to be a considerable political test for the Commission and for our whole partnership to try to ensure that we deliver more successfully on these programmes in the future than we have managed to do so far .
I thought that Mr Linkohr made some extremely pertinent and challenging points .
We will be coming back to that , not least when we have the opportunity of discussing the letter which the Commission will be addressing to the budgetary authority as a letter of rectification to the 2001 Budget , which will go right to the heart of the real resource problem we face , which creates so many political difficulties for us .
Let me comment first on Mr Valdivielso 's report before dealing with Mr Piétrasanta 's report .

Naturally , I welcome the fact - though I do not think his speech was quite so enthusiastic - that Mr Valdivielso 's report is generally supportive of the Commission 's efforts to reform the MEDA Regulation , though there are some criticisms .
Mr Piétrasanta 's report is also favourable towards the 1998 MEDA Programme report .
I want to stress that the revision of the MEDA Regulation is a key element in the broader efforts we are making to enable us to deliver aid more effectively and to streamline our often excessively onerous procedures .
The Commission 's objective in revising the MEDA Regulation is to streamline the decision-making process so that we can deliver assistance promptly , in line with the political priorities of the European Union in the Mediterranean .
The Commission proposes to reduce excessive scrutiny arrangements for individual projects in the Management Committee by introducing strategic programmes through the yearly adoption of national financing plans and a regional financing plan and simplifying decision making .
The simplifications that we have requested would bring MEDA programming procedures in line with those of other financial instruments of EU external relations programmes .
It makes no sense to treat MEDA differently .
I must underline that the Commission cannot hope to improve the implementation of the programme if it remains paralysed by cumbersome procedures .
The approval of the new regulation will allow the Union to lend real support to the Mediterranean countries in their structural reform process .
The economic growth of these countries is of key importance to their political and social stabilisation .
I should also note that the firm commitment of the Mediterranean partners themselves to economic reform would greatly facilitate the implementation of the programme and would trigger a significant rise in its disbursement rate .
We have an absorption problem with some of our partners .
It is difficult to spend the money as fast and as sensibly as we would like if we have not even agreed the Association Agreements , or to justify a situation in which we successfully negotiate an Association Agreement and then cannot get our partner to initial it .
We all have to move faster if we are to make a greater success of the programme .
We agree with the bulk of Parliament 's amendments , particularly those which strengthen MEDA 's strategic character .
In that spirit , we can fully endorse Amendments Nos 2 , 8 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 15 , 17 , 19 , 20 , 30 , 33 , 37 and 41 and we can partially accept Amendment Nos 4 , 5 , 6 , 10 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 28 , 31 , 35 , 38 and 40 providing some slight verbal modifications .
That may save me a bit of work if I am doing the votes later in the week .
However we cannot support Amendment No 25 , which proposes an individual examination of financing proposals by the MED Committee .
We think this is contrary to the spirit of our overall proposal on the revision of the MEDA Regulation , because we want to streamline and simplify procedures .
We cannot accept Amendment No 13 , which would seek to include a financial reference amount for the period 2000 to 2006 in the regulation since this would clearly prejudge the results of the budgetary procedure as has been agreed in the context of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
We cannot accept Amendment No 21 which seeks the removal of direct budgetary support , nor Amendment No 27 on direct industrial cooperation and I should point out that the new enterprise policy of the Commission focuses on the improvement of the business climate rather than on direct tools of cooperation .
In addition , the Commission at this stage lacks the necessary resources for proper industrial cooperation .
Nor can we accept Amendment No 35 or part of Amendment No 40 on the expansion of decentralised cooperation so long as we do not have the necessary human resources to do the job in a responsible and effective way , but forms of decentralised cooperation will be pursued where possible within existing regional cooperation programmes .
Now let me comment briefly on Mr Piétrasanta 's report .
I congratulate him and the other rapporteur , Mr Vandevielso , for the commitment and dedication which they have shown .
Most of the views expressed in Mr Piétrasanta 's report and in the amendments are wholly in line with the Commission 's efforts to reform the MEDA programme and our overall objective of streamlining procedures and accelerating delivery of aid .
We support the plea regarding the simplification of MEDA 's management procedures and the strengthening of its strategic and integrated approach .
The report 's appeal for an increase in Commission staff assigned to management of the MEDA programme is one we wholly support .
Enough staff to do the job is one of the key principles underlying the Commission 's efforts to reform its external assistance services .
The increase will be , of course , pursued within the overall staff priorities of the Commission , and I note as well the report 's request for the preparation of an annual report on human rights in the Mediterranean .
We believe this is something for the Council and the Commission to consider together .
We support the proposals for reinforced South-South cooperation and for more programmes backing small and medium-sized enterprises .
We are taking action on water management but we are not , I regret to say , in a position to support the micro-project proposals because again we lack the staff to manage them properly .
They are extremely resource-intensive in terms of management .
It will be apparent from what I have said that we are thinking very much along the same lines .
Our programmes in the Mediterranean are at the core of my agenda , along with the reinvigoration of the Barcelona process .
Let me make two final points .
First of all , I hope , the Commission will this week be agreeing a Commission communication on the revitalisation of the Barcelona process , which we will then , of course , wish to discuss with this Parliament .
Our funding of programmes in the Mediterranean between now and 2006 is probably the largest of all our programmes representing over 20 % of our efforts externally .
My concern is that we should deliver that assistance more effectively and more rapidly .
I have told Parliament before of my surprise at the discovery that if we were to continue at the present rate of disbursement it would take us almost nine years to get through the backlog of our existing obligations in the Mediterranean .
That is simply not tolerable .
You cannot explain that to the people you are trying to help and it is very difficult to justify it to Europe 's taxpayers .
Instead of our programmes enhancing the reputation of the European Union in the Mediterranean countries and around the world , it damages our reputation even though we are using taxpayers ' money to do good .
So , the reform of programmes like MEDA goes right to the heart of what we are trying to do in the Commission .
The other point I wanted to make is this : at the informal meeting we had in Evian at the weekend we spent over three hours talking about external assistance and how effectively we do things as a Union .
I pay great tribute to the French Presidency for giving this issue the priority it has .
The Commission raised the issue in May when I set out our external budget for the General Affairs Council , the first time the General Affairs Council had ever discussed the budget for external relations , and when we put forward our proposals for reforms , so I think the issue now has the political priority it deserves .
But we will be tested by what we do with MEDA and what we do in the Balkans and by how these programmes actually work on the ground .
I cannot keep on coming back to this Parliament and saying we have terrible problems .
Parliament , the Commission and the Council have to be able to show that we are making a difference .
I hope that with the Parliament 's understanding we will be able to ensure over the years ahead that our external programmes are as effective and rapid as we all want them to be .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Common Community diplomacy
The next item is the report ( A5-0210 / 2000 ) by Mr Galeote Quecedo , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on common Community diplomacy 2000 / 2006 ( INI ) .
Mr President , I believe that we all agree that in 2000 , obviously , the Community already enjoys numerous and fundamental competencies in the external field .
The Maastricht reform reflects the aspiration , so often expressed in this House , that Europe should speak with one voice in the international arena .
With the CFSP , the Union ' s external activity takes on a new dimension , definitively going beyond the economic field in order to participate actively in external policy .
However , the European Union repeatedly has cause to regret - we have been seeing this recently - that it cannot meet the requirements of external action .
Having said this , I wish to begin by saying that the objective of this report is not to seek a further increase in the competencies of the Union in the external field .
Those who wish to do that have other debates , in the field of institutional reform , in which to find expression for their aspirations .
All that we are proposing is to implement measures which will rationalise and improve the way in which the enormous external action of the Community institutions is carried out .
We propose basically to make decisive progress in three areas .
Firstly , by improving the training of Community officials intended to be involved in carrying out external actions .
The numerous officials in the Commission who deal with external relations , taking on competencies of prime importance , are technical specialists but in general they lack the prior diplomatic training , which is necessary to fulfil their duties .
We therefore believe we need to create a Community diplomatic college , which will provide Community officials intended for external action with a good diplomatic and international training .
To the same end , we believe it is necessary to provide an opportunity to link the national diplomatic corps , whose experience and long tradition are of great value , to our external action , and we therefore propose to implement a ' bridging ' system between national external services and the Community external service .
Secondly , we wish to clarify and develop the legal status of the Commission ' s current external delegations , their role and their relationship with the various Community institutions .
The Commission delegations have seen a dramatic quantitative and qualitative expansion over recent years .
Nevertheless , they do not function in the same way and their relationship with other institutions is unclear , since it is not regulated .
We therefore propose that the Commission delegations become Community delegations so that their relations with the Council may be closer , through the High Representative of the CFSP , as well as their relations with the European Parliament and its members , thereby guaranteeing greater efficiency and political control of their activities .
Thirdly and lastly , we intend to improve the coordination between the delegations and the external services of the Member States .
We need to promote this type of coordination , in order to prevent confusion and inconsistency , not to mention other deficiencies , which were plain to see at the informal General Affairs Council in Evian last weekend .
To this end we propose various mechanisms and , amongst other things , we envisage the possibility of joining together the missions of those Member States that agree to do so with the current Commission delegations , at the appropriate time .
Furthermore , this would represent a considerable reduction in costs .
Ladies and Gentlemen , Mr President , none of the proposals that have been put forward represent institutional reforms , and even less the ceding of Member States ' sovereignty .
We are simply proposing a more effective use of the competencies which have already been granted .
We are not setting out to propose conflicting models of Europeanism , but simply to be more efficient .
Therefore , the rapporteur cannot support those amendments which would represent profound structural changes to the institutional architecture of the Union .
In particular , I would like to express my gratitude for the other contributions which , in committee and with tomorrow ' s vote in Parliament , greatly enrich the initial proposal .
I would ask the various groups to vote in favour of this report and the European Commission to reflect the feelings of this House .
Mr President , first of all I would like to extend sincere congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Galeote Quecedo , for his very important and also interesting report that has come at a very opportune moment .
If we look at how the tasks of the European Commission , and , in fact , those of the European Union in general , have developed , then we see that this relates to the new phenomenon of the candidate countries , the old phenomenon of the existence of trading partners and development regions , and the not so new phenomenon of Bosnia and former Yugoslavia .
These are areas in which the European Union , and the European Commission in particular , have an abundance of tasks before them .
A great deal of criticism of European effectiveness has to do with the way in which these tasks are organised .
The committees we have sent out there appear to echo the call for decentralisation that is often heard in other areas of the European Union too .
Decentralisation is needed to make decision-making more effective and also to ensure that when there is no pressing reason for something to be dealt with in Brussels , it can be decided on locally .
Naturally this will directly affect the way in which these European missions are assessed .
For example , the mandate of the European missions must be widened , which therefore means that they will need more personnel .
There have been some very embarrassing discrepancies between the possibilities open to the European missions , and those of the United States , for example .
Indeed this found expression in the number of people that could be employed locally through the European Union .
The European Union ' s profile could be raised by putting Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s plans into practice .
We must have real EU embassies that are at least some sort of a match for the United States embassies , especially in areas where it is the European Union that bears most responsibility .
Therefore we cannot tolerate having ineffective diplomats in situ .
I believe it behoves the Commissioner to look closely at who is proving effective and who is failing on that score .
I welcome the fact that there is contact between the European diplomats out there and the European Parliament .
Naturally this must proceed under the supervision of the Commissioner who has responsibility for these affairs .
This contact with diplomats appointed as special envoys by the European Parliament is , of course , also something we would heartily recommend .
We gladly subscribe to those aspects of Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s report that could lead to us speaking with one voice .
Mr President , this report on a European Parliament initiative highlights an extremely important issue that we are facing , not only in the field of common foreign and security policy but in the context of enlargement of the European Union itself .
In the field of CFSP , notable progress is already being made , particularly in terms of cooperation in the area of defence .
A common military force is being created .
It would be strange - not to say dangerous - if the European Union did not at the same time strive to improve its common diplomatic instruments .
There is no excuse for lagging behind in this area , even if we take the factor of each Member State ' s national interest into account as well as the almost purely economic nature of the history of the Community ' s institutions between the Treaty of Rome and the Treaty of Maastricht .
Diplomacy at the beginning of the twenty-first century has indeed been marked by great events and processes that are giving it much greater scope than it has had in the past .
Amongst these I would highlight the globalisation of the international economy and the financial markets .
It is no exaggeration to state with all certainty that diplomatic activity is becoming more and more involved in the economic sphere and to say that , in turn , economic interests cannot be protected without diplomatic activity .
As is also well known , this situation is being played out against a backdrop in which the positions of the main players on the international political stage are being redefined .
The aims that provide the market with additional sensitivity or idealism , however , particularly the fight for a project which is able to reconcile the goals of economic development and those of social and political development cannot be reached unless there is a high degree of cooperation between the Member States at all levels , specifically at the diplomatic level .
What better instrument than diplomacy can there be for promoting objectives of peace and of reconciling national interests ?
The European Union must provide itself , as this report recommends , with more and better elements of common diplomacy .
It is quite clear that , amongst other obstacles , organising matters according to pillars and the fact that the European Union has no legal personality both make it more difficult to achieve this aim and forced this report ' s proposals to perform some clever balancing tricks .
Nevertheless , we can , at no great financial or organisational cost , contribute to a better use of the diplomatic resources we already have in the European Union , to everyone ' s benefit .
The wealth and diversity of diplomatic experience in the various countries of Europe is also recognised throughout the world .
It would be a mistake to think that any of the proposals put forward in this report could harm processes that are under way in the field of CFSP in general , or in the field of diplomacy in particular .
The underlying aim of this report , as we understand it , following on from several discussions held over a period of months , is to bring together all relevant current experiences and processes and to direct them towards a common goal , which is , by and large , to create a genuine common European diplomatic service .
Lastly , I should like to say that although one might criticise certain aspects of the report , I have no hesitation in recommending that you adopt it , and I hope that the proposals it contains are given the reception that they deserve .
Mr President , we in the group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party set great store by the fact that this is not an attempt to set up a single diplomatic corps to replace the Member States ' external services .
Rather , it is a question of improving the quality of the external service the Community already has and of improving cooperation between that service and the Member States ' external services .
There is no doubt that there is a need for improved training of this kind in the majority of Member States , and especially in the applicant countries which will , of course , soon need a sizeable staff of well-trained people .
We in the Liberal Group attach importance to the fact that what is at issue here is in-service training and not basic training .
By that , I mean providing training to people who are already in service or on the way to joining the service . And we attach great importance to the fact that the training should be open to participants from the national external services so that there is interaction between EU and national diplomats .
We have therefore tabled a number of amendments which we hope Parliament can accept .
It is debatable whether there is a need for a new institution with its own building and board of management , as well as a heated dispute about where the institution is to be located .
We would certainly prefer to support actual activities than just bricks and mortar , but we are able wholeheartedly to support the intention behind the proposal , and we hope that Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s reflections will be given careful consideration in the Member States , the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , the majority of my group considers that , unfortunately , the unambitious and technical nature of Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s report means that it fails to live up to its fine title of a common Community diplomacy .
In particular , I feel that it is a mistake to deny , as Mr Galeote Quecedo has done , that the political aim of his report is the gradual creation of a common diplomacy as the expression of a common policy .
This is to ignore the reality that what we have at the moment is a discordant , incoherent chorus of European countries and their 14 thousand or so diplomats , compared to the 3 500 diplomats of the United States .
We should simply supplement the 15 diplomatic corps with another , more or less competent corps , made up of European Union officials or , as is the case today precisely in Commissioner Patten ' s entourage , national diplomats , possibly including more representatives from some countries than others .
I also feel that the debate on Commissioner Verheugen ' s statements indicated extremely clearly that it is not possible for the Union to carry out its external activities in the context of such a lack of cohesion and such frustration caused by the confusion of powers and responsibilities .
Commissioner Patten , you have already spoken on this subject , Commissioner Verheugen will also do so , and then each of the Member States will give their opinion .
This means that the message we send to the European citizens can only be contradictory .
The group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will support Amendments Nos 5 and 6 tabled by Mr Dupuis , which introduce the political agenda of a common diplomacy and the proposal to start establishing European Union embassies in those countries where not all the countries of the Union are represented .
I hope that others will also support these amendments .
Mr President , our group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , broadly supports Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s report , although it is also the case that certain sections of the group disagree with important aspects of it , as we will see later .
We feel that Mr Galeote Quecedo has carried out a profound , serious and ambitious piece of work , although it is also prudent with regard to current prospects .
The joint effort in committee by the various political groups demonstrates that common diplomacy is a concern felt by all of us .
In fact , our experience , acquired through visits to different parts of the world , highlights four worrying issues :
First : the scant and insufficient coordination of the Member States with regard to issues that must be addressed jointly whenever the interests of the European Union are at stake , and the minimal cooperation between the delegations of the European Union .
Also , we sometimes fail to exploit the rich diplomatic experience we possess in Europe and often there are worrying confrontations between these various diplomatic services .
Second : the accidental occurrence of contradictions in interventions by different countries on issues affecting the interests of the European Union .
Third : the insufficient coordination in the defence of points of view , interests and responsibilities of the European Union in international bodies of a political , economic , cultural nature etc . , such as the UN , the International Monetary Fund , the World Trade Organisation , the WHO etc .
Fourth : we have also noted that the presence of the European Union is weak in relation to its economic importance and also in relation to the significant presence of the United States .
We therefore believe it is important to proceed with the proposal presented in the report and , furthermore , to take more cohesive action , make a greater impact and make greater progress in that direction .
Hence the usefulness of the proposal to create a Community diplomatic college and also the importance , which appears in Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s report , of the European Parliament playing an important role as trustee of the sovereignty and will of the European citizens in order to give content to this Community diplomacy and also give content to this prospect of constructing a European Union which creates peace , respect for international law and solidarity in the world .
Therefore , as I said at the beginning , our group will broadly support Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Galeote Quecedo report is interesting for two reasons : the first is that Parliament unashamedly reveals its true intentions in it , and the second is that nobody is paying it the slightest attention .
What is the real issue here ?
The real issue is nothing less than providing the European Union , which , by the way , is now simply the Commission , with those final attributes of a sovereign State that was lacking , i.e. a diplomatic service and the prerequisite for establishing it , which is legal personality .
Let us be logical about this .
The only reason for this college ' s existence is to create a common diplomatic service and to do so in a completely transparent way , as outlined in the Galeote Quecedo report .
If those who back this report achieve their aims , the ' carving up ' of our nations will thus have reached its logical conclusion , by once again adopting the old Monnet , Schuman and Delors method , which consists of creating a body in the hope that it will get around to creating its own role and content . The truth is , however , that so many preconditions have been left out that people may have the impression that we do not care what anyone thinks .
We are creating a diplomatic instrument without even thinking about the essential prerequisite of a common diplomatic policy .
This itself presupposes another prerequisite , which is that the common interests of the Member States must be defined . This prerequisite in turn presupposes another , consisting of defining a common link between Europe and the rest of the world .
If we are only talking about the three main powers , Germany , Great Britain and France , it is impossible to see what points would form the basis of our common interests and diplomatic policy , either on Western Europe ' s relationship with the United States or on the role of NATO , subjects on which we are definitely not in agreement nor likely to be , or on the East - and here we have the thorny question of Russia and our relations with the Central European countries in general - or on the South , perhaps significantly less where the South is concerned , particularly in the context of the Mediterranean policy .
This is therefore a fraud , and the worst of all kinds of fraud at that , which is intellectual fraud , unless , that is , we accept that the diplomacy of the main power - the central power - can effectively be foisted on everyone else , which would actually amount to solving the problem .
Quite recently , at the UN ' Women 2000 ' conference , our Polish friends were able to see just how flexible common diplomacy really is when they were ordered to fall into line with the position laid down by the Union , or face delays in their country ' s application for Membership .
We feel sure that the experience of our friends in Central Europe in the field of resistance to totalitarianism could prove useful to us some day , and furthermore , an illustration of this form of totalitarianism has been provided recently by the unacceptable quarrel that some people are picking with one of our fellow Members , Daniel Hannan .
Let there be no mistake , the idea of common representation at the United Nations is being used to attack the permanent seats held by certain Member States as well as the idea that there could be dissident voices in this world , such as the voice France tries very often to make heard with regard to the United States .
Ultimately , Europe can speak with one voice only if it has nothing to say .
This has been proved once again and it has also been proved that this Europe is not simply negating nations as individual nations - it is rejecting and annihilating Europe itself .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am sure that it will come as no surprise to our friend and fellow Member , Mr Galeote Quecedo , when I say that I am sorely disappointed by this report .
I feel that this is an over-cautious report , and yet it is already raising some people ' s hackles .
It would have been better to address the crux of the matter and I am sorry that the report has not done this .
The issue of diplomacy is not merely a question of training diplomats and the status of delegations . The issue is of fundamental importance and there is a powerful taboo in this Parliament which we are never prepared to confront : that we have fifteen national diplomatic services , which have been strengthened over years of integration by gradually taking over the competencies of all the national ministries and which have become the real powers , the main power blocking any possible reform of foreign affairs and diplomacy , because it is their power that would ultimately be under threat .
They had no trouble delegating and taking the powers of the other ministries to the European level , but when it comes to their own power , it is a different question altogether .
Mrs Frassoni pointed out how ridiculous it is to have a situation in which we have 14 000 diplomats , whilst the United States has 3 000 , with the cost / quality ratio of which we are fully aware .
We must address the issue of the diplomatic services and the issue of external affairs policy with the same approach that we used to achieve economic and monetary union , by establishing a gradual process of communitising external policy and the diplomatic services .
Unfortunately , the report does not address these issues .
Unfortunately , we are only proposing slight changes , which will just add a new level to the structures that already exist and we are in danger of ending up with bodies that are even more incapable of making the right decisions quickly .
In my opinion , the questions we must answer are these : do we or do we not want to communitise external affairs policy ?
Do we want to make the same huge mistake that we made by creating the figure of Mr CFSP and by restoring exclusive Community competence for external policy to the Commission or to a Vice-President of the Commission ?
These are the real questions .
I am rather disappointed that the report does not discuss these issues and somewhat surprised that the EPP has adopted this position given that , tomorrow , in another report on the Union ' s political priorities , it will probably adopt a more forthright position on the communitisation of external policy .
I therefore urge our rapporteur and friend , Mr Galeote Quecedo , to perhaps incorporate some of the amendments that have been tabled and to ensure that a process is initiated , that an appeal is made to the Council and that , for once , our Parliament does not fall short of the position of the Council and the Commission , as unfortunately has been the case for the last ten years .
Mr President , wishful thinking sets the tone of this report in my view .
Only occasionally does the rapporteur display any sense of reality .
This is very clearly the case in Recital O , in which he states that " the objective is certainly not to create a single diplomatic service to replace the foreign services of the Member States " .
Yet at the same time , the entire document is suffused with the notion of - it would be safe to say , the passionate desire for - a Community diplomatic service for the Union .
The rapporteur rationalises his intention at the very beginning of his report .
In his words : " since the 1950s the Community ' s external activity has expanded continuously " .
Given that the Union ' s vacillating behaviour in the Balkans during the recently elapsed decade of the previous century is still fresh in the memory , this robust declaration sounds extremely implausible to my mind .
Another important point raised by Mr Galeote Quecedo is that of " a lack of coordination " in the foreign policy of the EU Member States , which he believes to be essential to the " visibility and effectiveness " of the CFSP .
Does this really amount to nothing more than a coordination problem ?
As if the divergent national interests of the Member States had already been consigned to the European past !
The opposite is true .
The CFSP ' s self-same lack of efficiency and visibility , as picked up on by the rapporteur , can be directly attributed to the divergent interests of the Member States .
The tension between fantasy and reality in the report also manifests itself in the proposal to set up a College of European Diplomacy .
Just how realistic is it to ask for " adequate funding to be provided in the General Budget " for this project when the current EU delegations are already having to contend with serious personnel shortages due to a lack of funds ?
Mr Galeote Quecedo makes the same point himself in his explanatory statement .
Mr President , the question I am dying to ask is this : to what extent do the Member States themselves actually share the rapporteur ' s views ?
At the end of the day , there is nothing skilful about spending Community money .
On no account does this typically European custom rule out legitimate and extremely useful prior enquiries as to necessity and effectiveness .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for producing this report .
As Mrs Carrilho has pointed out , this is the first own-initiative report which this Parliament is approving in the field of external policy during this parliamentary term .
It is odd to hear the interventions of certain MEPs who say that they find this report very timid , and of others who feel that it will put an end to the last redoubt of Member States ' sovereignty .
I believe that this report represents a move in the right direction .
I believe that it limits itself to adhering pragmatically to the Community method and that it clearly demonstrates that joint diplomacy is one of the fundamental aspects of the visibility of the European Union ' s external action .
I do not know if we can speak today of the European Union as the main economic power , the main industrial power or the main financial power in the world .
What we can say , without a shadow of a doubt , is that the European Union is today the main provider of development aid , and this means that the European Commission delegates play a very important role when it comes to representing the Community institutions and , in particular , the Commission .
This means that their specific importance in many cases , given the significant quantities they have to distribute , is greater than that of the ambassadors and of the Member States .
Therefore , Mr President , it is clear that anything which helps to improve the preparation and knowledge of the Commission officials will be an important element for the European Union ' s external action .
The rapporteur has explained the main initiatives contained in his report : the creation of a common diplomatic college , the establishment of procedures for Commission delegates to be received in third countries - an initiative which Mr Patten has accepted in general terms and which I am pleased to see included in this report - and also the drawing up of an annual report on the activity of European Union delegates .
I hope , Mr President , that these initiatives will contribute effectively to the creation of a more visible and coherent external policy for European Union action .
Mr President , today we are discussing Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s excellent report , on which there is a broad consensus .
Clearly , if we are to support the Union ' s international activities , we need suitable mechanisms , knowledge and skills .
Equally clearly , these alone are not enough .
We also need policies .
In this sense , Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s report remains within the limits of procedural rationalisation ; it also remains within the framework of certain policies .
We often ask the question : which came first , the chicken or the egg ?
Something of the sort hangs over today ' s debate .
But we must be clear that there are no vacuums in life .
In this sense , moaning and groaning solves nothing in politics .
Having said which , the framework to which the Galeote Quecedo report belongs will always dictate the conditions both for rationalising procedures and for the prospects of common diplomacy .
In this sense , it moves within the bounds of technocratic rationalisation and goes no further than policy will allow .
However we , the citizens of Europe , who are striving for a better future for the people of Europe and of the world as a whole , have to realise that we need to intervene in these matters transcendently .
We need to move forward , we need to be guided by the logic of a positive dynamic balance , not a static balance which goes nowhere .
In this sense , there have indeed been huge vacuums in the CFSP and we have all acknowledged the fact and seen what is needed in order to put flesh on the bones of this policy , which is instrumental to the political development of Europe .
In this sense , the report translates the initiative of the European Parliament into a framework , into prospects , action and rationalisation .
In any event , if there is anyone here in this House - and I do not think that there is - who believes that Europe has no future , they can express it somewhat differently .
But I believe that the people of Europe and the large majority of parties and factions see Europe as a Europe with prospects , a Europe of peace , a Europe of cooperation , a Europe of social cohesion , a Europe of development .
And this sort of Europe cannot function if it has no prospect of a common foreign policy and defence and security policy , i.e. if it does not have the corresponding mechanisms .
Under these circumstances , the tiny foundation stone of this structure which the European Parliament is laying today represents a serious starting point and I think that it has created new momentum and better prospects .
I would like to speak on behalf of the non-federalists in our group who actually feel that Europe is centralising far too much and more and more powers are being taken away from people at local and national levels , basically without any proper democratic control .
There is quite a lot of double-talk here tonight .
On the one hand , people are saying that we are not talking about or aiming for a single diplomatic corps , but it is quite clear that the aim of this whole project is to have EU embassies abroad and to abolish national ones .
I am not being nationalistic and saying that I want the Irish Embassy , but there is a certain amount of danger in this , particularly because it is geared towards the common foreign and security policy , which is not in the interest of the developing world or of the peoples that have been persecuted and exploited by Member States of this Union .
You only need to look at the number of , for example , British embassies abroad .
Britain has twice as many embassies as either France or Germany .
It has a huge diplomatic corps which reflects its colonial past .
I have grave reservations about the idea of a common European embassy , given that in the past people fleeing persecution in certain countries were able to go into some embassies and seek asylum and get protection .
What happens if you have a single European diplomatic presence abroad ?
We abolish national embassies .
What would happen then if someone fleeing from persecution were to seek asylum or help from the EU embassy if it did not suit the EU 's interests to support him or her ?
I believe that there are grave dangers in what we are doing .
It is interesting to hear some people speaking today about the need for a higher profile and EU embassies to compete with the US .
This is all about competition .
It is about being able to compete with other superpowers .
I do not approve of the idea that Europe should create another superpower .
To do so would destabilise the global community . Whereas , we should look for more cooperation and less competition .
The idea of competing with the US is completely unacceptable .
If you look at the report itself , it is geared towards facilitating the common foreign and security policy .
Not all Greens and EFA members in our group - the non-federalists - would support Mr Dupuis ' amendments , because we believe that they are moving in the same direction and we would have grave reservations about that .
Mr President , although the European Union barely has a legal basis or status as an international political entity , the report and proposal under discussion suggest creating mechanisms which are suited solely to that sort of entity .
The proposal to create a Community diplomatic corps and a college of diplomacy is not intended to fill a vacuum in Community legislation .
In essence , this proposal , tabled no less as a proposal by the European Parliament , which is supposed to represent the people , is intended to deprive Member States of the facility to exercise an independent foreign policy which differs from the choices made by the dominant circles in the European Union , to the detriment of the people .
It is basically intended to abolish diplomatic representation of the people , of the Member States , and to replace it with diplomatic representation directed by the managing board of the European Union .
This proposal is intended to take all foreign policy matters out of the jurisdiction of national governments , far from any possible democratic control , and away from national parliaments , and is therefore in violation of national constitutions .
The Communist Party of Greece , as you know , is opposed to any further integration of the European Union and to the CFSP and the superpowers of Mr CFSP , the notorious Mr Solana .
We are opposed to measures which seek to convert national governments into powerless county councils , which is why we shall be voting against the proposal .
Outwardly , Mr Galeote Quecedo 's report seems very reasonable , but on closer examination , we get a rather different picture .
If the proposals were pursued , we would have another building block in the construction of a European State .
There are many points of detail in the report which are particularly controversial , not least the idea of European Union embassies and the suggestion that the European Union should have " coordinated representation in international bodies such as the UN " .
The implication of this is that the United Kingdom and France should give up their seats in the Security Council and make way for an EU representative .
I am alarmed at the anti-United States rhetoric which we have heard from a number of speakers , and at some of the other outbursts from other Members .
This is hardly the moment for the Commission to be encouraged to embark on yet another ambitious development of its role .
The Commission 's external assistance programmes account for nearly EUR 10 billion this year , and the priority task of the Community delegations is to administer these programmes properly and efficiently .
Mr Patten has just made reference to this .
In his communication on the reform of external assistance , Mr Patten recognised , and I quote , " acute staff shortages have had a direct and negative impact on the speediness and quality of EC aid delivery " .
He said that there is an urgent need to focus activities on core tasks and that additional staff needs will be concentrated in the area of project and programme implementation , in particular within delegations .
The clear conclusion is that the most important role of delegations is the administration of external assistance , not to try and run some additional diplomatic tasks .
Management personnel is what we need in the delegations .
There is no recognition of this in the Galeote Quecedo report .
Yes , the Commission needs to recruit a different sort of personnel .
Yes , it needs to give them improved , specialist training , but not for some new-fangled diplomatic service , but to get the external assistance programmes on the right footing .
Mr President , the informal meeting of Foreign Ministers in Evian has , in fact , already anticipated to some degree the excellent proposals in Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s report .
As I understand it , it was agreed that the EU embassies in third countries and the embassies of the Member States should improve their level of cooperation and coordinate their development programmes , and that there should be far more joint action .
Now these are things we have already called for on countless occasions , and so I am delighted that Mr Galeote Quecedo has made a proposal that is very much in line with our wishes .
Mr President , last week , I was in Indonesia on a fact-finding mission and all I can say is that the EU delegation out there provided me with outstanding support .
When I go on foreign trips , I always ask for a meeting to be arranged which will be attended by all the EU ambassadors , i.e. the ambassadors of the 15 Member States .
This occasion was no exception , and a meeting was indeed arranged .
And then there are complaints that the joint policy of the EU Member States is not in the limelight enough , and that although people in Indonesia know full well what Japan and the United States are doing there , they do not have a clear enough idea as to what the 15 Member States of the European Union are doing there .
If I then ask : ' how do you coordinate your work , and how do you harmonise your activities , the answer is : ' that is not something we do ' .
And I would go so far as to say that people seem to be in great fear of achieving a degree of coordination and harmonisation .
That is why I think it is so important that these agreements were reached in Evian , and why I welcome with open arms the fact that an EU college of diplomacy has been proposed .
The national diplomats should also be required to attend courses at a college of this kind , so that they understand how to take joint action at European level .
There is an urgent need for this .
It is not a question of wanting to outdo the United States , or Japan , for example , but what we do need to do is give Europe a much higher profile in third countries .
Accordingly , I have a great deal of time for Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s report and I truly hope that the Evian proposals come to fruition .
Mr President , over a period of 150 years , missionaries and aid workers have fostered knowledge of international affairs and commitment in my own country amongst broad sections of the population .
It is important for each individual Member State to retain and extend the opportunities it has for asserting , through its government and embassies , the voice and commitment of its own people on international issues .
Embassies constitute one of the most essential and most obvious expressions of national sovereignty .
History shows how , for example , a country such as Norway fought to conduct its own diplomacy in its struggle for independence from Sweden .
By having its own embassy , a country can also provide important services to its citizens when they visit another country .
The embassy can provide them with a service in their own language .
At the same time , embassies constitute indispensable sources of information and centres of analytical work for the various governments of the countries concerned .
Mr Galeote Quecedo has done a very fine job , but I am sceptical about the following points : recital E concerning the establishment of a professional and permanent community diplomatic service ; and recital P in which there is talk of setting up EU embassies in the future .
What exactly does this mean , Mr Galeote Quecedo and Commissioner Patten ?
Paragraph 1 - the setting up of a College of European Diplomacy .
In which language is it to operate - in Spanish , English , French or in the languages of all the Member States ?
Paragraph 12 - in which I think the embassies of the Member States are being told that they are to issue joint statements of their views .
Is this not already clear to them under the framework of the Common Foreign and Security Policy ?
Finally , there is talk of guaranteeing coordinated representation in the EU and other international bodies .
Sweden and many other countries have proud traditions in the United Nations .
Let us continue along these lines .
Mr President , I have taken the floor now spontaneously - as spontaneously as it is possible to do so in this Parliament - because a colleague from the group cannot be here .
But I am taking the floor as someone who until last April was a very ordinary civil servant in the German diplomatic service , and so people might perhaps think that I would be certain to be relatively sceptical about an approach of this kind because it will surely tend to erode the powers of national colleagues .
I am not sceptical , and I should like to warmly congratulate Mr Galeote Quecedo on his report .
I am , however , rather surprised at the strange scenarios depicted by some of the honourable members here .
What is this really about ?
Mr Galeote Quecedo actually made this quite clear : there is a remit for the European Union to be represented in third countries and this is about us being represented there better and more professionally within its terms ; it is about our people whom we post there being able to work as effectively as possible within their remit .
I do not wish to offend anybody , but if I imagine let 's say a former national civil servant from the Ministry of Agriculture in a Member State coming into the Commission at some point and doing really outstanding work internally , and then being appointed to head perhaps an external delegation or a Commission representation abroad , I think that this person would definitely still gain from learning what national colleagues will have perhaps learnt at a diplomatic college .
And I believe that this would allow the person to do their job even more successfully .
Similarly , however , I should also like to say that this remit will of course grow in conjunction with powers at European level .
In this respect , both the fears expressed by Mr Coûteaux on the one hand , and the hopes expressed by Mr Dupuis on the other , are certainly justified .
As the tasks broaden , so the power devolved to these representations will increase , but this is also what we , as a body , have all wanted .
Seen from this point of view , it is good if we already start making appropriate preparations now .
I believe that the report drafted by Mr Galeote Quecedo is a very good one .
Mr President , I very much welcome the interest that Parliament has shown in the external service , in particular , Mr Galeote Quecedo 's report .
I want to assure Parliament that we will consider its recommendations very carefully .
I want to pay particular tribute to Mr Galeote Quecedo .
He deserves considerable respect for the very professional and open-minded way in which he has carried out his work .
I can say without any reservation that the Commission has benefited from the report and it is bound to make a permanent impression on the way we run our external service in the future .
It is already a subject in which we have been taking a keen interest .
I left a special meeting of virtually all our heads of delegation in Brussels early today specifically to be here for this debate .
When apologising for my early departure I was able to inform them of the close interest that Parliament takes in these matters .
The fact that we called all our heads of delegation to Brussels at this time is a sign of our determination to give a firm lead to the external service and to provide it with the career structure and the leadership that it deserves and needs .
Members will have seen the communication on the development of the external service that was adopted by the Commission on 18 July .
It recommends continuing to rebalance delegation staff between officials and local agents and continuing the regionalisation of our representation in a way that will free up 32 official posts immediately to be redeployed to delegations that need reinforcement .
The communication updates the list of priorities for the opening of new delegations and offices .
However , even though some of these are urgent priorities , our first concern must be to use available resources to reinforce some of our existing delegations .
The communication also describes the measures we are taking to devolve authority from Brussels to delegations in the field , known in jargon as " deconcentration " .
This is closely linked to our efforts to reform our external assistance programmes .
The communication makes it clear that what it proposes is only a first step .
We intend to continue and to ensure the best use of the resources we have at our disposal on the basis of an evaluation of the workload of each delegation .
I want to make this point very clear because it is the backdrop to Mr Galeote Quecedo 's report .
If we get through our reform proposals and if they are supported by the budgetary authority , in the SCR and the Bureau d 'assistance technique combined we will have fewer people managing our external programmes , though we will have more than at present in the SCR .
But we will have fewer people in Brussels and more people in the field .
That is the balance we should be striking : to have more of the work done on the ground in our delegations .
We will be preparing a follow-up communication on the external services in the first half of next year .
Let me comment specifically on Mr Galeote Quecedo 's report .
It makes recommendations in three main areas : the training of officials assigned to external relations , the legal status of delegations and coordination with Member States .
A number of the points raised by the resolution , for example on regionalisation and on the evaluation of our network of external representations , are already covered in our own communication .
The report stresses the role of the Commission and its delegations in the Community 's external activities and it is , of course , essential that the Commission 's external service be able to continue to contribute properly .
The first step must be to develop the training of officials in the Commission who deal with external relations .
I am delighted that the report puts so much informed stress on that point .
We have already made good progress but we need to build on it very fast indeed , particularly given the deconcentration that I have talked about .
We should try , as the report suggests , to benefit from the skills and experience of existing training institutions in the Member States .
We are already in contact with many of them and we will seek to deepen that relationship .
Whether it is now time to set up a college of European diplomacy is something that we will have to look at very carefully with Parliament , the Council and others .
We will certainly consider that proposal very carefully and it underlines the importance of training - language training , management training , all the other sorts of training that are essential in order to make our delivery of programmes and our representation overseas more effective .
On the legal status of delegations I should say that although delegations are formally delegations of the Commission they are under clear instructions to give all possible assistance to all the institutions of the European Union and indeed to Member States .
I am not convinced of the need to formalise this state of affairs since it exists already .
I do not want to complicate procedures further , but again I am open-minded on the issue .
We have made it absolutely clear to our delegations that they should regard themselves as working for the High Representative and for the other institutions of the European Union , both when it comes to reporting and when it comes to logistical issues .
On relations with the Member States , I wholeheartedly endorse the proposal for greater cooperation .
This is already our policy and the discussions this weekend at Evian very much concentrated on how best we can achieve that in practice .
In our 1998 communication on the external service , we made it clear that any Member State that wished to keep a presence in a third country without maintaining an embassy was welcome to use the Commission 's delegations .
This has already happened on two occasions : in Sierra Leone by Germany and in Burundi by Austria .
There is already a considerable degree of cooperation between Member States ' embassies and Commission delegations .
There are regular meetings at all levels .
Joint reports are produced , either at the request of headquarters , or on the initiative of heads of missions .
The Commission also supports and , when appropriate , seeks to participate in co-location projects where more than one Member State and / or the Commission agree to occupy premises jointly .
We have a programme of secondment of Member States officials and diplomats to our delegations .
There are ten in our delegations at the moment , with a few more due in the near future .
The restriction on the development of this programme is not lack of will on our part - I want to make that clear - but to some extent a lack of resources and also a certain reluctance on the part of the Member States to respond to our invitation to second diplomats to the delegations .
I want to underline the importance of coordination .
We have to cooperate better without finding ourselves in a situation in which everything we do is second-guessed , not just in Brussels , but in other countries as well .
All this discussion about coordination and about the future of the external service takes place against the backdrop of a treaty which talks about a common foreign and security policy , not a single foreign and security policy in a Union of fifteen Member States , each with its own foreign minister .
I strongly suspect that we will have fifteen foreign ministers in the European Union for the foreseeable future .
But what we have to do is make coordination and cooperation more effective , more meaningful and more professional .
A final plea .
In welcoming this report and in promising active cooperation in following its recommendations I must stress that if the external service is to carry out the role which Parliament wants for it , it must have the resources to do so ; that is , not just resources to place officials in third countries but also to ensure that they are properly trained , that they are equipped with the necessary information technology and that they have secure means of communication .
Last and by no means least , it is very important that they are provided with adequate physical protection in what is an , often , very dangerous world .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Patten .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , at 12.30 p.m.
EC investment partners financial instrument
The next item is the report ( A5-0202 / 2000 ) by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation regarding the closure and liquidation of projects adopted by the Commission under Council Regulation ( EC ) No 213 / 96 on the implementation of the European Communities investment partners financial instrument for the countries of Latin America , Asia , the Mediterranean region and South Africa ( COM ( 1999 ) 726 - C5 ­ 0062 / 2000 - 2000 / 0034 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have the great honour of presenting , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , this report on the liquidation of one of the projects which appears to have been more successful or which has been more positively appreciated in the field of North / South cooperation : the ECIP ( European Community Investment Partners ) project .
This project is universally considered to have been successful , although , in company with many other projects , it did suffer from the delays which have built up in the external relations sector , delays with which we are all familiar and which Commissioner Patten has recently analysed in great detail .
In this case , we have almost 600 projects which were approved in due time and which are to be financed by the ECIP .
The Commission has therefore proposed - after a delay which we condemn in our report , caused , of course , by the events of 1999 - to extend , not the legal basis itself , but the existence of the technical assistance offices and the means which are essential for the management of the sizeable remainder of the ECIP - 590 projects - and to do so for two years .
I have to say , Commissioner , that the Committee on Development and Cooperation has been faced with the opinions of the other Parliamentary committees - the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control - on this matter .
As you will have seen , these two committees attempted to fence in the Commission , so to speak , and place greater restrictions on it , calling upon it to conclude the operation six months earlier and to submit progress reports earlier in the process than proposed .
We , the Committee on Development and Cooperation , have understood the Commission ' s message , the request to assist the ECIP project - which , I repeat , has contributed , along with other projects , to the creation and growth of thousands of small and medium-sized enterprises in Third World countries and has , in effect , raised the profile of the Union and enabled it to penetrate a new sector , which is therefore important to the Commission - and we have therefore decided not to go along with the more restrictive opinions of the other Committees or to make amendments to the Commission ' s principal request to be granted two years to bring this major economic cooperation instrument to the best possible conclusion and to honour the agreements , signed before 31 December 1999 .
However , at the same time , Commissioner , we have made a request : we have called upon you to inform Parliament of what the Commission intends to be the future of this instrument and to do so in good time for us to be able to reflect on the matter , together if possible .
We have seen that it is an effective instrument which has responded to real needs and has employed much more in the way of resources than the Community Budget funding .
We therefore call upon you to accept our amendment in order to make the co-decision procedure as rapid as possible and so that , if possible , we will be able to close the procedure in a single reading , so that you will be equipped with the means for action as soon as possible .
Our modest request is that you inform us of your intentions before the end of the year .
We are aware of the differences of opinion and the possible conflicts of responsibilities between external relations and development and therefore between the responsibilities of the individual Directorates-General , and possibly even between the responsibilities of the individual Commissioners , but we are also aware that , during restructuring , the responsibility for external relations is extremely carefully reviewed by yourself , in particular , Commissioner , and by the entire Commission .
We have not , therefore , laid down a line of march . We have not laid down that the ECIP has to remain an autonomous instrument or that the ECIP can and must be integrated into a wider-reaching instrument .
We have merely requested that the faith we are placing in the Commission in granting it these extra two years will be repaid : this is our request , and I would ask you , Commissioner , to tell us now whether you accept the amendments which we have tabled .
Mr President , the Committee on Budgetary Control unanimously supports the objectives of the EC Investment Partners programme .
However , we do criticise the way in which it has been implemented .
The first point to note is that the Commission is currently operating in a legal vacuum , because the proposal to continue the programme - which has after all already been extended twice - was only tabled at the end of January , that is , one month after the regulation had expired , and will not be able to be adopted until late autumn .
We endorse the legislative proposal as a stopgap measure until the end of 2001 , because we do not deny that , according to the figures published , 34 000 firms have been involved as partners , creating over 1 300 joint ventures and 42 000 jobs .
Nevertheless , the Deloitte & Touche appraisal report highlights a series of grave shortcomings which need to be tackled .
For example , procedures have become increasingly bureaucratic and cumbersome and therefore less business- and user-friendly , which has resulted in the accumulation of a backlog of payments and increasing discontent among financial institutions and enterprises because of delays in decisions and contracts .
Bad management and a lack of coordination between the ECIP Unit and the SCR also mar the Commission 's reputation , as does the discrimination between financial institutions .
For example , the state-owned development bank of Denmark receives 38 % of funding while Spain 's only receives 23 % .
As well as further points of criticism and three proposals for amendments , our opinion also contains questions which the Commission ought to take into account when it is deciding whether to continue operating the ECIP beyond 2001 or whether to incorporate it in a single investment facility , as Mr Dell 'Alba has already mentioned .
Mr President , as somebody keen on helping countries to create jobs and transfer technology , I have to say that the ECIP programme is extremely good and , in principle , that was the objective .
But as my colleague and friend , Mrs Theato , has mentioned , it is full of worms .
It is almost as if the project was a wonderful , beautifully-wrapped box of chocolates , but inside was absolutely packed with worms .
The reason for that is simple .
If you look at Facility 1 , it grants up to EUR 100 000 for simply identifying a potential joint venture .
So , clearly , when you look at Facilities 2 , 3 , 4 and 1b , you soon realise that the work was not done by somebody who was a banker , but by somebody who perhaps was a bureaucrat and knew nothing about finance and lending to projects which could be viable .
In short , I would say if such an instrument is ever to be invented and devised , it should be done with bankers and industrialists , people who know what they are talking about , not bureaucrats sitting in the European Commission .
Therefore , the sooner this project is wound up and the European Union saves money that is being wasted , the better .
I feel very strongly that such investment projects should be very carefully thought out with input from industry and bankers so that maximum jobs are created where they are needed and where there is wide coverage and public accountability and transparency .
When I was a member of the Budgetary Control Committee and met the people who were managing this project , I was not at all impressed with the knowledge that they had of running such an enterprise , and I come from an industrial and financial background .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report presented by Mr Dell 'Alba refers to the winding up of one of the main financial instruments for Community aid to the private sector .
The Socialist Group supports all cooperation measures which , like this one , help to make companies , and economies in general , more dynamic , by means of private initiative .
The ECIP , whose projects are now coming to an end , has been particularly successful , as has been previously pointed out .
According to the external evaluation it has been subjected to , the ECIP has demonstrated a significant multiplier effect , creating jobs and joint ventures .
We now hope , Commissioner , that the future programme that will replace it will add better management to these positive effects .
Nevertheless , we have to say that although we are happy with the successes of this programme , we Socialist members of the Committee on Development and Cooperation suggest that the main objective of any instrument for aid , including those in the private sector , must be to reduce poverty in those countries , which is ultimately the objective of these instruments .
Wealth creation and the generation of jobs by means of companies financed through Community funds must benefit those populations in need .
The application of these instruments must take account of the need to achieve labour , social and environmental standards , otherwise it could be said that these instruments do not aid development but rather constitute subsidies to individuals .
We cannot say that in the evaluations control has always been exercised over the quality of aid via the ECIP .
For example , when a bank is established in a beneficiary country by means of ECIP funds , how can we be sure that these funds are directed towards attracting investment and not simply to subsidising the presence of the bank in that country ?
As the rapporteur has said , it is a question of framing Community aid within a broad strategy which includes the private sector , which the Commission does not refer to in its plan for reforming aid policy , despite the fact that attracting private funds is necessary for the development of many countries .
In this respect , we wish once again to repeat the question by Mr Dell 'Alba to the Commission about its intentions relating to extending this instrument to the countries of sub-Saharan Africa , whose need for funds is also very great .
In short , we hope that this experience of the ECIP , which has been very important for Latin America , will serve to improve the programme replacing it , which , we have noted , has no clear role in the Commission ' s plan for reform .
Coordination within the Commission is essential to improving the effectiveness of aid and , to this end , the different instruments must have one broad aim and one overall strategy .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to those of us who have closely followed the evolution and development of the ECIP instrument throughout its short but intense history , it seems that the best way to summarise Mr Dell 'Alba ' s report is to highlight the message contained in the amendments of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , since they recommend the continuation of this financial instrument because it has been the best vehicle for establishing and strengthening Europe ' s business fabric in the countries involved and , consequently , for creating employment .
Now that the agreement on free trade , political concertation and cooperation between the European Union and Mexico has just entered into force , it is a good time to remember that we should continue with this type of financial instrument which , in some cases , such as Mexico , has been used intensively and positively , and is ideally suited to strengthening commercial ties between particular blocks , such as the European Union and the countries involved .
Otherwise , the European Union would no longer be acting in accordance with its cooperation and development commitment , not only in the case of the countries of Latin America , but also in the cases of Asia , the Mediterranean and South Africa .

In short , we clearly support Mr Dell ' Alba ' s report , and we congratulate him on the clarity of his ideas when he deals with the need to continue in the future with the implementation of the ECIP , in my opinion , as a single instrument . We also hope that these ideas will be directed , after more than ten years of positive experience , towards making the bureaucratic process involved in the project ' s implementation more flexible and rapid in order to allow for more efficient action .
In my opinion , this requires a strengthening of human resources in the Commission ' s offices in the countries involved .
Mr President , the proposed ECIP development programme provides a pretty picture of the European Commission ' s mismanagement .
Although this programme is heading in the right direction , i.e. technology transfer to developing countries , the Commission has , perhaps unwittingly , applied a brake .
The programme has been running for twelve years and the Commission has waited right until it is about to end before considering whether to carry on with it .
As with other programmes , the Commission has not looked into the consequences of a possible end to this programme , the implications for the continuity of actions already undertaken or for the situation affecting partner businesses and jobs .
It appears that , last year , the EUR 90 million that were budgeted for this programme were not even used , due to a lack of human resources available to study the dossiers , which are piled up on a desk somewhere in Brussels .
At the same time , the administrative procedures have become more cumbersome with every passing year , yet the personnel running the programme have not seen any increase in their staffing numbers .
Similarly , business partners were not informed of the possible termination of the programme .
Lastly , the criteria for the distribution of funds between the different foci of the programme , particularly the social rights of workers , have remained impenetrably vague .
In light of what I have just said , we ask the Commission to look into the means , firstly , of producing a rapid evaluation of the assessment and , secondly , of re-establishing the programme whilst improving its transparency and maintaining the level of its budget .
Mr President , I shall be voting against the Dell 'Alba report , and more generally against the ECIP and MEDA programmes , which were basically designed to finance subsidies and loans to private companies investing in Latin America , Asia , the Mediterranean and in South Africa .
I protest at the fact that public money might be used - in any form at all - to generate private profit .
This project , which is supposed to focus on SMEs in the first instance , in reality often involves subsidiaries of huge multinational companies , such as banks , which take part in these programmes and profit from them .
The stated political aim of these programmes is to encourage the opening up of these countries ' markets to European capital .
In the past , these poor countries were plundered and exploited by the capital of the great European powers in competition with one another .
All that has changed is the fact that the programmes now advocate coordinated action for this capital .
Capital that is invested through this programme is no more designed to develop poor countries now than it was in the past , since they are dependent on European capital .
These programmes are not designed to make the lives of the working classes any easier , but to exploit a cheap workforce over there in order to increase the wealth of owners and shareholders over here .
I therefore object to these programmes across the board , because in spite of a few hypocritical phrases about fighting poverty , they all seek to provide the imperialism of the great European powers with additional instruments for getting a foothold in poorer countries and then dominating them .
Mr President , we are holding a debate on an issue which is of relatively modest importance in budgetary terms , ambitious in its objectives , relatively encouraging in its results , inefficient because of its cumbersome management procedures , at times contradictory and , in short , there is clearly room for improvement in the future .
I must express my satisfaction at the frankness and transparency with which the committee has analysed the results that have been obtained .
It does not hide anything and I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Dell 'Alba , because in a co-decision procedure he has rejected demagoguery and easy criticism in favour of the professionalism with which he has approached the drawing up of his report .
I hope that , in a co-decision procedure , the Commission will be sensitive to Parliament ' s position so that we can begin the now urgent reform of this important financial instrument .
This instrument for the development of the private sector in developing countries is in accordance with the thinking which inspires the new position of the European Union in its cooperation policy .
We have already talked a lot about this in relation to the ACP countries and we must apply the same criteria in relation to the countries of Latin America and the southern Mediterranean .
The results obtained so far are encouraging .
More than 1 300 new companies have been set up , generating 42 000 jobs , and investment flows to the tune of EUR 3 500 million have been created .
Certain hopes and expectations , however , have been left behind .
We find it contradictory to say that fighting poverty is our priority and , yet we lack the information and indicators necessary to ascertain to what extent the most impoverished sectors have benefited from the aid .
Lastly , Commissioner , it is urgent that we reform the five current cumbersome procedures , none of which is of any real use , since they can clearly be improved .
Let me thank Mr Dell 'Alba and the Development and Cooperation Committee very sincerely for their excellent work on the Commission proposal on the future of the European Community Investment Partners .
Let me commence with a bit of background .
The ECIP instrument operated successfully for 12 years , from 1988 to 1999 .
More than 2 500 actions were approved in that period for a total amount of over EUR 290 million involving 1 400 joint ventures and EUR 4.3 billion in investment .
From 1991 , the Commission sent annual reports on the implementation and on the results of ECIP to Parliament and to the Council , of which the last covered operations in 1999 .
Parliament also received the independent evaluation report that was completed in December 1999 , but , as honourable Members will know , from 1997 ECIP began to run into trouble .
The lack of sufficient staff to ensure the smooth management of an ever-increasing number of actions resulted in delays in the implementation of the programme , which in turn caused growing discontent among its beneficiaries .
These difficulties were compounded by the introduction of more stringent financial procedures needed to guarantee the proper use of the resources managed by the Commission .
They are typical of the problems we face , namely insufficient resources to do the job wedded to overly restrictive practices and procedures .
The Commission decided not to extend the instrument beyond 31 December 1999 .
This was a painful decision , but , I am sure , the right one - and to reappraise the instrument in order to prepare a redesigned programme .
This will allow better coordination with other similar European Union instruments and ensure improved management and financial procedures in the light of the new Commission guidelines on development policy and the management of external aid .
Mr Dell 'Alba 's report contains extremely helpful suggestions in this respect .
The approval of the proposed regulation will make possible the continued sound management of existing ECIP projects and their orderly closure and winding-down as they reach completion .
As far as the suggested amendments are concerned , the Commission agrees with Amendment Nos 1 and 2 , which correspond with our views on the need to reassess , improve and redesign the existing financial instruments for the support of private investment .
As regards Amendment No 3 , the Commission agrees with the principle behind it but is not in a position to provide the legislative proposals requested by Parliament by the end of this year .
We are presently engaged in a comprehensive review of all our existing financial instruments .
We need to be candid .
We need more time to present a properly thought through and fundamentally revised programme .
The Commission therefore proposes to evaluate all the options by June of next year and then make proposals .
The honourable gentleman has been generous , courteous and understanding .
He therefore deserves the assurance from me that the timetable I have set out is one we intend to observe , and I hope he will accept our determination to present our proposals within that sort of time-scale in good faith .
I wish we could act more rapidly , but to do the job properly we need a bit more time .
Let me finish by thanking the European Parliament for the support which the House has given to the proposed regulation on ECIP .
It will allow the Commission to bring this programme to an end in a responsible manner and to launch renewed and improved initiatives for promotion of the private sector in developing countries .
I am sure that we will have other future opportunities that will enable me to explain to some honourable Members why I do not equate that with nineteenth century imperialism .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Patten .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , at 12.30 p.m.
Community humanitarian activities
The next item is the report ( A5-0191 / 2000 ) by Mr Imbeni , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament : Assessment and future of Community humanitarian activities ( Article 20 of Regulation ( EC ) 1257 / 96 ) ( COM ( 1999 ) 468 - C5-0044 / 2000 - 2000 / 2016 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking all my fellow Members from the various Parliamentary groups who have made a substantial contribution to the preparatory work for this report to express Parliament ' s position on the Commission ' s Communication on ECHO ' s activities , on emergency aid and on humanitarian activities .
The committee ' s unanimity regarding the report is evidence of highly profitable cooperation , and I hope that this will be reflected in the final vote in the Chamber tomorrow .
A discussion on ECHO , or humanitarian aid , will include mention of the worst tragedies and the greatest contradictions of our time .
It will touch on war , natural disasters and the damage to the world ' s ecology system , on the continued tragic ethnic conflicts and civil and military wars , on the basic injustice underlying the North / South relationship and the suffering , in particular , of the most vulnerable peoples ; of women , children and the elderly .
And the truth is that the forecast for the next few years does not indicate an improvement in this situation .
I merely refer to a number of newspaper articles which have appeared during recent months on issues such as the fact that a totally unexpected part of the North Pole has shown signs of melting , the water poisoning in Bangladesh which is endangering safety , health and hygiene conditions for 25 million people , or the drought in many parts of Africa .
We must therefore be responsible and realistic , and , even more than in the past , we must plan action for the future to prevent natural disasters and to respond to the consequences of the tragedies often - almost always - caused by man .
These planning operations require an improvement in coordination at international level between the European Union and all the other parties involved in humanitarian aid , and greater cooperation within the European Union between the Commission and the instruments available to the Member States , in order to avoid the repetition of the frequent past cases - referred to in the Commission document and confirmed by the assessments - of duplication and repetition of action and , thus , wastage of energy and resources .
In this context , I find it unacceptable - and both my report and Parliament ' s position are clear on this point - that ECHO should be reduced to a source of funding for initial relief operations and nothing else .
We need to act in a wider perspective . The objective of ECHO and of European Union activities must be , firstly , to increase preventive action and then , secondly , to link emergency and initial relief actions to the operations intended to re-establish minimum living conditions in places affected by natural disasters and wars , thereby providing humanitarian aid during the stage following provision of emergency aid .
The sums in question may well be limited , in terms of more general budgets , but we are talking about EUR 2 500 million which have been allocated over the last four years by the European Commission to non-governmental organisations ( 56 % ) , United Nations agencies ( 25 % ) , the Red Cross ( 11 % ) and other direct operations carried out by ECHO or specialised Member States agencies .
There we are . In my opinion , the Commission ' s analysis compels us to act to further strengthen ECHO and to avoid the prevalence of certain positions present within the Council , which is divided over these issues .
Certain people in the Council are of the opinion that ECHO ' s activities should be reduced , but I take the completely opposite view .
One very last point , Mr President : ECHO cannot be treated as an ATM service where international agencies or non-governmental organisations withdraw money and do not even tell the beneficiaries where the funding came from .
The European public and the beneficiaries should be told about this remarkable work by ECHO .
This is why we have proposed - and I hope that Commissioner Patten , who is not listening to me at the moment , will take this proposal on board with due consideration - that an information campaign be mounted to inform the public of our countries how our money is being spent and how our resources are being used , and we propose that this information campaign should not , of course , be financed out of ECHO funds but out of the ad hoc funds .
Mr President , the rapporteur , Mr Imbeni , has done an excellent job .
There is no need to repeat anything .
I should like to expand on two problematic issues .
The first is a question of principle .
Humanitarian aid has to be provided regardless of what has caused the catastrophes concerned and irrespective of any other political objectives .
Its increasing politicisation in recent years is an unacceptable and , ultimately , also inhumane phenomenon .
But at the same time , it should also be noted that the growing number of catastrophes is not only due to natural events over which we have no control .
As it is , this cannot be said of wars , in which humanitarian aid has to be supplied , perhaps by ECHO .
An increasing number of natural disasters are clearly linked to the fact that we are placing ever greater demands on the global ecosphere and biosphere .
The United Nations ' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , IPCC , has reported , for example , that we can already see a , " discernible human influence on global climate " .
Our concepts of crisis management ought therefore , in my opinion , also to have a socio-political dimension and be integrated into development policy and , for example , economic policy strategy .
Otherwise we will , in many cases , only be repairing the damage inflicted as a consequence of our own policy , and the people in the countries of the South , in particular , will suffer as a result of the disasters which we have caused .
The second problem is directly linked to the first and yet is of a very practical nature .
I call on the Commission - even if the extensive problem which I have just outlined is not yet resolved - to link the design , organisation and operation of humanitarian aid more closely to development policy .
The Commission has already made attempts to do this , which I feel still need to be stepped up considerably and freed of red tape .
An example of this is , in my opinion , the concept of emergency relief which is geared to development , which the Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit ( Company for Technical Cooperation ) is trying to put into practice .
Mr President , I should first like to salute Mr Imbeni , the author of this report , and express my appreciation of his work .
It is an excellent report which both identifies the main points of criticism and describes ways to ensure that ECHO is able to work effectively in the future .
We have had this office for humanitarian aid in the EU since 1992 , and both evaluation reports - which form the main basis of the assessment , together with the Commission 's report - contain high praise for ECHO in respect of its work so far , while identifying several very serious weak points .
Although the assessment of ECHO 's work in terms of efficiency compared with costs , is very positive , there still remains the problem of the infamous ' grey area ' in the time immediately following the events which trigger the provision of relief .
Humanitarian operations in this ' grey area ' cannot be assessed on the basis of precise criteria , nor do they provide the information and recommendations required for future ECHO operations in the area .
It is therefore necessary , in my opinion , to improve disaster preparedness and step up the provision of disaster relief as a priority .
It should be noted here that the regional approach adopted by the existing DIPECHO instrument offers a possible solution .
At the same time , however , the lack of sufficiently flexible alternative instruments within the Commission is to be lamented .
The Commission needs to present a clear strategy for the role which the humanitarian aid provided by ECHO has to play as part of foreign and development policy .
ECHO does not have the necessary human resources to do the job of a planning headquarters .
Staffing levels are below those characteristic of other Commission departments and well below those in national administrations , which are known to invest considerably less in crisis prevention .
Here the appropriations , which currently stand at around EUR 7.5 million , therefore need to be at least - wait for it - quadrupled to allow the work to be done effectively .
It is particularly regrettable - and Mr Imbeni has already made this point as well - that when projects are developed and run through partners , around 56 % of which are non-governmental organisations , they are not identified strongly enough in the public arena as European Union aid .
I believe that there is a considerable need for action here in the future .
The public has to be informed , but please not with the funds which are directly available to ECHO .
We should continue to pursue the positive initiatives here and use alternative sources of funding to defray the costs of informing the public .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate Mr Imbeni because I believe he has produced a splendid report and , while we were debating it in committee , we were already in complete agreement with his proposals .
The Socialist Group believes that aid policy must be the flagship of the European Union ' s external activities insofar as it reflects the ideas which must inspire the construction of the European Union , that is to say , solidarity and cohesion on a global level .
In these times of Commission reform , when many Community policies and procedures are being questioned , humanitarian aid has been evaluated positively by different bodies and , of course , on a political level , by Parliament .
It is true that there has been a lot of criticism of humanitarian aid .
However , we , who have seen and evaluated what ECHO has done , believe that its work has been very positive .
This report therefore serves to ratify the principle of humanitarian aid as a right for people involved in disasters and an obligation on the part of the international community , in which the European Union is a major player , in both quantitative and qualitative terms .
Nevertheless and with a view to the future , we must take some steps forward .
Firstly , we must overcome the so-called ' grey area ' which was mentioned earlier , that is to say , the interregnum between the end of emergency aid and the beginning of the rehabilitation and development actions .
While this ' grey area ' continues , in which nobody is administratively responsible , there will be people who do not receive assistance for no other reason than a lack of internal coordination within the Commission .
We have seen this in the case of Mozambique and other disasters .
Humanitarian aid did arrive , but during this interregnum it has not continued for rehabilitation and development cooperation .
Coordination within the Commission and complementarity with the Member States and other donors are factors which are fundamental to the efficiency which reform is intended to produce .
Secondly , it is urgent that we increase the number of staff dedicated to humanitarian aid activities .
The number of ECHO ' s staff is not proportional to the importance of its work .
Thirdly - and this is closely related to the previous point - the budget for humanitarian aid must be increased proportionally with its political importance and the real objectives we wish to achieve and which can be counted in the most important terms : human lives .
In this respect , the Commission and the Council ' s budgetary proposals are far from meeting what we believe to be the humanitarian needs .
Lastly , we must try harder and harder to improve the decentralisation and flexibility of relations with agents for humanitarian aid , fundamentally the NGOs .
An instrument was mentioned earlier , DIPECHO , which provides operative preparation for disaster situations .
We believe that it is essential that , when a humanitarian catastrophe occurs , whether natural or caused by man , instruments are already in place .
In this respect , we wish to highlight the importance of DIPECHO .
The Socialist Group supports the principles which govern humanitarian aid and its future in the terms which I expressed earlier .
We do not believe that this should become a token policy , but rather a flagship , together with development cooperation , of the European Union ' s external action .
Mr Imbeni said earlier - I do not know if the Commissioner heard what he said because he was talking at the time , but it seems to me to be very important - that there must be an awareness-raising campaign on the significance of humanitarian aid , on what this humanitarian aid means to us , the European Union . Mr Imbeni also said that the costs of that campaign should not be met with money intended for humanitarian aid .
I believe that this point , the subject of an amendment which has been presented this afternoon , is important and deserves our support .
What could be more important than humanitarian emergency aid ?
In other words , saving the lives of numerous human beings by taking swift and effective action , making funds immediately available and ensuring that they are well-spent , whilst eliminating political deliberations and bureaucratic rigmarole .
Needless to say , the European Union has its work cut out in this respect .
More to the point , it can , and must , take a leading role in this field in view of the added value it offers compared with the individual States .
ECHO must become the central coordination platform for all Member States .
It must be equipped to this end , so that it can operate to best advantage , for this is about life and death and so only the very best is good enough .
This will entail extending and improving the staffing capacity , decentralising competences , formulating quantifiable objectives , systematic monitoring of the results , continuing to learn from past mistakes , and above all , improving coordination with the other offices of the Commission and the Member States .
In order to mobilise the necessary public support for emergency aid , it would be a good idea to give greater publicity to what Europe does and why .
Moreover , increased transparency would create an additional incentive to meet the highest demands .
The relationship between emergency aid , reconstruction and development is the same as that between the seed , the stems , and the leaves of a plant ; one evolves naturally from the other .
And what this means in terms of ECHO , which is the seed , is that although it does not have to handle all the reconstruction work itself , it does have to make all the necessary preparations .
When it comes to the reconstruction and development phases , the Commission needs to bring its own staffing levels up to standard with all haste , and drastically reduce the procedures .
A number of speakers have already said as much this evening .
Only then will Europe be able to make a virtue of need .
Mr President , throughout the world , development aid is giving way to humanitarian aid .
Even here , the Directorate-General for External Relations is gradually taking charge of the areas that were formerly the responsibility of the Directorate-General for Development , with humanitarian aid compensating for the failures of external policy .
It is not just a question of providing aid , but also of restoring balance in the use of natural resources among all of the world ' s inhabitants .
Unfortunately , humanitarian aid cannot play this role and must not serve only to bail out a liberal policy which at the same time murders the populations of the countries in receipt of aid .
Sustainable development is all but absent from the European Union ' s humanitarian policy - we are quite unprepared for natural disasters and do little to prevent conflicts .
Systematic training in how to deal with earthquakes and floods as well as in preventing violence would be welcome in many parts of the world .
Instead of this , the European Union always reacts too late - once the disaster has been declared .
This lack of planning can be seen in the programmes of aid for health and nutrition , and gender issues are also ignored .
The connection between humanitarian and development policy , although crucial , is systematically missing .
It is important not to do just what is strictly necessary , but to prevent the effects of these catastrophes , and first of all , the factor that makes them worse , which is poverty .
We hope that cross-sector posts will be created in order to link ECHO and the Directorate-General for Development .
These could also initiate cooperation with other worldwide organisations in the field of humanitarian aid , beginning with those in Member States , since there is a considerable lack of coordination in their actions .
It is equally important that operating and assessment costs do not exceed 20 % of ECHO ' s budget .
Payments must also be made more rapidly .
Venezuela has been waiting since last December for the aid it was promised .
Even if we are satisfied overall with the European Union ' s humanitarian policy , and if we are generally happy with Mr Imbeni ' s report , this policy must , to a greater extent , be in keeping with sustainable development .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Imbeni on an excellent report , into which he put a tremendous amount of work .
I want to refer to the question of Third World debt relief .
We must be more forceful in our efforts to put the issue of debt relief for Third World countries on a permanent footing .
The Jubilee 2000 campaign helped to focus international attention on the debt issue .
The campaign has been instrumental in achieving progress in providing additional relief both at multilateral level and by major bilateral creditors .
Poor countries face unsustainable debt burdens at the same time as they are confronting natural disasters , famine and the HIV / Aids pandemic .
Debt service payments often exceed health and education budgets .
Surely there is nothing more important in developing countries than education .
If people have literacy and numeracy they are a danger to the leadership of the worst-governed countries .
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have brought out an initiative as an official response to the major multilateral lending institutions and the need for debt relief .
We all know that the link between debt relief and poverty reduction needs to be substantially strengthened .
Debt relief programmes for Third World countries must be put in place permanently .
The joint United Nations programmes on Aids has already estimated that 95 % of all HIV-infected individuals live in developing countries .
The effect of the Aids pandemic means that progress and development become more difficult .
We must address this problem urgently .
The Ugandan President has set up a massive programme to deal with the Aids pandemic in his own country .
It is a great example for the rest of the African countries .
European Union leaders are meeting in Nice in December to discuss the reform of EU policy programmes .
I would once again call on EU leaders to address the need to control arms exports to Third World countries .
It is hard to believe that in the European Union , where all key economic sectors of activity are regulated and controlled by law , the export of arms to third countries seems to go unregulated for the most part .
This is a barbaric and hypocritical position .
EU leaders should have the courage to face up to the key defence manufacturers .
They would also win broader support from the citizens of the EU , who are seeking leadership on this issue .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to express my thanks and congratulations to Mr Imbeni for his excellent report .
I agree with him that ECHO has in the past been and can continue to be in the future an excellent instrument for humanitarian intervention in the world ' s crises , and this aid must be given an increasingly higher profile and become one of the trade marks of European Union action , for so it has been in recent years , I recall , for example when there was an ad hoc Commissioner for ECHO in the Commission .
I therefore feel that this evaluation , which attempts to improve the image of the programme , is right and necessary , and it appears , to a large extent , to be the aim of the excellent Imbeni report . I have tabled two purely technical amendments to the report , on the subject of the visibility of the programme in particular .
We need to strengthen , develop and , I would argue , provide autonomous funding for this opportunity for the European Union to publicise ECHO ' s activities , for it is an unknown fact , for example , that it contributes over 50 % to the budget of the Commissioner for Refugees .
I therefore call upon the Commission to give very serious consideration to Parliament ' s suggestions and to take the Imbeni report carefully into account when carrying out the restructuring which is to take place to make ECHO ' s actions increasingly useful and effective in assisting the areas and peoples in the greatest need .
You may be certain , Commissioner Patten , that this report is of the greatest importance to Parliament .
In the Committee on Development and Cooperation we have dedicated a great deal of time to humanitarian aid policies and you know that on this issue , in general , you will always have our support .
Firstly , I must today express my gratitude to the officials in ECHO and the staff of the NGOs who , in extremely precarious circumstances , when everything is failing on the ground , are the first , the most self-sacrificing , and often the only ones to provide essential humanitarian aid .
I must remind you that in Rwanda , in Kosovo , in Mozambique , in Central America , the sacrifices , sometimes of their lives , of those working in cooperation with us , have been some of the most inspiring stories in the history of the European Union .
In the small amount of time I have for this intervention I must add that I agree with the Imbeni report and , in particular , I would like to highlight the following issues .
As has been said , we must clarify the so-called dilemma of the ' grey area ' . We must clarify the procedures and , in some cases , the legal basis and the responsibility of each party , in order to make the management of ECHO more efficient .
I have already referred to the problem of human resources , as well as the problem of visibility , and the objectives must be clarified .
In certain cases , in Cuba for example - as you know , Commissioner - in the guise of humanitarian aid , programmes are implemented which are no such thing , but simply a form of concealed cooperation , sometimes for reasons of ' ideological solidarity ' with the Castro regime .
For the future , it is necessary to improve management , increase cooperation with our partners , improve complementarity with the actions carried out through the efforts of Member States and , in short , frame the humanitarian aid actions of the European Union within the global strategy of our cooperation policies .
.
Mr President , I should like to say at the outset that I welcome without reservation Mr Imbeni 's extremely constructive report .
It is an excellent piece of work and both my colleague , Commissioner Nielson , and I are delighted by the arguments set out .
We are delighted by the broad welcome which has been given to the Commission 's communication on its assessment and future plans for the Community 's humanitarian activities .
Many congratulations to the honourable Member .
Humanitarian aid , as a number of honourable Members have said , is an extremely important facet of the European Union 's external identity .
I am the first to acknowledge that we have a great deal to do to improve our performance .
But , it is also important that we should acknowledge the enormous amount of good that our help does , day-in day-out , often in extremely difficult circumstances , often in very difficult situations right across the world .
Whatever the faults - and it is our responsibility to try to put them right - let me pay tribute to what has been achieved and is being achieved by European Union aid and by the generous support of Europe 's taxpayers .
We are the biggest providers of this humanitarian assistance in the world and it is important , occasionally , that we remember that .
We very much appreciate Parliament 's support for the reforms we are seeking .
Much of the strategy which honourable Members urge on us tallies , marches very closely , with what we anyway wanted to do .
I would stress that however much we might all like to do more we have to focus our action , given the very limited human resources at our disposal , on getting right what we are trying to do already .
In this context , the Commission has decided to focus ECHO 's interventions based on a definition of the term " humanitarian " which is , in my judgement , generous and flexible but is not infinitely elastic .
We believe it would be wrong to overload ECHO with an ever-growing number of tasks simply for reasons of administrative ease .
Both Commissioner Nielson and I want to help countries and peoples in emergencies .
But we also want to help them out of emergencies so that they can stand on their own feet again as quickly as possible .
We will address this through country strategies which bring together the various types of assistance , emergency , developmental and so on , as quickly as it is feasible to do so .
That in my view is the best kind of assistance and it is the wisest use of our taxpayers ' money .
Let me add that we do not intend to make ECHO into an operational department which delivers aid from contingency planning to distribution in the field .
That is not , and never has been , where ECHO 's strengths lie .
Such an approach would be ineffective and it would detract from the many advantages of ECHO 's partnership approach which allows it , as has been said , to make funds quickly available to those who need them most .
The partnership approach also allows for real involvement of civil society at the outset of aid operations , and the value of that has been proven time and time again .
We will continue to choose partners on the basis of their efficiency and the availability of partners for the task in hand and bearing in mind , of course , their different comparative strengths and the roles they can play .
The NGO sector is an extremely important channel , but the United Nations and the Red Cross movement are also valued partners .
Thanks to this mixed approach to partnership when necessary , we will be able to send specific messages to the different political fora .
Mr Imbeni mentioned the important issue of visibility .
That is important .
We want Europe 's voters and taxpayers to know what is being done with their money and in their name .
We have planned a Eurobarometer survey to gauge the current levels of awareness of ECHO in Member States and on the basis of that survey , which of course we will want to discuss with the honourable Member and others , we will be able to develop appropriate ways of increasing the awareness to which the honourable Member referred .
The humanitarian aid we give will continue to be governed by the principles of impartiality and non-discrimination laid down in our regulation and accepted by the humanitarian community worldwide .
It is an element of our external identity demonstrating that Europe can act worldwide with one voice and that it can make a difference on the ground .
As the biggest single source of humanitarian aid funding worldwide , as I said earlier , the European Union has a responsibility to be not just the biggest in terms of quantity but the best in terms of delivery .
That is our clear and ambitious goal .
I should like to end with just one reflection .
I do not come entirely new to the debate on these issues .
Over ten years ago I was the development minister in the country I know best , as we learn to say , and was responsible among other things for humanitarian assistance .
What has most depressed me about the international scene over the years is that , in practice , our ability to deliver humanitarian relief rapidly in the most unpromising circumstances has increased a great deal more than our ability to prevent that humanitarian assistance being necessary in the first place .
That raises serious political and environmental questions about issues such as humanitarian intervention which are going to dominate much of the foreign policy agenda in the years ahead .
But in the meantime we must make what we do in terms of humanitarian aid more effective .
The honourable Member 's report will make a significant contribution to that .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Patten .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , at 12.30 p.m.
( The sitting was closed at 9.15 p.m. )
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , it is my great pleasure to welcome a group of municipal councillors from Malaga this morning .
Our visitors include the wife and daughter of José María Martin Carpena , a Popular Party municipal councillor in Malaga , who was assassinated by ETA on 15 July .
Ladies , allow me to say that your presence with us here today illustrates your courage in coping with this horrendous experience , which was made all the more painful by your witnessing this heinous murder .
In all sincerity , I can do no more than offer you our deepest sympathy .
Yesterday , as you know , this House paid its respects to the victims of terrorism in Spain and observed a minute ' s silence in their memory .
I would like you to know that you have the full support of the European Parliament in the fight to put an end to terrorism in Spain .
Madam President , we once again have cause to regret the fact that , in Europe , there are still people who murder others because they think differently and who burn down the houses of their political opponents .
There are people who force many others to emigrate in order to save their lives and the lives of their families .
Faced with this , under the rule of law , we democrats can only unite to defend our system of freedom from the tyranny of terror and trust in judicial action .
The most difficult thing is to explain to the widows and to the children who have been orphaned why their loved ones have been taken away .
To you , Elvira , María José , we can only offer our deepest sympathy .
Madam President , once again you have shown yourself , through your words today and yesterday , to be worthy of your duties as a representative and as a human being , and I thank you on behalf of the Socialist Group .
In fact , in an emotional tribute , we have just applauded one of the victims , José María Martín Carpena , whose life has been taken simply for having committed the crime of living and working in a peaceful and democratic country .
Every , or almost every , human being feels emotional and all democrats feel indignation , but I have a special reason to feel emotional in this case .
For sixteen years I had the honour of being mayor of the city to which Martín Carpena dedicated his life and of presiding over the Council in which he worked .
I understand very well what a great job all councillors do .
In return for modest human , political and economic compensation , they give their time generously and dedicate their lives to the public good .
That is how Martín Carpena won the affection of all the people of Malaga .
Madam President , as you know , and as we saw yesterday , there are groups in the Basque Country who support terrorism .
Using Nazi rhetoric , they propose ethnic and political objectives for territories , which are currently Spanish and French , which surpass the Albania of the sixties . They wage their campaigns in the countries of the European Union .
I would like to remind Members that a political union based on democracy and human rights would not have allowed the terrorist totalitarianism of the 20s and 30s to emerge in Europe .
Therefore , when all the social and communication institutions of Europe can react with the courage of this Parliament and when the fifteen different populations have the same attitude to ETA ' s attacks , terrorism will be all but finished .
On behalf of the Socialist Group then , Madam President , I would like to pay the warmest of tributes to the memory of Martín Carpena and also offer my best wishes to the family and colleagues of this murdered councillor .
Madam President , the presence of the group of councillors from Malaga and , in particular , the presence of the widow of Martín Carpena can help us to regain that sense of hope which ETA wants to stamp out .
I believe that their presence is without doubt something which will allow us to believe that the Basque people can regain its capacity for dialogue and can return to peace .
It is clearly difficult for words to keep their value , despite the fact that we repeat them and that yesterday and today Parliament has adopted its position .
It is important , however , that they continue to have value .
The presence of these people must be reflected in our words and it is important that we speak out so that our words may be worthy of their courage and so that , in speaking and in adopting our position , we share their pain .
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party wishes to express its hope that peace may return to the Basque people .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of the European United Left , I would also like to pay tribute to councillor Martín Carpena and express my admiration and gratitude to him , his family , his wife , his friends and , through them , to all the families of those people who , in the course of their duties , have lost their lives to terrorism .
I would like to say to his family and friends that his sacrifice has not been in vain and that they have been at the front line in the defence of democracy , through their bravery and courage , not only in the Basque Country and in Spain , but also in Europe .
The front line of democracy must be defended democratically .
We must bear in mind the enormous courage required in order , on behalf of the people , as representatives of the people , to defend democratic values every day , in at atmosphere of danger , coercion and threats .
Not only have councillors been killed , but also members of the security forces and of democratic forces , social representatives , union representatives and businesspeople . It is particularly perverse , however , to kill , intimidate and pursue those individuals in whom the people have put their trust .
There can be no greater contradiction .
That is why all the political groups , in unison , are today reaffirming their commitment to the defence of democracy and thanking those friends and families of people like Martín Carpena for the example they set .
This will commit us in the future to the fight for democracy and freedom .
Please be assured that the sacrifice of Martín Carpena has not been in vain .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I should like to echo your words of sympathy with , and admiration for , but especially of sympathy with , the relatives of Martin Carpena .
Any assault within Europe involving innocent people is an assault on Europe itself , on its democratic values , on the belief that via democratic means , the necessary changes can yet be made in a peaceful and tolerant manner , thus enabling people to live happier lives in a structured society .
I therefore hope that all countries will join forces even more emphatically than in the past in order to find these paths of peace and dialogue and that nobody will try to seek political gain from such attacks .
Mrs Carpena , relatives , friends and people from Malaga , as well as people from so many other places where the death toll has risen to more than a thousand , we feel for you and we should more than anything like to see an end to these acts of terrorism This is why we are opposed to polarisation .
We invite all those who seek peaceful change to gather around the negotiating table .
The Middle East
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the Middle East .
As you know , today ' s debate is rather special because it will be immediately followed by addresses by the Speakers of the Knesset and the Palestinian Legislative Council who are here in Strasbourg and will be joining us in the gallery shortly .
I shall welcome them once they are here and , as you know , they will be making their official speeches to the House at 11.30 a.m.
Madam President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by following you , Madam President , and the Speakers from the groups , in expressing the sympathy and sorrow of the Council , which condemns terrorism .
This is an issue which we addressed at our informal meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in Evian on Saturday and Sunday .
I in turn wish to assure the inhabitants of Malaga and Mr Carpena ' s widow of the European Union ' s intention to fight on their behalf against the scourge of terrorism , which represents a real threat to our democracies .
You quite rightly decided , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , to address the question of the situation in the Middle East .
This decision was all the more timely given that this region , which has been the scene of a number of particularly striking events over recent months , is approaching what may prove to be an historical watershed .
What we in fact face is a turning point for the people of the region : for the first time there is a real possibility of an end to half a century of conflict between Israel and Palestine ; but there is also a risk , if this hope is dashed , of a resurgence of violence .

The fact that the Speakers of the Knesset , Mr Avraham Burg and the Palestinian Legislative Council , Mr Ahmed Qurie , have agreed to come here together and address the European Parliament today at your invitation , Madam President , demonstrates the will for peace and dialogue which now drives both sides .
I also see their , to my knowledge , unprecedented visit as a gesture of recognition of the European Union ' s unceasing efforts to promote peace in the region , a recognition which is also accompanied by high expectations of Europe .
We must live up to these expectations and this gesture , which I see as a sign of trust and hope , deserves to be welcomed .
I shall now endeavour to explain our analysis of recent developments and of the current state in the region and future prospects of the peace process .
We have witnessed a number of extremely important incidents in the Middle East over recent months , such as the Camp David summit and Israel ' s withdrawal from southern Lebanon .
The death of the Syrian president , Hafez El Assad , under whom Syria became an important player in the region , occurred at the same time .
This rapid series of developments mainly concerns negotiations between Israel and Palestine .
The accession to power in Israel of Ehud Barak , who was elected on a platform of peace , and Yasser Arafat ' s unstinting determination to keep the dialogue alive allowed the peace negotiations to resume , thereby helping to resolve the stalemate which had dogged the peace process for several years .
The Sharm el-Sheikh agreement signed on 4 September 1999 marked the start of a new stage in the peace process and the end of a long period of deadlock , if not retreat .
It specified how the clauses of the Wye River agreement , which had as yet still not been applied , were to be implemented .
It set out a new timetable for concluding Permanent Status negotiations and granted a de facto extension to the one-year interim period by setting new deadlines , which are due to expire shortly , on 13 September 2000 .
As this deadline approaches , we are entitled to take initial , albeit provisional stock of the breakthrough in the peace process .
My first comment is that it has been possible to implement the main provisions of the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement , even if somewhat belatedly in relation to the original timetable .
The second redeployment was completed on 24 March 2000 , i.e. just over two months after the original deadline .
Several hundred prisoners have been released , although the overall outcome is still not completely satisfactory .
Other provisions have not been properly implemented .
For example , the third redeployment has not taken place .
Only one of the two corridors planned between the Gaza Strip and the West Bank has in fact been opened .
Land on the West Bank has continued to be colonised and expropriated , in violation of the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement , which prohibits any unilateral action designed to change the situation on the ground .
These difficulties , together with the depressed economic and social climate , have done much to foster tension in the territories which , on several occasions , has degenerated into violence .
As for Permanent Status negotiations , which were to follow an interim framework agreement , they stagnated long ago .
The parties had departed so far from their initial positions as to give the impression that it was still too early to hope for a compromise . The recent Camp David summit was held in response to this situation and , even though it did not achieve the hoped-for agreement , it did open new prospects on all aspects of Permanent Status and , as such , cannot be considered a failure .
On the contrary , it created new momentum .
I for one am certain that this outcome , which seemed unthinkable just a few months ago , would not have been possible without the personal commitment of President Clinton and Mrs Albright .
The progress achieved owes a great deal to their determination to bring the positions of both sides closer together and move the negotiations forward .
It is , of course , also - and above all - due to the political courage and sense of responsibility and commitment to peace demonstrated by the President of the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Prime Minister .
It was in fact the first time that they had debated all aspects of Permanent Status without any taboos and neither hesitated in advancing and relaxing the positions of principle which they had hitherto presented as non-negotiable .
As we know , the discussions were broken off and , under the diplomatic rule which dictates that nothing is agreed unless everything is agreed , the progress achieved cannot be considered definitive in the absence of any overall agreement .
Peace in the Middle East may be in sight , but that does not make it a fait accompli .
The progress achieved at Camp David needs to be consolidated and final concessions are necessary , especially on the question of Jerusalem , refugees and , above all , the Holy Places .
Camp David opened up new possibilities .
We have no doubt that a solution can be found which takes account of the legitimate expectations of each party and the rest of the world , including for the Holy Places .
We therefore have an historic opportunity and the current situation is still extremely auspicious .
The Israeli Prime Minister , who was elected on a platform of peace , wants an agreement , and an agreement is just as much in his interests as it is in the interests of President Arafat , who has stood by his decision to become involved in the Oslo process .
As for President Clinton , he is more resolved than ever to use all his influence and the influence of his country to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion before the end of his term of office , i.e. by the end of the year .
This rather exceptional window of opportunity could , however , close again quickly and this is something we must guard against .
The American elections are approaching , as is the new parliamentary term in Israel , and could prove to be a delicate issue .
As for the deadline of 13 September set in the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement for concluding Permanent Status negotiations , it cannot be postponed indefinitely unless the negotiations show some tangible sign of progress and the prospect of an early outcome .
This exceptional opportunity must not be wasted .
If the hope raised by Camp David is to be made reality , the parties must , first and foremost , continue to be involved and to demonstrate the same commitment and will as they have shown hitherto .
Their leaders must make difficult and courageous decisions and everything must therefore be done to encourage the parties to continue unwaveringly along the path which they have taken in a bid to conclude a global and final agreement .
The European Union is prepared in this context to do whatever it can to guarantee that the efforts being made will be successful .
There are several aspects to its role , which it intends to continue to play in an active and constructive manner : encouraging the parties , helping to find solutions , supporting the implementation of agreements .
The Union never misses an opportunity to reiterate the importance of international legitimacy , its concern to see the United Nations resolutions applied , the basic principles which inform the peace process and its determination to encourage the parties to continue with the peace process through close , regular political dialogue with all the parties in the region .
You yourself , Madam President , noted the extent to which European positions are listened to and anticipated , scrutinised , dissected and judged sometimes as too timid , sometimes , on the contrary , as too energetic or ill-timed but , on balance , always as constructive and balanced when you visited the Middle East at the beginning of the year .
You also noticed how just how strong expectations of Europe still were .
It was this concern to affirm the role of Europe and meet the parties ' expectations which prevailed when a special European Union envoy was appointed back in 1996 .
Ambassador Moratinos - whom I greet and who has held this post for the last four years - has managed to give Europe a profile in the Middle East by cultivating daily contacts with all the leaders in the region .
This role of supporting , facilitating and mediating , which complements that of the United States , is coupled with a contribution to the collective debate to find new ways forward , break certain taboos and propose compromises .
The 1999 Berlin Declaration and the 1980 Venice Declaration are an expression of the remarkably unified views of the European partners and act as reference texts which have , I am sure , opened the way to historic compromises between the Israelis and the Palestinians .
Finally , Europe has developed a cooperation policy with all the countries in the Middle East in a bid to create the right conditions for harmonious economic and social development and , at the same time , strengthen regional integration , which is crucial if peace is to gain a permanent foothold .
As a result , as you all know , Europe has underwritten nearly half the financial commitments to international aid to Palestine since 1993 .
It is , of course , and I should like to stress this point , prepared to help with the full implementation of the agreements that have been concluded when the time comes .
It is still , without doubt , too early to discuss what an agreement on the Permanent Status of the Palestinian territories might look like ; in any event , it will be solely up to the two sides to define this status through negotiation , which is the only admissible method .
However , the Camp David discussions give us an initial idea of what the outlines of a future agreement may be .
I should like to say in this context that , in our view , a Palestinian state will inevitably emerge , but it must be a viable , peaceful and democratic state .
It is the natural concomitant of the Palestinians ' indefeasible right to self-determination and I am convinced that it is also the best guarantee of security for Israel .
This right to a state and , hence , to proclaim statehood must not be subject to any veto .
However , as the European Union has already stated , it would obviously prefer a Palestinian state to emerge from a completed process of negotiation .
But , as you know , it does not stipulate that this is a condition .
Its position on this question is as stated in the Berlin declaration of March 1999 .
But all the efforts planned at the present stage , starting of course with the efforts made by both sides , must be geared towards concluding an agreement , an agreement which is , let me repeat , within arm ' s reach .
As you may have noticed , even the Palestinians are now questioning the advisability , the conditions and , most importantly , the timing of their proclamation of statehood in the light of current developments .
The exchange of views between the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Fifteen during the recent informal meeting in Evian , which I referred to earlier confirmed that the European approach in support of the peace process hitherto is the right one .
The urgent need for a decisive breakthrough on the Israeli-Palestinian front should not , however , distract us from the other aspects of the peace process , and it is this that forms a coherent global issue to which a universal , lasting settlement must be found .
An Israeli-Palestinian agreement is indispensable .
It is vital but it alone cannot guarantee peace and stability in the Middle East .
In addition , it is time , as the President of the French Republic recently stressed , for Syria and Israel to return to the negotiating table , given that the present status quo is in the interests of neither country .
Every effort should therefore be made , as quickly as possible , to broker an agreement between Israel and Syria and between Israel and Lebanon .
In this respect , there are prospects despite the contrasts in the present situation .
Israel ' s withdrawal from southern Lebanon on 24 May of this year put an end to 22 years of occupation and , as a result , ' re-dealt the cards ' , as it were .
This withdrawal , which was certified by the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 16 June , is a positive factor on more than one count .
First , it marks the implementation , the belated but full and unconditional implementation of Security Council Resolution 425 and therefore represents undeniable progress in this respect .
It went through under less inauspicious conditions than might have been feared and , more to the point , was not accompanied by the dreaded outbreaks of fresh violence .
We really must highlight the sense of responsibility which both sides demonstrated here .
So far , the difficulties have been overcome and it has been possible to implement the provisions of Resolution 425 .
The question of Israeli incursions along the blue line was settled after two months of wrangling .
On 27 July , the Security Council adopted Resolution 1310 extending the UNIFIL mandate for a further six months .
On 5 August , the Lebanese Government agreed for the force to be redeployed in the former occupied zone and , since then , UNIFIL has set up a number of permanent posts in the zone and taken up its position along the Israeli-Lebanese border .
At the same time , the Lebanese Government went ahead on 9 August and deployed a mixed force of 1 000 men , 500 soldiers and 500 policemen in the former occupied zone whose mission is to maintain public order within Lebanon itself , but not to engage in any kind of border surveillance , despite its responsibility to do so .
The redeployment of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Government ' s dispatch of a mixed security force to the south are , in our view , positive developments .
The situation along the border with Israel is , however , still volatile .
Incidents flare up along the blue line blue from time to time but have been relatively minor so far .
It is therefore in the interest of all the parties to avoid any incident which might provoke an escalation .
The Lebanese Government therefore needs to accept all its responsibilities here in order to create the conditions needed so that UNIFIL can exercise its mandate in full .
The situation in southern Lebanon can only be stabilised if this region , which has suffered enormously from the occupation and the war , is rehabilitated and reintegrated into Lebanon ' s economic and social fabric .
The European Union is of course more than ready to help reconstruct southern Lebanon as soon as conditions on the ground allow .
It intends to give very precise expression to its aid to Lebanon at the donors ' conference for the reconstruction of southern Lebanon which is scheduled for the autumn under our presidency .
Here too , the withdrawal of Israel from southern Lebanon and the gradual restoration of Lebanese sovereignty in the area are steps in the right direction .
In addition , the changes taking place in the region give cause , we hope , to anticipate a gradual change in relations between Syria and Lebanon ; here too the situation is no less volatile and we are convinced that only an Israeli-Syrian agreement , in application of Security Council Resolution 242 and the principle of land for peace , will allow fair and lasting peace to be established in the region .
We must admit that circumstances do not appear to augur well for the resumption of negotiations between Israel and Syria , at least not in the short term .
The positions of the two sides , which we are all aware of , are still irreconcilable at this stage , even if the gulf between them does not appear as wide as on numerous aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
In addition , the internal agendas of the Israeli and Syrian leaders appear for the time being to be monopolised by other political preoccupations , although the strategic choice of both sides is for peace , as was recently reaffirmed at the highest level .
During his investiture address on 7 July , President Bashar al-Assad indicated that he was anxious to conclude an agreement with Israel , reiterating that everything was negotiable except the line of 4 June 1967 .
Ehud Barak , for his part , called on Syria to conclude what he called a ' peace of the brave ' , an expression with which we concur .
There is therefore cause to hope that they will return to the negotiating table during the months to come .
My reading is that recent developments in the region are not linked solely to developments in the peace process , even if it does play a vital part .
Although still inadequate , regional integration is progressing slowly but surely .
It comes first and foremost within the wider context of the Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean process , which is an expression of the European Union ' s wish to develop a global strategy for this region which is so close to and so inextricably bound up with us .
A free trade area is being set up with the Union , to include all the countries of the Middle East and should - in fact we are sure that it will - help these economies to liberalise and modernise and integrate into the world economy .
Association agreements have already been signed with Jordan , Israel and the Palestinian Authority and an agreement should soon be signed with Egypt .
Negotiations are under way with both Lebanon and Syria .
There is no doubt that , in its political dimension , the Euro-Mediterranean process , with the draft charter for peace and stability , not only economic but also social and human stability , will help to construct the ' post-peace ' Middle East , the Middle East which we all wish for , because there is no alternative to the peace process which has now entered what we hope and believe to be a decisive stage .
Europe has followed the lead of the rest of the international community , especially the United States - and I shall end here Madam President - and intends to do everything to facilitate the decisions incumbent upon the main players , i.e. the Israelis and the Palestinians , who are answerable to their people and to posterity , and to foster the emergence of peace , a peace which we have waited so long for , wished for so hard and which is now within our grasp .
Madam President , I should like to begin by associating the Commission wholeheartedly with the moving remarks that you made yesterday about terrorism and about the courage of those who have been martyred for democracy and also with the remarks made this morning by Members of this House .
I should also like to say what an honour it is to discuss the question of a peace settlement in the Middle East in the presence of some of those who have it in their hands to bring about this historic development .
Naturally I very much agree with what the President-in-office has just said .
I do not intend to repeat all his arguments save , perhaps , to make one or two personal reflections on some of the comments the President-in-office has made and to add one or two other points , principally on economic issues .
The Camp David summit , whilst it did not manage to achieve a final settlement , did , as the President-in-office said , mark enormous progress .
I am sure we would all want to pay tribute to the skilful and persistent diplomacy of President Clinton and Secretary of State Madeline Albright .
Camp David helped to narrow the gaps between the parties to the dispute .
It helped to address and indeed to remove some long-standing taboos , for example , on the intensely difficult historical issues surrounding the status of Jerusalem .
Having travelled as far as that , it would obviously be a tragedy if the opportunity for peace that now exists more than ever before were to be wasted .
We stand ready , as the President-in-office has indicated , to help move things forward in any way we can and we are ready to do what we can to secure a settlement .
It is a great pleasure to see our own representative , who has done so much to ensure that the European Union 's presence in the region is felt .
With time moving relentlessly on , there has inevitably been a growing amount of talk about Palestinian statehood .
The Berlin European Council Declaration remains the position of the European Union .
President Arafat has received wise advice to postpone the planned declaration of an independent Palestinian state on 13 September .
I want to repeat what was said in the Berlin European Council Declaration last March , that the European Union is convinced that the creation of a democratic , viable and peaceful sovereign Palestinian state on the basis of existing agreements and through negotiations would be the best guarantee of Israel 's security and Israel 's acceptance as an equal partner in the region .
That is our position .
As far as Syria is concerned , everyone recognises that President Bashar al-Assad needs to consolidate his position .
However , here too the differences with Israel are narrow and we think they could be bridged .
We will continue to do all we can to achieve this .
We have a key role to play in Syria in terms of actively encouraging economic reform and modernisation in the interests of Syria and in the interests of regional stability .
I had an extremely good visit to Syria , albeit too brief , earlier in the year , at which we significantly moved forward our dialogue on economic issues and on the assistance we can provide .
We want to respond to further requests from Syria for assistance in the reform process .
We will also be prepared to support strengthening of the rule of law , human rights issues and political pluralism .
As far as South Lebanon is concerned , there remains an enormous amount for Europe to do , not least as part of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
The European Union will assist with the reconstruction of southern Lebanon as soon as the Commission conditions permit .
The Lebanese Government must maintain order in the south and in addition it must translate its generic aid requests into concrete and realistic proposals .
We will outline our strategies as soon as these conditions are met and , as many Members know , we have had an assessment mission in the area to see exactly what we can do on the ground as soon as possible .
It will not surprise the House to know that we intend to work in areas like mine clearance where we have so much experience , areas which are vital to the restoration of normal economic life and decent social conditions in South Lebanon .
At the same time as we are preparing for a possible role in implementing any peace agreement , we are also focusing on the regional scenario after a peace settlement .
When conflict is a thing of the past , it is important to recognise that a peace settlement would transform everybody 's prospects .
Sustained economic growth and economic stability are the keys to regional peace and consolidation of that peace in the years ahead .
People are more likely to support peace if they feel that their living conditions are improving .
However , at present , economic growth is stagnant , and unemployment is distressingly high , over 15 to 20 % overall .
Disparities are growing both within the region and , as was said in the debate that we had yesterday on MEDA , between the region and the European Union .
In addition , the regional labour market will come under strong pressure because of high population growth resulting from the welcome incorporation of more women into the labour market and the future integration of Palestinian refugees into the economies of the region .
Regional prosperity , therefore , depends on serious efforts to promote economic growth .
Private investment will play a central role in that , but public investment will continue to be important , especially regarding economic transition , including harmonisation , internal liberalisation and regional cooperation , stabilisation and regional infrastructures .
I referred to the interesting debate that we had yesterday evening on MEDA and our attempts to speed up and simplify the regulation so that we can deliver our assistance in the region much more rapidly .
It is important to remember what the scale of that assistance is .
The European Union as a whole , the Commission , Member States , and the EIB , are responsible for about 50 % of all the economic assistance in the region .
The Commission and the EIB are responsible for about half of that 50 % , so we are responsible for about 25 % .
Over the last few years our assistance in the region has been averaging about EUR 800 million , that is from the Commission and the EIB , about EUR 450 million from the Commission and the rest from the EIB .
That is a substantial investment in the future prosperity and well-being of the region , but I am still seeking to ensure that the resources available are spent more effectively and more rapidly .
I said yesterday that the Commission would be holding discussions this week , and I hope it is not presuming on its collective wisdom to say that we will be able to publish our proposals later this week .
We are discussing a Commission communication on the revitalisation of the Barcelona process , which everybody recognises to be extremely important .
In that document we will be stressing the vital significance of greater regional cooperation and more trade and cooperation between the countries to the south and not just between Europe and the countries of the South .
I hope that the document and its implementation will help to consolidate political developments in the region .
I repeat : this is clearly a historic opportunity to secure a peace that would bring prosperity as well as stability to our neighbours to the south .
We stand ready to help them in every way we can , politically and economically .
We stand ready to help them both to achieve peace and to build on the foundations that a peace settlement would lay .
Madam President , since the creation of the State of Israel , we have surely never been so close to a lasting and stable peace agreement in the Middle East .
The differences between the parties , however , have probably never been so profound .
The withdrawal of the Israeli troops from southern Lebanon , the will demonstrated by the new Syrian President and the clear progress made at Camp David - as has been mentioned here this morning - seem to offer us a panorama in which peace is actually within reach .
However , there are still potential pitfalls , which remind us that , we are as close to taking advantage of this historic opportunity as we are to the black storm clouds that will descend upon the region should the negotiations fail .
What we can we in the European Union do ?
Of course we offer our services by means of the European Union ' s special envoy , Ambassador Moratinos , whom I welcome .
We undoubtedly offer a guarantee in terms of the future economic development of the region , which would no doubt result from the peace agreement , through our cooperation and investment , as Commissioner Patten has correctly reminded us .
We encourage the opposing parties to persist courageously with the negotiations , ignoring the most pessimistic , sometimes threatening , voices , which sometimes emerge from their respective countries .
We are grateful for the summary of the facts , the information communicated to us this morning by the Council and the Commission , and their good will .
However , we should ask ourselves whether this is worthy of the responsibility and aspirations of the European Union on an international level .
To speak with one voice , to aspire to a leading role not only economically but also , surely , politically , demands more of us .
No group is offering greater support than the European People ' s Party to the governments promoting the peace process , especially to the United States .
No group is forcing itself to act with greater prudence than we are at this critical moment .
From this point of view we propose that next year , when we celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Conference which gave rise to this peace process , the European Union should once again bring together , in a repeat of the Madrid meeting , the leaders who participated in that Conference .
Meanwhile , we should reaffirm the European Union ' s full commitment to the peace process and our willingness to honour our historic , economic and also political responsibilities in the region .
Madam President , first of all , I would like , on behalf of my group , to welcome the President of the Knesset , Avraham Burg , and the President of the Palestinian National Council , Mr Abu Ala , who are present in the gallery , and whose interventions we will listen to with great attention .

The presence of these two distinguished persons indicates that the peace process is not purely a process taking place between governments .
It is a process taking place between peoples and between parliaments , which democratically represent those peoples .
I would ask the two Presidents to deliver a message to their people : they have come here and they have seen how the representatives of peoples who have been age-old enemies and who have waged war for centuries , can work together and in peace , and can share values .
I believe that this is the fundamental message we can offer you .
I would also like to point out that , as well as the effort being made in terms of negotiations between the governments , which we must support , my political family , the Socialist International , is also trying to support and promote this process because both the Israeli and Palestinian leaders belong to our family and we feel profoundly committed to them .
We agree with the exhaustive analysis of the situation made by the President of the Council and I would simply like to repeat the message , to our friends from the Middle East , that we are committed to the peace process and to its development since the Sharm-el-Sheikh agreements , which led to the last major debate in the European Parliament .
We are approaching a deadline .
We Europeans understand the importance of deadlines and the need to pull out all the stops when deadlines approach , but we believe that the important thing at the moment is for both parties to persevere .
We welcome the efforts of President Clinton and Secretary of State Albright .
We consider ourselves to be committed to this process , and we welcome the presence here today of that tireless pilgrim of peace , Ambassador Moratinos .
Above all , I believe that we should point out the importance of what is at stake at the moment because , until now , there had been no real negotiation of the situation of the Palestinian refugees since 1948 , the continuation of the Israeli settlements and the establishment of definitive borders .
Those are the very important and thorny issues which must be dealt with .
Another very important issue is the status of Jerusalem , which requires a compromise .
It is not only a political problem . It is a cultural , historical and religious problem .
Therefore , there is no room for a solution based on exclusive claims .
As some experts have said , on religious issues there are no half measures , but , if we are talking about the religions of the Book , which preach the love of God and our fellow man , it must be possible to find a solution between people .
Where Holy Places are concerned , there is no room for solutions based solely on sovereign rights and it is very important to take proper account of the various international formulae : I believe that the mediation of certain Arab countries , who are closely involved , may be of help .
Lastly , Madam President , I believe that , from the point of view of European Union action , we must try to strengthen the Euro-Mediterranean process , bring Syria out of its isolation , strengthen the process in the whole of the region and , above all , send a message to the Middle East which indicates that the European Union , as a union of age-old enemies , wishes to participate fully in the creation of a shared peaceful future in the Middle East .
Madam President , for lack of time , I shall merely focus on the relations between Israel and the Palestinians .
We all very much regret that the Camp David negotiations came to nothing .
This was most probably down to the fact that the time was not quite ripe for an agreement , as a result of which the gap between both parties could not be narrowed or could not be narrowed sufficiently at any rate .
We live in the hope , however , that a new foundation will be laid after a period of contemplation and reflection , so that we can pick up the peace process once again and herald a new era .
Indeed , we now have to ensure that the negotiations are resumed as quickly as possible .
Needless to say , the international community needs to lend a helping hand , together with the Arab States and the Muslim community .
As far as the European Union is concerned , we hope that it will speak with one voice and assume a more pro-active role - and I particularly refer to a more pro-active role in the political field - and will thus contribute to the peace process .
The EU owes this much to both parties and to the international community .
It is evident that , meanwhile , unilateral action from either side is to be discouraged , as this could well harm future negotiations .
We cannot tolerate violence in any form .
The negotiations must be resumed by means of an open , direct and genuine dialogue , and Europe has a major part to play in this !
Madam President , I have been present in Jerusalem as a provisional member of Parliament ' s delegation for relations with Israel .
We met reasonable representatives of the Israeli Government but also , among the members of the Knesset , a dismaying number of implacable fanatics who maintain that Israel has all the rights and the Palestinians none at all .
It was therefore good that the Council ' s representatives made it clear that the EU backs all current UN decisions .
What , then , do these decisions imply ?
Well , they say that there should be Jewish and Palestinian States in the area , that the whole of Jerusalem should be an international area , that all Palestinian refugees should be allowed to return home and that Israel should leave those areas which it has occupied .
It may therefore be noted that Israel is right in one respect , namely that there is to be a Jewish State .
That is what no-one now questions but , when it comes to all the important questions in the peace negotiations - that is to say , Jerusalem , the refugees and territorial considerations - the Palestinians in fact have international law on their side .
At the same time , everyone appreciates that the UN decisions cannot directly be implemented by peaceful means .
Israel is opposed to this .
The Palestinians are prepared to compromise .
They are not demanding west Jerusalem .
They appreciate that Israel cannot receive between five and six million Palestinian refugees .
The Palestinians are prepared to make concessions over territory .
They are making concessions , which is splendid and necessary , but the Palestinians and Arafat cannot make large concessions of any kind without a revolt in their own ranks .
It is therefore important that the EU should stick by the Berlin decision to recognise a Palestinian State without conditions as soon as the Palestinians see fit to declare such a State , to which they are entitled .
Israel has the military power and US backing .
The Palestinians do in fact have international law on their side .
Let them also have the European Union ' s full support , in the same way and to the same degree that the United States supports Israel .
Let the EU act as a sponsor for the Palestinian State , that is to say the democratic Palestinian State .
This would also raise the EU ' s standing in the world .
Madam President , my group asked for a major debate on the situation in the Middle East to be included in this part-session .
It also suggested that high-ranking Israeli and Palestinian leaders be invited jointly to the European Parliament .
We are therefore delighted by the initiatives taken in this direction and warmly welcome the speakers of the two assemblies who have honoured us with their presence .
At a time which everyone senses is decisive , what useful message can we Europeans send out to the peace process today ?
I tend to agree with what the President-in-Office said on the subject .
The first message , to my mind , concerns the issue around which the entire process turns , i.e. the Palestinian State .
I think the time is right to clearly reiterate the terms of the unequivocal declaration adopted by the Berlin European Council in March 1999 , in which the Fifteen stated that they were ready to recognise a Palestinian State .
Did Europe ' s recognition of this inalienable right lead the Palestinians to proclaim statehood without further ado ?
On the contrary .
It fostered the sovereign and responsible decision on the part of the Palestinian leadership to postpone the deadline and I am convinced that it is prepared to postpone it by a few more weeks to give negotiation a chance if it feels , between now and 13 September , that we are on the brink of an overall peace agreement .
So let the European Union clearly reaffirm the position which it took in Berlin and encourage the Palestinians to make precisely this gesture .
In the same spirit , Europe ' s second message , in my view , should consist of a reminder of the basic principles from which negotiations can and should develop , i.e. the relevant resolutions of the United Nations , especially those relating to the withdrawal of Israel from all the occupied territories , including East Jerusalem , or the right of refugees to return or receive compensation .
This sort of reminder would not in any way close the door to the compromises needed .
On the contrary , it would make the sovereign Palestinians responsible for seeking original , mutually acceptable legal formulae , together with the sovereign Israeli negotiators , on the basis of the principles recognised by the entire international community .
I think that Europe ' s third message should contain a guarantee that the future global agreement will be implemented to the end , unlike - alas - all the partial agreements which have succeeded each other since Oslo .
The United States alone cannot provide this guarantee .
No one today knows the intentions of the future leaders of the Israelis and the Palestinians .
The European Union is therefore a unique guarantor , alongside the United States and Egypt , as the representative of the Arab world , that the commitments made will be honoured faithfully and to the letter .
These are the three wishes of my group with the hope that , as a result , Yerushalaim , which means in Hebrew : peace will appear .
Madam President , thank you very much indeed for arranging this very important debate at this particular time .
I also wish to warmly welcome to our Parliament the Speaker of the Knesset , Mr Avraham Burg , and the President of the Palestinian Legislative Council , Mr Ahmed Qurie .
Like many people , I too , Madam President , was disappointed that the recent Middle East peace talks in Camp David did not culminate in a peace settlement between the Palestinians and the Israeli Government .
However , I do not believe that these peace talks were a complete failure either .
We should fully recognise that the Palestinians and the Israeli Government are now negotiating on bottom line issues , including the status of Jerusalem , the borders of the Palestinian State , the fate of Jewish settlements and the right of return of Palestinian refugees .
I very much hope that the Middle East will resume peace talks in the near future .
I appeal to the key parties involved to strive in good faith to lay down a negotiated settlement based on existing agreements .
Permanent status negotiations resumed in September 1999 .
It was always going to take time to tease through what were very difficult , delicate and sensitive political matters .
EU Heads of State have affirmed on a number of occasions that the security of the Israeli and Palestinian people both collectively and individually must always be protected .
I support the principle of exchanging land for peace and the continuing and unqualified Palestinian right to self-determination .
I believe that the best way to address this latter issue is through negotiation .
I am calling on the Israeli Government and the Palestinian leadership to take the necessary steps to re-establish mutual confidence , accept the need to make concessions and focus on the overriding goal of achieving lasting peace and stability in the region .
The peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians are not the only matter up for discussion within the Middle East .
It is important that negotiations between Israel and Syria should resume quickly and that the Lebanese track of the Middle East peace process should also be addressed .
In this latter regard , I welcome the fact that since the Israeli forces left southern Lebanon , the region has been very peaceful .
There has been peaceful progress on the Lebanese-Israeli border since the Lebanese Government gained authority within the region , and we all must certainly welcome the fact that southern Lebanon is now at peace .
In the overall context , securing peace in the Middle East is always going to take time .
The first step in the current peace process was taken when Israel and Egypt concluded the Camp David peace treaty in 1979 .
It took another twelve years before a comprehensive peace process got under way with the Madrid conference , which enshrined the land for peace principle .
We can all take solace from the fact that the key protagonists in this difficult political equation are now addressing the most vexed and thorny bottom line issues that have to be resolved if a permanent peace agreement is to be put in place in the Middle East .
Madam President , I have very mixed feelings about the peace talks that have been broken down at Camp David .
In any case , the extreme time pressure which the participants were under did not serve any immediate purpose .
In fact , I wonder what use this " diplomatic pressure cooker " approach has in terms of the final stage of the peace process in the Middle East ?
It is a tough peace process that needs to provide a lasting solution to the lengthy and complex conflict between the Israelis and Palestinians and between the Israelis and Arabs respectively .
Public opinions on the Israeli and Palestinian sides - invisible yet very tangible - were also very much a player within Camp David .
It is exactly because of this key factor on the home front that third parties , whether they are referred to as peace brokers , such as President Clinton , or very committed subsidiary parties to the peace process , such as the European Union , need to guard against exercising excessive pressure in the shape of a punishing time schedule .
Is there not a task here for the EU , namely to urge all parties involved to keep the so-called " windows of opportunity " open for as long as possible ?
However , my mixed feelings about the failure of Camp David are mainly generated by the uncompromising attitude adopted by the President of the Palestinian Authority , Mr Yasser Arafat , and the enthusiastic response he received to this at home .
The home front hailed him in the Gaza Strip as the ' Palestinian Saladin ' , complete with flags and banners .
In popular speech , Arafat has inherited this dubious Arab title of honour from Saddam Hussein .
It is exactly this Palestinian homage after Camp David 2000 which shocked Amos Oz , a recognised Israeli champion of peace and noted author .
He put his bleak state of mind into words this summer in a probing newspaper article . " I am sitting in my front room in front of the television and am watching the tremendous reception which Yasser Arafat is being given in Gaza just because he said ' no ' to peace with Israel .
I watch in silence and amazement and I am reminded that the real Saladin made a solemn pledge to the Arabs never to make a pact with non-believers .
He would kill them en masse and throw them into the sea .
I can see Arafat in his grey-green military outfit .
An Arafat , dressed as Che Guevara and greeted as a Saladin : it breaks my heart " .
The author moved on to a crucial topic within the Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiation : " the right to return " .
Earlier this week , Arafat reiterated this Palestinian political claim in the context of the meeting of the Arab League in Cairo : " We will not accept an agreement without obtaining all the rights we are entitled to pursuant to international resolutions " .
So this includes UN Resolution 194 which stipulates the right to return on the part of Palestinian refugees .
Madam President , I am also keen to give you Amos Oz ' view of this increasingly poignant historical burden .
In his opinion , this " right to return " is nothing more than an " Arab euphemism " for the liquidation of Israel .
In the same breath , Oz adds that he is more than happy to grant the Palestinians the " right to their free and independent Palestine " but that this should not be at the expense of the existence of the Jewish State .
This is a view which will hopefully give Western politicians food for thought .
In the foregoing , my aim was certainly not to trivialise the suffering of the Palestinian people .
I wish them a life in peace and freedom with all my heart .
However , this peace and freedom cannot be brought about if it is at the expense of other peoples ' safety .
Madam President , as a representative of a Christian political party , I am not an unquestioning defender of Israel ' s political interests .
This is a task which Israel ' s leaders and citizens are more than capable of handling themselves .
In accordance with the Bible , God ' s word , I consider the Jews as His chosen people , upon which lies the divine duty to be a " beacon for all peoples " .
Only in religious compliance with this requirement is a true Israeli-Palestinian settlement possible , on the basis of justice from Above .
Madam President , Europe has a special historical responsibility for the peace process in the Middle East .
This means proceeding with great sensitivity and not taking a schoolmasterly line or apportioning blame to one side alone .
The fact that the Foreign Minister himself responded to the last peace negotiations by stepping down , serves as a reminder to us that above all in Israel , which is the stable democracy in the region , every step taken by the politicians must have the backing of the majority of the Israeli people .
Nevertheless , we would do well not to forget that for all the fine words uttered , the crucial negotiations for peace in the Middle East take place in the USA and not in Europe .
Perhaps those EU politicians whose brief it is , have so far been unable to find the right way to act as genuinely neutral and productive mediators in this conflict .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , this is not the first time that the House has concluded that the situation in the Middle East is critical .
It is critical both for the Middle East itself and for the European Union because , apart from all the important issues which the peace process encompasses , it represents a new challenge for the common European foreign policy .
In other words , the European Union must play a more active , more systematic and more intensive role in projects in the region and , of course , in the peace process .
There are precedents for this .
Let us not forget that the highly important UN Resolution 242 was devised mainly by Europe .
So , to pick up on something very important which Mr Patten said , peace is not enough , we also need to monitor what happens , to see what the scenario is once an agreement has been reached , I think that the European Union should review its presence and involvement in the region .
Thus , as well as the special envoy , I think that the time has come for the European Union to set up a task force consisting of representatives from the Commission , the Council and , yes why not , the European Parliament - after all we have two eminent parliamentary representatives from countries in the region here today - to work out detailed proposals and positions on specific issues being addressed during the current peace process and on any issues which we need to bear in mind in the period following the agreement .
Mr President , I too would like to welcome the Speaker of the Knesset , Mr Burg , and the Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council , Mr Abu Ala .
I feel that this debate , from the Council statement to the speeches made by Mr Moscovici and Commissioner Patten and the majority of the other speeches , has shown that Europe is of one mind regarding this extremely sensitive period following Camp David .
I am sure that we all see that phase , or in any case a change in the situation as very important , and I am sure that the situation has not been compromised , although we realise that , if change does not come about , there is currently a serious risk on both sides that the extremist tendencies present in the two camps may prevail .
My opinion is that if we analyse the situation in the region thoroughly - and we have , indeed , talked about the withdrawal of Israel from the Lebanon , the situation in southern Lebanon and developments in Syria - we find that we are in agreement on this matter as well : I feel that this debate is evidence of the convergence of our views - of the agreement of Parliament , the Commission and the Council on the matter - and that Europe has already made a contribution .
The quality of its performance is debatable , but Ambassador Moratinos ' role in the region and the Council resolutions have certainly been effective .
I have to give credit to Commissioner Patten , for his presence in the area and also in Syria - we were able to go to Syria when his mission was finished - had a lasting influence on the development of the situation in Syria .
We can draw encouragement from all this and from the continuing work of the Clinton government on this initiative .
Nevertheless , I do feel that , today , without professing to be telling anybody what to do and in respect for the two interlocutors and their positions , we should be asking ourselves what we can contribute .
I would like to end by suggesting that we could use regional cooperation as a solution to make a European contribution right now before the peace process comes to an end .
Mr President , will the United Nations Millennium Summit which took place this week be the last chance summit ?
I see it rather as yet one more chance for peace in the Middle East .
Six weeks after talks broke down at Camp David , Bill Clinton is due to meet Ehud Barak and Yasser Arafat in New York tomorrow , after a month of intensive , albeit less media-attracting negotiation .
So hope of saving the peace process is not lost , even if it means setting aside the original timetable and , hence , avoiding at all costs any unilateral provocation which would ruin months of effort .
Everyone has his or her own interpretation of the outcome of Camp David and of the responsibilities incumbent upon either side .
Discussions have certainly never progressed this far before .
The gulf is still wide , although certain historical taboos have been broken .
But that is not enough .
We must now accept in our hearts what our heads have known and been dictating for a long time .
This is the price for peace .
To rely on the strength of symbols , on either side , is to hold on to a myth .
As for Europe , which intends to support the process , not to take sides , it hopes to be more , much more , than the region ' s banker .
It is our historical and moral duty as well as our desire to become a full political partner very quickly , tomorrow if possible , and the simultaneous presence here of Avraham Burg , the Speaker of the Knesset , and Ahmed Qurie , the Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council , both of whom I welcome , cannot but augur well in this respect .

Mr President , I arrived back yesterday from Palestine and Israel , where over a thousand Italians - representatives of district , provincial and regional councils - have been spending a week building peace bridges between Palestinians and Israelis and setting up projects for cooperation with the Palestinian people .
Jerusalem is at the centre of the conflict , and it is one of the key factors in the peace process .
For the Palestinians it is a town to be shared with East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State and West Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Israel .
For the Israelis , before Camp David , no part of Jerusalem could be touched .
Now the taboo has been broken .
Yet the Israeli negotiators are still extremely uncompromising , for the problem is not that the Palestinians do not want to make concessions but that they have the right to the return of the territories occupied in 1967 which is enshrined in the UN resolutions .
Since 1993 , Jerusalem has been a closed city for the Palestinians .
As Commissioner Patten said , the Israeli Government has many times failed in its obligations following the Oslo negotiations : they have not adhered to the timetable laid down in the agreements for the withdrawal of troops from the occupied territories .
For the Palestinians , the divided territories are a nightmare .
There is no free movement and over a thousand prisoners arrested before 1993 have been held in prison as if they were hostages .
Their imprisonment is a constant threat to the peace process .
However , a genuine tragedy for the peace process and the future of the Palestinian State is the continued increase in Israeli settlements : under the Barak Government , over 41 000 settlers moved into in the occupied territories .
And I , together with the thousand Italians , saw these settlements expanding all over the place .
This is a genuine crime against peace , but also against the environment and nature : just one example is the mountain of Jellab Edumin , a green hill outside Jerusalem which has been destroyed by bulldozers .
Another key factor are the refugees : they are not merchandise but human beings who want to realise their right or their dream to live in their own land or see it once again .
It is makes no sense for them not to be able to go back : Palestinians , who were born there , are not even allowed to visit it .
Peace is necessary .
It is on everyone 's lips , but peace can only be achieved if each person is allowed to exercise his right of citizenship in his own free State .
As Europeans , we must make every possible endeavour - over and above the economic efforts which we are already making , we must increase our political role - to ensure that the law prevails and that the Palestinians are able to live in their democratic State , which we must recognise as we recognise the Israeli State , so that Jerusalem becomes an open city , a city of the world , the capital city of two peoples and two States .
I fully endorse the statements by the President-in-Office and Commissioner Patten .
I cannot understand how they have ignored in their contribution the conditions in which the people of Iraq now find themselves .
The reasons for this are twofold : the continued dictatorship of Saddam Hussein and his oppression of Iraq 's citizens and the continued imposition of sanctions of the most Draconian kind .
The war has always been about controlling oil and in my view little or nothing to do with Kuwait .
As for weapons of mass destruction , I agree that somebody like Saddam Hussein should not have control of them , but there are others in the region who should not either .
Look around the Middle East , and indeed the rest of the world , and what confronts us is an array of weapons of mass destruction , mostly supplied by the developed world , including the European Union .
The market in weapons is now so competitive that some of the most horrific despots are getting bargain basement deals for weapons of mass destruction .
It is a lesson to the Middle East that it is unwise to nationalise the oil industry .
It must be asked where did Saddam Hussein get the weapons from before the Gulf War and where is he supposed to be getting them from now ?
I suggest that we should consider appointing a political envoy from the European Union to Iraq to see if we can broker some sort of peace , between the United Nations and Iraq , because the sanctions are genocidal in their effect .
Mr Moscovici , Commissioner Patten , I also would like to be associated with the words of welcome to our honoured guests , Mr Ahmed Qurie and Mr Avraham Burg .
It is understandable that Palestinians feel that right would have been on their side in formerly declaring an independent Palestinian state on 13 September .
They believe that the Oslo negotiations and the various Camp David discussions would have conferred legitimacy on such a step .
However , it has to be recognised that even if negotiations had progressed so far that the declaration of statehood was non-controversial , the future of Jerusalem was always going to re-ignite controversy once again .
Jerusalem is the key issue and it needs to be looked at in a new light .
It is a unique problem which requires a unique response .
Jerusalem should not be regarded as an Arab city or a Jewish city , a Christian city or a Muslim city .
Progress will only be made if it is agreed that it is a truly international city to which all traditions have a valid claim .
The governance of this historic city must be removed from any nationalistic or sectarian , in the best sense of that word , spirit and this governance must provide for equal access and rule for all .
Just as we were delighted to remove Berlin walls in Europe , we do not want to see similar walls erected in Jerusalem .
People from the furthest ends of the Earth have an affinity with Jerusalem and this must be recognised and honoured and not overlooked in the current negotiations .
With these few words , I would like to wish the discussions , if they do take place , all success and genuinely hope that they lay the basis for permanent peace in the Middle East .
Mr President , as far as the Middle East and the Israeli-Palestinian peace process is concerned , I have always counted myself among those in the House who say that it is up to the people of the region and their leaders to define the terms of their peaceful coexistence , just as it is up to them to make the efforts and sacrifices needed on both sides in order to do so .
As a European , I set great store by the Euro-Mediterranean balance and if , like many others , I have somewhat regretted the European Union ' s lack of political clout in this process , I have likewise always refused to sit here in Parliament and play at being teacher , to coin a phrase .
Today , just a few days away from a peace agreement or a major crisis which could erupt in dramatic scenes of violence , we must give peace every chance to succeed by helping those on both sides who are taking huge collective and individual risks to bring about peace .
That is why I am in total agreement with the position stated by Pierre Moscovici and what I would say today is that we shall not help to bring about peace by taking sides in the debate and in the difficult negotiations under way .
As I see it , therefore , in the short time left to us , our message to the Israelis and Palestinians should be simple and straightforward .
It can be summarised in three points : we want a peace agreement in the Middle East , we shall support and guarantee a peace agreement once it has been signed and we shall use every possible means , including but not only financial means , to help ensure that it is implemented .
To conclude , we know full well that peace is always a difficult process .
Europe , torn apart over the centuries , knows that better than most .
Overcoming divisions and eradicating terrorism is easier to talk about than to achieve as we know only too well from the Balkans , the division of Nicosia and the bombs in the Basque country .
And yet , peace is the only way forward , as the Israeli-Palestinian negotiators are well aware .
So all we can say is , good luck , agree to peace and we shall be at your side , as we are now .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Speaker of the Knesset - whose acquaintance I made during a visit to Israel a very short while ago - and the representatives of the Palestinian Legislative Council .
We all deeply regret the partial failure of the Camp David discussions , although we would like to thank President Clinton and Mrs Albright as well , who put so much work and brainpower into the talks .
However , we feel - and here we agree with the report - that this peace agreement which is being drawn up has increased the possibilities and that there is a way forward .
We feel that everything that can be possibly be done now and in the future , including in terms of equal opportunities , must be done and followed up : the Palestinian people has the right to self-determination , without prejudice to the rights of the State of Israel .
There is one more point which deserves our attention , Mr President , which concerns the city of Jerusalem , which is one of the most sensitive elements in the issue .
We must endeavour to preserve the religious , cultural and universal character of this holy city , and it must certainly not become the subject of haggling or the property of any one side .
It has been proposed that it become the capital of both States .
That would be ideal .
I would also like to touch on a personal , political consideration . Europe must make an additional effort , it must take further steps to gain and perform a political as well as an economic role .
We cannot limit our concern to economic issues or matters of water , the sovereignty of Lake Tiberias and so on and so forth .
We must not forget our political responsibility to history : the European Union has a responsibility as well as the Heads of the States of Israel and Palestine .
Europe must become a political body and negotiate to achieve peace in this case as well , doing everything in its power to ensure that lasting peace is established in the Mediterranean .
Mr President , I would like to reinforce Mrs Sbarbati 's warning : right now we need more boldness .
The European institutions need to be more courageous .
Together with the United States , the European Union now has the difficult and vital task of preventing either party from reverting to its past position and of assessing the possibility of finding a solution to the problems of the Palestinians and the Israelis .
With a view to this , I support Mr Galeote 's proposal to hold a conference along the same lines as the Madrid Conference .
I will illustrate the importance of this with a historical reference : in the 1980 Venice Declaration , proposed by Ministers Genscher and Colombo , the Community first of all established the need for a solution to be found to the Palestinian question through negotiations .
At that time , Arafat was still regarded as a terrorist , he was barred from obtaining a visa to go to the United Nations headquarters in America and there was no general consensus regarding the diplomatic strategies to be adopted .
Following his visit to Rome in 1982 for the Conference of the Interparliamentary Union , things at last started to move and not only did Arafat obtain his visa but - following the preparatory work carried out in Oslo - the United States started to play an active part in the Palestinian question .
Today , there is no question about the fact that the United States ' activity is vital , but I do feel that the European Union also has a part to play and that it must not forget the past , not in order to claim any right to rule , but to regain its essential role which , as Minister Moscovici pointed out , complements the activities of the United States in the search for a solution to the matter , a solution which is still a long way off .
I would like to end with a reference to what is known as the International Statute of Jerusalem .
By an International Statute I do not mean that the city would have an international administration , but merely that , as an international community , we must direct this initiative so that the statutory instrument - irrespective of who has territorial sovereignty over Jerusalem - commits all parties to a system of international control , so that every believer - whether Christian , Jew or Muslim - is , at last , guaranteed access to the holy sites .
Mr President , Arabs and Palestinians have committed terrible historical errors and injustices , but they have also paid the price for them .
For some time now , it is not the Palestinians who have been the most intransigence in the negotiations . Indeed , they have even given ground in the supposedly neutral area of basic concepts .
Given the cultural and religious importance of Jerusalem for the Islamic world , I believe that the Palestinian renunciation of all rights over that city - East Jerusalem - could lead not only to a backlash from broad sections of the Palestinian population against their own leaders , but also an international Muslim mobilisation against them .
Media and political circles are warning that the Palestinians could waste the historic opportunity of being able to negotiate with a Prime Minister such as Ehud Barak , who has dared to put the issue of Jerusalem on the table openly .
Nevertheless , it is also the case , in my opinion , that Barak and the right-thinking political and social sectors in Israel could lose the excellent opportunity to negotiate with a leader such as President Arafat if they do not fulfil the minimum necessary requirements .
In my view it is now necessary to adopt a formula which allows for this right thinking and I believe that the European Union is in a good position to contribute to this .
Mr President , I should like to thank the various speakers for their interventions and I should also like to welcome Avraham Burg and Ahmed Qurie , whom I have already had occasion to meet in Israel and Palestine .
You have all naturally focused in your interventions on the peace process and the negotiations , which are without doubt the key to progress in this region of the Middle East .
Allow me to repeat our point of view : Camp David created new momentum which clearly broke down the barriers .
We are , in fact , facing an historic watershed , an unprecedented opportunity , because the present climate , this combination of circumstances , is exceptional .
Each of the parties - and the American mediator , who is playing his part to the full - has an interest in reaching an agreement and is determined , I have no doubt , to do everything to bring one about .
And so , I repeat , we have an historic opportunity to put an end to this conflict which has lasted so very long .
Having said which , every historic opportunity has its historic risk .
Clearly , nothing is a foregone conclusion and additional efforts , imagination and courage are still vital .
Equally clearly , time is running out .
President Mubarak was in Paris at the end of last week and I think he used an excellent phrase which sums up the situation perfectly : ' peace is now or never ' .
What role , therefore , can the European Union play ?
What does this role involve ?
Several speakers welcomed the role of the European Union ; at the same time , I rather had the impression from their interventions that they regretted that it was not a more active role , which is perfectly logical .
We can always wish for a more active Europe .
I too wish for a more active Europe .
The French Presidency has vowed to have a highly active Europe .
It is in keeping with our historical approach and the way in which we intend to conduct the mission incumbent upon us today .
At the same time , however , you cannot rewrite history . Nor can you act against the wishes of the players themselves .
In this respect , I note that it is the two sides themselves who have come to see us , who are requesting our help , our advice , our intervention and our assistance , and not just and not predominantly financial assistance .
Obviously they feel that we are playing a useful part although I am also aware of the extent to which they are sometimes able to show us the limits of our role .
So find ourselves between these two sides .
What does this role involve ?
It is exercised at three levels , as I have said .
The European Union intervenes in support of the negotiations .
It is in contact with both sides , through our intermediary , Mr Moratinos .
It constantly encourages negotiation .
It reiterates the principles of international law , which all of us , especially we Europeans , live by .
Secondly , the European Union makes a contribution to the debate on issues connected with the negotiations .
But here too , and this brings me back to the same point , both sides must want and ask for our contribution and sometimes we witness the sort of role-playing here with which we are all familiar .
And thirdly , we help to implement the agreements that have been concluded , as and when this occurs .
I think that we should already start to think about the Middle East which will emerge once there is peace , peace which we hope for and believe possible for tomorrow .
Whether or not this peace will last will also depend on how we go about strengthening ties between the countries in the region and developing their ties with us .
What can the European Union do in this context ?
There is all the action which Commissioner Patten summarised .
There is also the Barcelona process , which offers us a particularly suitable framework , provided that we make full use of its potential .
It is this Barcelona process - and this brings me to the end of what I have to say - which the presidency wishes to leave its mark on and to start on at the forthcoming Barcelona IV meeting .
I heard a call for a summit meeting here .
What we are planning at the moment is a ministerial-level meeting .
We sincerely hope , however , that developments in the peace process will make it possible to hold a meeting not just at ministerial level , but also at Head of State and Government level in order to set the seal , as it were , on the emergence of a new era in the Middle East .
This is where the presidency , with the Commission and , I am sure , with Parliament ' s support , will be concentrating its efforts in the weeks and months to come .
That concludes the debate .
EU external action priorities
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the European Union 's external action priorities .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union , as our debate has just demonstrated , is perfectly qualified to take on the role of a full , influential and respected actor on the international political stage .
Our democratic values , our common will to foster peace and security in the world and our history guide us towards such a role .
The Community ' s economic clout , its primary role in promoting development , and its privileged links with numerous countries or groups of countries also allow us to take on such a role .
Finally , the instability of a fast-changing world , sometimes at the Union ' s very door , actively encourages us to take on such a role .
That is why the French Presidency of the Council intends to continue the efforts made over recent years and help to promote the Union ' s international profile .
I should like to explain briefly the four main objectives which we have set ourselves .
First , needless to say , to press ahead with the process of enlargement , the main task facing us in coming years ; secondly , to promote the development of a European security and defence policy , which should help to put the European Union firmly on the international map .
We also want to promote the development of strategic partnerships with our neighbours and with the main regional blocs . This should allow the European Union to help create a multipolar world , which is one of the fundamental long-term factors to the stability of international relations .
Our fourth and final objective is to improve the efficiency of EU instruments on the basis of the debate held by the ministers of foreign affairs at the informal meeting in Evian on 2 and 3 September , i.e. last Saturday and Sunday , at the Commission ' s proposal and in the presence of Mr Patten .
The French Presidency ' s first objective is to give new momentum to the accession negotiations .
The prospect of enlargement is the basic question which we Europeans have to answer , the huge challenge which faces us over coming years .
That is why the French Presidency is determined to ensure that the IGC is a success and conclude ' a nice treaty in Nice ' , in order to prevent any delays to enlargement and ensure that we can welcome the first candidate countries to a Union with more efficient institutions .
I should like to make a brief aside here to tell you that our attitude today is one of slight concern . We feel that it is time to move from somewhat static declarations of position to real negotiation culminating in compromise ; otherwise we shall have trouble both starting and concluding the negotiations .
Again on the question of accession negotiations , allow me to say that we shall push as far ahead as possible with negotiations with the Luxembourg six , of course . These are the countries with which we expect to make progress in negotiations on the most difficult chapters of the Community acquis .
And we shall do likewise with the Helsinki six , maintaining the pace of negotiation and , depending on the level of preparation of each country , opening up a whole series of new chapters , 42 in all , ranging from four to nine , depending on the country .
All in all , our objective , in close consultation with the Commission and Commissioner Verheugen , is to arrive in Nice at an overall vision of the state of negotiations , thereby efficiently guiding the work of the following presidencies and preparing the way for the completion of negotiations .
The various reports currently being examined in our committees and the debate on enlargement planned for October will give us further food for thought .
Hence the main deadlines during our presidency will be as follows :
A ministerial negotiating session will be held with each of the 12 candidates either on 21 November , for some of the candidates , or on 5 December , preceded by two meetings at ambassadorial level in the autumn .
As far as the Fifteen are concerned , we shall be organising a politically-orientated debate at the General Affairs Council on 20 November on the basis of the overall report and the individual progress reports on each candidate country which the Commission is due to submit to the Council at the beginning of November .
The purpose of this debate , in the run up to the Nice European Council , is to identify the main difficulties which need resolving , chapter by chapter , country by country and , on the basis of this , to discuss how the accession process should continue .
Finally , we shall be convening the European Conference twice , once in Sochaux on 23 November for the ministers of European affairs of the Fifteen and ministers from the candidate countries , and once in Nice on 7 December for the Heads of State and Government , at the opening of the Biarritz Summit .
As you will see , we hope to give a strong new impetus to the enlargement process .
The Union indicated in Helsinki that it would be ready to welcome the first new members on 1 January 2003 , as soon as the procedure for ratifying what we hope will be the future Nice Treaty has been completed but , as the Heads of State and Government stressed at the Feira Summit , the countries in question must not only transpose the Community acquis , but more important still , they must be able to implement and really apply it .
This is naturally a very complicated and , as we well know , a difficult task for the candidate countries , but the Community is already helping by supporting the efforts of each country .
These efforts are vital in order to complete the enlargement process under way in a serious and controlled manner and thus enable the most advanced countries to accede as quickly as possible .
As far as Turkey is concerned , I would just like to say briefly that recognition of its candidate status in Helsinki marked an important step which my country , France , supported .
The presidency will work in the Council to have the accession partnership for this country adopted and will continue to conduct a detailed analysis of the acquis .
It will also ensure that the Union honours its financial aid commitments with a view to setting up a single framework covering all aid instruments to Turkey .
It will work especially hard to have the regulation on the economic and social development of Turkey adopted .
It goes without saying , however , that accession negotiations will be quite out of the question until such time as Turkey complies with the Copenhagen criteria , especially the democratic criteria , although any progress in this direction will of course encourage us to adopt the measures which I have just mentioned .
We are waiting with interest for the House to adopt Mr Morillon ' s reports on these important issues .
The French Presidency ' s second objective is to push ahead with the European common security and defence policy by implementing the decisions taken in Helsinki and Feira .
The Union now has the instruments which it needs in order to apply a common foreign policy .
It had been missing one instrument which was vital to the credibility of its commitment , i.e. the capacity to mobilise sufficient military resources to allow it to decide and act autonomously within the context of the so-called Petersberg tasks .
Our objective , which the crises in Bosnia and , more recently , in Kosovo have taught us , is to provide a global response to the manifold and extraordinarily complex dimensions of today ' s crises : not just ethnic crises , but also sociological , administrative , judicial , security-related and military crises .
All these dimensions apply .
What is special about the European response , compared with other instruments , is that it can offer a global response to all these dimensions .
In other words , the French Presidency hopes to take part in an extremely ambitious project which will of necessity take several years to complete .
It therefore intends to keep up the pace of work so that the Feira commitments can be kept by the time the European Council meets in Nice - a particularly heavy agenda .
The three main issues are as follows : as regards countries ' abilities to meet the objectives , the commitment conference which we shall be holding on 20 November will give each Member State the chance to state how it intends to help achieve the overall objective defined in Helsinki ; as regards the permanent political and military institutions , our presidency has to prepare for the transition to the final , operational stage which will allow the Union to manage a crisis in all its dimensions as quickly as possible .
Finally , we need to implement the Feira decisions on relations with NATO and with third counties in connection with military crisis management and the continuing work to strengthen civil crisis management instruments .
The French Presidency ' s third priority will be to develop strategic partnerships between the Union and its neighbours and the main regional blocs .
The priority within this priority is to strengthen relations with the Union ' s neighbours , especially the Balkans where , as we all know , the situation is still giving cause for concern .
As a sign of the importance which the Union attaches to developing relations with the Balkans region , which we wish to see enjoying peace and democracy , France has proposed that Croatia host a summit on 24 November with the countries of the former Yugoslavia which , although at varying stages , have made the most progress with their democratic development .
The idea is to support recent positive developments in several of these countries and to remind the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia that the door will also be opened to it once it joins the movement or , to be more precise , when the conditions are right for it to join the movement .
Developing the strategic partnership with Russia and the Ukraine is another priority of the French Presidency , which is due to host the EU / Ukraine Summit in Paris in 10 days ' time and the EU / Russia Summit on 30 October .
The framework for action by the French Presidency of the Union vis-à-vis Russia is defined by the conclusions adopted by the Feira European Council , which offered to support the efforts being made by President Putin and the new Russian Government to modernise and reform Russia .
At the same time , the presidency will , of course , continue to monitor the issue of Chechnya closely .
The Council reiterated in July that only a political solution would bring about a lasting settlement of this conflict .
Finally , despite the uncertainty hanging over the future of the peace process in the Middle East , which we have just debated , developing our Euro-Mediterranean relations is one of the French Presidency ' s main concerns .
We hope to take general stock of the Barcelona process and assess cooperation under the MEDA programme during the ministerial meeting in Marseilles on 16 November and , if circumstances allow , at the summit which may then be organised for the following day in order to define guidelines to give new impetus to Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
The presidency also intends to complete work on the peace and stability charter .
During this meeting , as far as the peace process is concerned , the European Union should play a major role in supporting the two sides and the agreements which they conclude .
Finally , the presidency is keen to implement the Common Strategy on the Mediterranean adopted in Feira and ensure that the new MEDA regulation is adopted .
As far as the association agreements are concerned , let me repeat that it hopes to sign the agreement with Egypt and achieve substantial progress in negotiations with Lebanon , Syria and Algeria .
Beyond its immediate environment , the French Presidency will ensure that it develops political dialogue with the main regional blocs .
I am thinking here of Asia .
In Asia , priority will be given to resuming political dialogue between Europe and Asia and to strengthening economic and financial cooperation within ASEAN .
A summit will be held in Seoul on 20 and 21 October and we also hope to resume the dialogue between the EU and ASEAN .
History will record two important summits with key countries in the region during the French Presidency .
The summit with Japan on 19 July decided to start revising the 1991 declaration and preparing an action plan for adoption at the summit in 2001 .
The other summit , with China , will be held in Beijing on 23 October .
As regards Africa , the presidency will be organising an initial follow-up meeting to the Cairo Summit and working to develop relations with sub-regional organisations in accordance with the provisions of the Cotonou Convention .
It will be organising the fourth ministerial meeting between the EU and SADC in Gaborone on 29 and 30 November and a ministerial meeting between the EU and the Community of West African States in Abuja on 16 October .
The trans-Atlantic dialogue will focus on three foreign policy issues : the Balkans , Russia and the peace process in the Middle East .
This framework will also be turned to good account during the summits with the United States and Canada on 18 and 19 December , in order to bring our main partners up to date with recent developments in the European foreign , security and defence policy .
Dialogue with Latin America will be furthered during the course of regular meetings with the regional groups next week on the fringe of the general assembly of the United Nations .
France has also suggested that its partners consider the future of relations with Cuba .
Finally , the French Presidency will ensure that Europe is able to do all it can , in a coherent and responsible manner , to help open a new round of negotiations , which we hope will be global and balanced negotiations , within the World Trade Organisation .
In the longer term - and this is the fourth priority of the French Presidency - the Presidency again opened a debate during the informal meeting in Evian , in the presence of Mr Patten , on improving the efficiency of Union instruments .
The Union - as I have said - has numerous instruments at its disposal which allow it to influence developments in international relations .
Thus , its diplomatic presence in the world , both that of the Fifteen and of the Commission , is unique both in terms of staff numbers and geographical coverage .
Similarly , the Union now constitutes an active and coherent group in the United Nations , where its points of view are represented in every forum .
Finally , its financial resources , our financial resources , are considerable .
However , we all know the weaknesses in the Union ' s external action : lack of visibility , inadequate coordination on occasions , flexibility which leaves much to be desired , too little influence in international institutions , especially Bretton Woods .
Efforts have already been made to rectify these shortcomings , mainly by adopting the first common strategies , but this does not alter the fact that the impact and credibility of European action fall well short of the resources implemented .
The ministers of foreign affairs of the Fifteen therefore opened a debate at the instigation of Hubert Védrine during the recent informal meeting at Evian , based on the excellent work presented by Mr Patten on behalf of the Commission and by the Secretary-General of the Council to the High Representative for the CFSP , Javier Solana , who was also present in Evian .
Several items were entered on the agenda .
First , we need to improve coordination between the various actors in the European Union - in situ , in the third countries , through more decentralised management of Community programmes and through improved coordination between Community action and action by Member States .
At central level , this must be done by reaffirming the coordinating role of the General Affairs Council in order to improve the coherence of external action in all its aspects .
I am thinking here about political dialogue , financial cooperation and commercial franchises .
Then we need to turn the overall efforts of the Union to better account and make them more efficient .
That presupposes establishing the measure of this global effort vis-à-vis the outside world and , hence , having synthetic tools which integrate all aspects of external aid .
We also need to enhance Community aid management by improving the planning and implementation of Community instruments , taking account of the finding made by the Commission and endorsed by the Member States , that there is an unacceptable divide between commitments and Community appropriations disbursed and the increasing criticism , legitimate criticism , by third countries of slow , unwieldy processes .
Finally , and this is my last point , Mr President , the partners , i.e. the Council and the Commission both agree that we need better monitoring of the implementation and efficiency of Community aid , especially by the General Affairs Council , which needs to play a more important role in steering the Union ' s external action .
I can tell you , in this respect , that the ministers will refer to this point at the Council session on 18 September in order to define a monitoring framework and modus operandi , together with the Commission and the Secretary-General or his representative .
Those , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , are the priorities of the French Presidency as regards external action .
We intend to cooperate in this and many other areas with both the Commission , which will be the main driving force in this area , as it is in every other area , and with the European Parliament .
I very much welcome this opportunity to speak to the European Parliament just a couple of days after the informal meeting of foreign ministers in Evian , at which there was a serious discussion on the effectiveness and efficiency of the European Union 's external activities and the budgetary consequences , the first time to my knowledge that such a discussion has taken place .
I want to congratulate the French Presidency without reservation on the priority that they have given to this extremely important practical issue .
I want to respond to the motion for a resolution , not least since I suspect that in it are the bones of the discussion that we will be having between the Union 's institutions on CFSP over the coming years .
Just before the summer break , as some Members may have read in the newspapers , we discussed in the Commission the demands , the constraints and priorities of the European Union 's external relations , our understanding of what should be the Commission 's external role and some of the problems we encounter in performing it .
Any such discussion should of course begin with the Treaty .
One of the five objectives of the European Union , as set out in Article 2 of the Treaty , is that it should assert its identity on the international scene .
That objective reflects a number of things .
It reflects first of all the European Union 's political interests , including a growing role in the area of security , which the President-in-Office referred to in his interesting remarks .
It reflects our economic interests , trade and the external dimension of the single market , including our agricultural policy .
The Euro would also come under this heading .
It reflects our responsibilities for external assistance which have grown exponentially in recent years .
The European Union and its Member States now provide 55 % of total international aid and two thirds of global non-refundable aid .
It reflects our defensive external interests , issues such as drug trafficking , nuclear safety issues , environmental concerns and migration and last but not least relations with our near neighbours , including the whole process of enlargement , which in my view is the most important and challenging issue facing this generation of European politicians .
It is worth remembering that less than 20 years ago relations with Greece , Spain and Portugal were external affairs for the European Community as it then was .
Our prime task in the European Union 's external relations is surely the projection of stability , both in our immediate neighbourhood and beyond .
A more stable neighbourhood and a more stable world guarantee a more stable European Union .
The skills that the European Union has brought to its own development are skills which offer an example and a model elsewhere in the world .
We need to be more imaginative in drawing on our experience and using it beyond our shores .
In discussing how the European Commission can concentrate on this task , I want to be clear about the limits of our role .
Foreign policy is and will remain fundamentally a matter for national governments , in other words for Member States .
There are 15 foreign ministers in the European Union today and there will be 15 for the foreseeable future .
But it is equally important that the Member States should acknowledge what you in European Parliament and those working on the CFSP have long understood : that mere intergovernmentalism can be a recipe for weakness and mediocrity , for a European foreign policy of the lowest-common denominator .
That is why the Union chose to move on from political cooperation , why the Treaty of Amsterdam created the new high representative for CFSP and why there is an important role for the Commission and for the European Parliament in trying to make a Common - I stress common not single - Foreign and Security Policy more effective .
The new structures , procedures and instruments of CFSP recognise the need to harness the strengths of the European Community in the service of European foreign policy .
It would be absurd to divorce European foreign policy from the institutions which have been given responsibility for most of the instruments for its accomplishment , for external trade , external assistance , many of the external aspects of justice and home affairs and so on .
That is why the Commission participates fully in the decision-making process in the Council , that is why we have a shared right of initiative - not a sole but a shared right of initiative - in these issues .
There needs to be a sensible and sensitive partnership in the external field between the institutions of the Union , including the European Parliament , and its Member States .
We should be engaged in a common effort to make sure that world 's largest trading group also makes its presence felt politically .
We have a real contribution to make and we must not be afraid to make it .
Another point I want to emphasise is that the Commission is not seeking new powers or a new role , but we do want to be able to exercise the powers we already have under the Treaty more effectively .
I have every sympathy for European Parliament 's desire to do exactly the same .
I am determined that the Commission should make a coherent contribution to the external relations agenda .
It is very easy in the external field , perhaps more than any other , to make grandiloquent statements about Great Issues such as peace in the Middle East , a stable and productive relationship with Russia , international development .
But if these are to be transformed from aspiration into reality , we have to pull our collective European weight .
What does that mean in practice for the Commission ?
Firstly it means better coordination between Commissioners and Directorates-General encouraging a habit of working together .
I think we are starting to improve things .
I chair the group of RELEX Commissioners which meets regularly both formally and informally .
We try to frame a single agenda to discuss the impact of what we are doing on other Commissioners ' areas of responsibility .
I think it is fair to say that this has so far been successful and that we intend to continue in this spirit .
We have managed to avoid the turf wars which I am told occasionally disfigured the harmony of previous Commissions .
Secondly , we are feeling our way towards a new and more productive working relationship with the Council and I hope with the European Parliament .
It was evident at Evian with ministers this weekend .
Apart from the detailed foreign policy issues on our agenda like the situation in the Middle East , we were looking at how we decide our overall annual priorities in external relations and how we apportion the budget .
As I said before , when I made a presentation to the Council on the budget and on our priorities in May it was the first time this had ever happened .
Earlier this year , as well as that presentation to foreign ministers , I hope that I gave the European Parliament exactly the same candid presentation on our external relations budget .
In the past commitments have simply built up from one budget exercise to the next , with almost no effort to pull things together into a coherent whole .
We are now trying to create a more rational system in which we can all have a proper political discussion early in the process on what our priorities should actually be .
That is important in the Council and it is important in the Parliament because you are the budgetary authority .
We cannot spend more than you allow us to but in that case you should not ask us to do more than is possible and criticise us when we have to make judgments about priorities .
However , I think we are in a much better position to make those judgments with political guidance from the Council and Parliament .
Thirdly , I am working with Javier Solana to create sensible structures and the right division of responsibilities between the Commission and the High Representative for the CFSP .
The institutional relationship between the Commission and the High Representative is evolving , as is the precise role of the European Parliament in the CFSP .
But we have in this last year managed to develop a strong and sensible partnership and I think we can honestly claim that , whatever the difficulties , it is starting to make a difference , for instance , in the Balkans where the challenge to the credibility of Europe 's foreign policy remains formidable .
Fourthly I am working to respond to new demands on the Commission arising from the new security agenda .
We have set up a new crisis management unit to help pull together the Commission 's contribution in that area , but I also want to adapt our structures so that we can have a greater input into aspects of external relations where traditional bilateral diplomacy has been less effective and where the Commission has particular expertise which it should be able to deploy more effectively .
One example is conflict prevention , which may involve issues that are not part of the normal diplomatic agenda .
Other examples are climate change , control of drug-trafficking , control of the other death industries , the creation of new civil structures including independent media and so on .
These are the sort of issues on which I want to see the Commission contributing its experience and resources .
In the discussions we had in the G8 foreign ministers ' meetings I was struck by the extent to which the foreign and security policy agenda is changing and bringing together disparate issues in which the Community has almost unique competence , for example in the environmental field .
We discussed yesterday Mr Galeote 's excellent report on our external services and the importance of enhancing the effectiveness of what the European Union does around the world .
There was a lot of discussion about better coordination , better coordination between Member States and all the institutions of the European Union , which I know is a serious priority of the French presidency and one which I totally share .
We have perhaps talked more openly about these issues in the last few months than ever before but now we have to put our rhetoric into practice and discharge our responsibilities .
Mr President , a great deal is expected of the European Union , particularly if it is to do justice to the challenges it faces in the sphere of foreign and security policy .
There has been a considerable amount of progress over the last few years , especially considering the Cologne and Helsinki Decisions , and the development of a European defence identity .
We must see - indeed Mr Patten made this very point - that we contribute a large proportion of the world ' s international aid .
But are we really well-equipped to do justice to these challenges ?
Are the structures genuinely suitable ?
Do we really allow excellent individuals such as Mr Patten and Mr Solana to represent us overseas or are we increasingly forcing them to compete against each other owing to inappropriate structures ?
The fact is that the Council wants to operate as the executive in the foreign , security and defence policy , but how is this to be accomplished with 27 Foreign Ministers at the same time , when the Council thinks of itself as an executive authority in collective terms ?
All this is bound to lead to a situation that will be untenable in the long run .
The European Union may have put the instruments for external assistance and trade policy on a Community footing to a large extent , but unfortunately we do not have the chance to allow the institution to push this Community policy through , the intention being to avoid any competition with the Foreign Ministers , who are not prepared to give up a little bit of their jurisdiction in de facto terms .
If you keep appointing new special representatives then , in the end , this will detract from the competences of the Community bodies , notably the Commission , without really bringing about coordination .
Kosovo is a case in point : it was absolute chaos .
We provide the most money but nothing is actually being resolved out there , despite the best efforts of all concerned , because the structures are inappropriate .
That is the real problem and it is increasingly bringing us into disrepute .
We must ensure - and Mr Patten has the right approach in proposing the reorganisation of external assistance - that we strengthen the power to act of our Community bodies , and that we improve the way in which work is carried out there and make it more effective .
But at the same time , the structures must fit together , or else we will fail to make headway in this area .
Of course that also means , for example , that - as Parliament said before Amsterdam - the two-fold construct of High Representative / Commissioner for Foreign Affairs will not work .
We have had our first taste of this only a year on . We have had our first taste of this only a year on .
It would have been much better to have a Vice-President of the Commission for Foreign Affairs attached by means of a special bond of legitimation to the Council .
If we are to fulfil the expectations people have of the European Union then we must organise the structures accordingly , but not in line with the traditionally held ideas of EU Foreign Ministers , who are not prepared to relinquish responsibilities in de facto terms .
The new troika must be made better use of under the circumstances , and the question of parliamentary control must be resolved too .
According to the Treaty , the European Parliament is responsible for the area of civil crisis management , trade policy and the like , and that is clearly the case .
The national parliaments are responsible for financing and supervising their armed forces and the orders to go into action , and there can be no doubt on that score either .
Only , we must have the good sense to bring about a certain amount of coordination between them .
But here too , control must clearly be in evidence , because we cannot have a situation where European foreign , security and defence policy means less transparency and democracy .
For this reason , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we must work closely together over the next few days in order to guarantee and secure the necessary secrecy of certain documents .
On the other hand though , we must also guarantee the same level of transparency and control that the public expects from national governments and national parliaments .
I believe we will find the right moment to make a start on this .
I see that the French Council Presidency is extremely well disposed in this matter and so we should work on it over the next few days .
We shall now suspend the sitting .
Formal sitting on the occasion of the address by Mr Avraham Burg , Speaker of the Knesset and Mr Ahmed Qurie , Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council .
Mr President , as you know I currently chair Parliament 's delegation for the United States of America and I should like to raise a point of order under Parliament 's rules concerning parliamentary delegations .
It has come to my attention that a group of parliamentarians from the EPP Group visited the USA in July .
Normally I would regard this as a private matter and not my concern .
However , in the programme connected with this visit the group is described as a delegation and in particular Mr Goodwill , MEP , is described as leader of the delegation .
I can make this programme available to you .
This puts the whole visit in an entirely different context .
There was a formal delegation which I chaired from Parliament to the USA in June and there is an understandable confusion when another group of MEPs some three weeks later arrive in the USA , to all intents and purposes also a European Parliament delegation .
I have reports that the comments of these parliamentarians were from the wilder shores of the EPP Group and were notable for their anti-European content .
I understand what you are saying , Mrs Read , and the presidency takes note of your comment .
We shall correct this mistake and keep you informed of the situation .
Mr Goodwill , I believe that what you wish to say echoes Mrs Read ' s comments .
Mr President , on a point of order I can inform the House that in no way did the visit by Members from the UK , Sweden and Germany wish to be described as a delegation .
We were merely visiting the United States as a group organised from within our own national groups .
We did not represent the EPP Group , we certainly did not wish to usurp the role of the official delegation .
I contest the point made about the views expressed during that visit as being particularly extreme .
We represented the views of our national parties over there as well as the views expressed within the European Parliament .
I am very sorry , Mrs Read , but I cannot allow you to speak again , as we are already running late .
We all know what the problem is .
The Bureau and Parliament have already made a commitment to resolving this issue and you really cannot speak again .
Let us proceed to the vote .
Vote
I am extremely grateful for the courteous offer that has been made .
Last night we had the opportunity to discuss this extremely important report at some length .
In my speech I drew attention to the communication that we have already produced on the external services , but said that we will be coming back with a further communication in due course which will bear the imprint of this extremely important report .
In particular I should like to express our enthusiasm for the very sensible ideas put forward about training for our external services and also the arguments about coordination .
It is a very good report on an important subject .
We hope that it will be a beacon for all of us in the dark nights that lie ahead .
( Laughter and applause )
Report ( A5 ­ 0191 / 2000 ) by Mr Imbeni , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament : Assessment and future of Community humanitarian activities ( Article 20 of Regulation ( EC ) 1257 / 96 ) ( COM ( 1999 ) 468 - C5 ­ 0044 / 2000 - 2000 / 2016 ( COS ) ) .
( Parliament approved the legislative resolution )
Explanations of vote
Dell ' Alba report ( A5-0202 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for Mr Dell 'Alba 's report , and I would like to explain this decision here since it relates to the financial concerns of pensioners in general .
Since they have very little money , they are , in effect , very careful how they spend it .
Sadly , the Dell 'Alba report does not take into consideration the proposals of the Chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Theato , who levelled severe criticisms at the report , which proposes to honour the outstanding expenditure laid down in a previous regulation on aid for certain European activities in Latin America , Asia , the Mediterranean and South Africa .
In my opinion , much more should have been done , and this should have rung genuine alarm bells for the Commission 's activities .
Piétrasanta report ( A5-0205 / 2000 )
Mr President , I could not pass over the chance to give an explanation of my vote for the MEDA report , seeing as , this summer , after I had been to Spain , I had a holiday in Tunisia .
While I was there , a Tunisian pensioner came up to me - goodness knows how he had found out that I represent the Italian pensioners in the European Parliament - and he said to me : " I know that there is an aid programme for Tunisia as there is for all the Mediterranean countries , but what good has it done me , a pensioner in Tunisia ?
What are you doing to help us ? "
I have , in effect , read Mr Piétrasanta 's report in its entirety and I regret to say that certain actions are missing .
In addition to the various initiatives laid down in the MEDA programme - which , I hope , will be given much more funding than the EUR 3 475 million which were appropriated to it between 1995 and 1999 - I hope that measures will also be adopted to keep a check on how European Union funding is used and that a large proportion will go to the peoples of the African countries which border on the Mediterranean , including their elderly citizens .
The MEDA programme is the mainstay of financial cooperation under the Euro-Mediterranean partnership set up in 1995 .
But the procedures are unwieldy and not transparent enough , the specification for the implementation of projects , which are too long ...
Reform is urgently needed because these problems are throwing the entire process into disrepute and are seen as bad signs by the people of the Mediterranean , who did , in fact , originally welcome the Barcelona process with a certain degree of enthusiasm .
The Commission text is a good text because its purpose is to help simplify current regulations .
But we need more if we want to give our Mediterranean policy a new lease of life : we need to involve the people more by supporting decentralised cooperation , we need to improve the way in which the cultural and human dimensions are integrated , open the free trade zone to agricultural produce and monitor and support fundamental freedoms .
I fully support the rapporteur ' s proposal that an annual report be drafted on human rights in the Mediterranean countries .
Galeote Quecedo report ( A5-0210 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for the report on a common Community diplomacy .
I have to say that my daughter , who was extremely happy to see European driving licences introduced and remarked at the time : " So Europe is making progress ! " , asked me on this occasion : " But when will European embassies be set up in the countries we visit as tourists ? "
Well , I would have liked the Committee 's report to have been more decided , more resolute , and to have , at last , established single European embassies to replace the 15 national embassies in the 15 Member States and the other States throughout the world .
Sadly , this did not happen , but I hope that it will come about with the next Commission communication .
The Liberal Party ' s five Members of the European Parliament support the efforts in this report to give better diplomatic training to those EC officials who work in the Commission ' s delegations .
We have proposed - and had accepted - an amendment which emphasises that it is simply a question of in-service training and that the courses are to be open to diplomats from the national foreign services .
The Liberals do not , however , support the idea of setting up a new institution in the form of an EC College of Diplomacy . Nor do we want the present delegations to develop into EU embassies .
Therefore , the Liberals have today voted in favour of the report as a whole but abstained from voting on the above-mentioned points .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament welcome , and have voted in favour of , the initiative to improve the Community ' s common foreign service .
We also support the initiative to give further training to EC officials engaged in external activities .
We are opposed , however , to setting up a college of diplomacy for training the staff .
It must be possible for such training to take place as , for example , in-service or on the job training .
We also make reservations about the Commission ' s delegations developing into proper embassies .
That would create an unclear picture of which problems are to be solved by the national embassies .
We have abstained from voting because the aims of the report are unclear .
On the one hand , it contains a large number of proposals for improving operations in the EU ' s present offices abroad .
It is also established ( in paragraph O ) that the purpose is not to create a single diplomatic service for the EU to replace the foreign services of the Member States .
On the other hand , the whole enterprise smacks of efforts progressively to do precisely that , namely to create veritable EU embassies as a stage in the process of transforming the EU into a superstate .
This impression is powerfully reinforced by paragraphs P , 13 and 15 , in which the talk is precisely of EU embassies , of coordinated EU representation in , for example , the UN and of Member States which so desire arranging for their diplomatic missions to be combined with the EU ' s delegations .
Because we are in favour of practical improvements to the existing foreign operation , but absolutely opposed to the EU ' s beginning to behave like a superstate in the world around , especially by stealth , we have no option but to abstain from voting .
Our countries have a special responsibility , being among the few democracies in the world .
In the same way as the United States , we must be in a position to take independent initiatives and intervene in those parts of the world where there is a need to defend human rights and to propagate democratic values .
Interventions of this kind should primarily take place with the help of economic sanctions but , depending upon the circumstances , military intervention may be necessary .
The prerequisite of the EU ' s being able to assemble the required drive to complete these tasks is close cooperation , both economic and political , within the EU , including closer cooperation between the foreign services .
At present , statements from the Commission ' s delegations are too dissimilar because of the divergent positions held by the Member States .
If the EU is to assert itself on the political stage , it requires a better coordinated foreign policy in which the EU countries are obliged to combine forces and to speak with one voice .
. ( FR ) Mr Galeote ' s report has the strange merit of indicating its real objective and logic fairly clearly , i.e. the creation of a single Community diplomatic service , while formally claiming the opposite .
The entire proposed arrangement in fact contradicts recital O , which states that the objective is not to create a single diplomatic service to replace the diplomatic services of the Member States .
I welcome Mr Dupuis ' frank and coherent amendments , which at least have the merit of calling a spade a spade .
The subtle internal balances of the PPE probably explain the baroque nature of the structure being proposed to us .
This clearly pathetic ducking and diving is directly inspired by the Monnet-Delors method and all Mr Galeote has done is to propose a new variation on that theme , this time on diplomacy .
With this method , the institution creates the function , the container hides the content , the technique gives rise to the policy .
But now we have the key and know how to decipher .
When Mr Galeote proposes setting up a training college to mould Community super-diplomats and recycle national diplomats , giving the European Union an international legal personality and ' coordinating ' representations , especially to the UN , we know full well that the sub-text reads : merge embassies , create a single Community diplomatic corps and communitise France ' s and Britain ' s permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council .
And of course , as always , the question of purpose , the question of content , the only question worth asking , is omitted .
What are we creating with this new institution ?
In this particular case , what foreign policy will this Community diplomatic corps serve ?
What common interests is it supposed to defend ?
This is a typically Marxist approach .
We are waiting for the ' critical qualitative mass ' which , we hope , will change the quantitative into qualitative at a certain threshold .
The common instrument is supposed to produce the common conscience , the common will , the common responsibility .
This cult of the quantitative culminates in a grotesque comparison between the number of American and ' European ' diplomats , the number of ' European ' diplomats having been obtained by adding up the numbers of professional diplomats attached to the foreign services of our various countries .
Must we reiterate that the United States are one and the same nation and the Member States of the European Union each have privileged links in the world , different and sometimes diverging experiences and affinities , and that it is this which so enriches European diplomacy ?
It is the complementarity of this individual expertise which can be used for a clearly-defined common objective which really serves European interests .
It is precisely these advantages which the single diplomacy being proposed to us will devalue .
In fact , we are eroding national will , despite the fact that it is the diplomatic driving force behind Europe and , at the same time , we express surprise when the increasing number of instruments and declarations is reflected merely by an absence of content and a general lack of interest .
The only positive aspect of this report might be its desire to rationalise the organisation and improve the professionalism of the European Commission delegations in third countries .
Experience has shown that these delegations are not always up to their real job , which is to implement Community programmes and agreements and monitor them on the ground .
It would appear that this job has now taken second place to other considerations , with Commission representatives too busy trying to obtain officially the usurped title of ambassador to oversee the proper implementation of the programmes which they are responsible for applying .
This last point apart , you will understand that we obviously did not vote in favour of the other , totally surrealist proposals in this initiative report .
Today we are admitting the absurdity and intrinsic weaknesses of a single currency which is not supported by any sovereignty .
And now we expect single diplomacy , conceived in the same back to front manner , to work or rather , not to work .
I welcome the initiative to improve training for EU officials working on foreign issues , but I cannot support the creation of a single diplomatic corps .
The Member States are responsible for foreign diplomacy , and I think there is a danger that transforming the Commission ' s delegations into Community delegations with legal standing might lead to conflicts of interest with the Member States ' national diplomatic delegations .
I cannot therefore vote in favour of Mr Galeote Quecedo ' s report .
Imbeni report ( A5-0191 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for Mr Imbeni 's report as well , for the European Union is certainly doing something extremely important in organising humanitarian aid for areas which have been struck by natural disasters or the effects of war .
Pensioners , whom I have the honour and the pleasure of representing , are among those who are most willing on these occasions to go and help the less fortunate victims of disasters .
But what benefit has Europe drawn from this initiative which , among other things , cost EUR 813 million in 1999 alone ?
Moreover , I would call upon the Commission to increase its expenditure , for it is extremely important for Europe to maintain a presence in the world and to give a high profile to its presence through , among other things , a symbol and greater publicity of this important activity .
Mr President , a single example , taken from the explanatory statement , illustrates just how laughable the report on the humanitarian activities of the European Union is .
The report cites the absence of operational tools , especially helicopters , as the reason for the lack of international aid in general and the lack of aid from the European institutions in particular , in dealing with the floods in Mozambique , whereas - and who could forget ? - there was no lack of helicopters , aeroplanes , every type of transportation equipment and even means of destruction when it came to intervening in Yugoslavia or Iraq .
The only conclusion to be drawn from this is that the major powers , which are capable of mobilising huge resources in order to impose their hegemony on the rest of the world , are not prepared to make the slightest effort when it comes to saving human lives .
Under these circumstances , the pacifying declarations on humanitarian aid by the European institutions are shamefully hypocritical and we have no intention of backing them , which is why we abstained from the vote .
I wish to start by congratulating Mr Imbeni on the quality of his report .
This report is fully in keeping with the philosophy of our institution , which has always made its voice heard in the least well off countries , through its opinions , its resolutions or specific action to improve and develop humanitarian aid .
Since the European Community Humanitarian Office ( ECHO ) was created at the beginning of the 1990s , Europe has taken its place as the biggest donor in the world .
However , despite legitimate efforts driven by historical links between certain European countries and developing countries , we are forced to admit that poverty is increasing throughout the world .
Today , half the world lives on less than two dollars a day .
This is unacceptable !
Has the money released been squandered ?
I do not think so .
Without the emergency aid provided by ECHO in order to deal with the natural disasters or serious crises which regularly hit the most vulnerable people on our planet , I hardly dare imagine the situation which we would have to deal with today .
Nonetheless , humanitarian aid needs to be rationalised .
In this respect , I welcome the fact that the House is calling for more coherent , more coordinated help and for greater collaboration between the various partners , such as the executive Commission , the Member States , the various associations or even the United Nations .
In addition , apart from humanitarian aid proper , we need to find ways of improving conflict prevention because 25 % of the African continent is still being torn apart by war .
Finally , even if the problem of development is a multi-dimensional problem and the European Union does not have all the answers , we still need to continue and step up our action in order to lay the foundations for sustainable world development and help eradicate poverty .
In any event , this was the concept which inspired the work of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , which is why I voted in favour of the report presented today by Mr Imbeni .
Mr President , I would like , on my own account and also on behalf of my colleagues , to protest in the strongest terms , and have it put on record , about the article that Madam President had published in today ' s edition of the Strasbourg daily newspaper .
In it , she voices her belief that it would have come to riots in Austria had the 14 EU States not imposed sanctions against Austria .
I utterly repudiate this .
In making this comment , not only has the President done the Austrian people an injustice , she has also abused her office , and thereby caused this House , an EU institution , a great deal of harm .
Mrs Raschhofer , I shall gladly pass your comments on to President Fontaine .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.23 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Vice-President , thank you for giving me the floor .
With your permission I would like to re-raise the point of order that I tried to make just before the votes this morning .
I will re-read the point that I wanted to make .
I currently chair the European Parliament 's delegation for relations with the United States of America and would like to raise a point of order under Parliament 's rules concerning parliamentary delegations .
It has come to my attention that a group of EPP Members visited the USA in July .
Normally I would regard this as a private matter , but in the programme for the visit , which I can supply to you , the group is described as a delegation and in particular Mr Robert Goodwill , MEP , is described as leader of the delegation .
This of course puts the visit in an entirely different context .
An official delegation from Parliament , which I headed , visited the United States of America in June .
I think that you will understand that confusion may well arise when another group of MEPs arrives in the USA some three weeks later as , to all intents and purposes , a second European Parliament delegation .
I know that there was a strong anti-European tone to their reports , and this , of course , is a matter for the EPP , but when damaging and derogatory remarks about the European Union stem from what is purported to be an official visit from the European Parliament , I feel that the matter should be raised here .
I would ask you as a matter of urgency to investigate whether Parliament 's rules have been broken .
Could you also ascertain whether the Members concerned had a formal invitation from relevant bodies in the USA and intend to declare their visit in the Members ' register of interests ?
I will of course pass on the other documentation that I have received .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , in the Minutes , in point 2 , you can see at the end , after Parliament observed a minute 's silence in memory of those who had died , the Minutes said : " Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso spoke . "
Actually there is no mention of what I said .
But if you look at the verbatim report you can see that there is a very important error which could mislead people .
The verbatim report says , at the end of my words : " The action of ETA is a righteous expression of the struggle for recognition " ... etc .
My words were : " The action of ETA is the enraged expression of the struggle for recognition of something quite elementary . "
The right to exist as Basque .
You can understand that the difference is a very substantial one .
I would like to amend it .
I would ask for responsibility to be taken for that because if you look at the Spanish press today , everybody has taken these words as the real ones .
That is at least based on a reference but then some mass media in Spain , whereas I cited Hegel as a quotation , have put in Nietzsche and this is no coincidence at all .
I am afraid I am faced with a determination to put words into my mouth which I did not say .
That is my protest .
I would like to amend what is in the verbatim report .
To say in the Minutes that I spoke is not sufficient .
You must record the sense of what I said yesterday .
Mr Gorostiaga , if you feel that you have been misquoted , you have hereby been given the opportunity to report this .
This too will be included in the Verbatim Report .
We will of course examine how this has happened .
I am taking note of this now .
( The Minutes were approved )
Agenda
As you are aware , Parliament decided this morning to add a communication by Mr Verheugen on enlargement to tomorrow ' s agenda at 5.00 p.m.

Mr Prodi , President of the Commission , has also expressed the wish to make a communication on this subject matter .
Since Mr Prodi is to leave Strasbourg by 5.00 p.m. at the very latest , I suggest bringing the Commission communication forward to 4.00 p.m.
The debates will consequently be resumed after the Commission communication until Question Time ( Commission ) which commences at 5.30 p.m ..

Are there any objections to this ?
Mr President , I wholeheartedly agree with what you have said , and also welcome with open arms the fact that President Prodi himself is to make a statement .
All I would ask - and the group chairmen in attendance will support me in this - is that the group chairmen are also given the opportunity tomorrow to make a brief statement of their position .
This has not been scheduled yet , but I would ask if it could be attended to , so that we too are able to make our positions clear .
There is no need for it to be a long statement , but the group chairmen must be given this opportunity .
I would urge you to arrange this accordingly .
EU external action priorities ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the declarations of the Council and the Commission on EU external action priorities .
Mr President , many thanks for allowing me to continue this morning ' s debate .
The Socialist Group has a need to recognise for itself that Europe ' s position on the world stage has undergone a dramatic change since the fall of the Berlin Wall , when traditionally , foreign policy was adopted by national states which continue to play a major role , of course .
We also noticed that our own governments often thwarted each other in their efforts to adopt effective external policy .
We are now in a position where we can gradually see these governments taking joint steps and the European Union setting up a growing common foreign policy .
And in our view , and this was also explained very clearly by Mr Patten , with regard to those external actions , " foreign policy " involves more than traditional foreign diplomacy as we knew it but also touches upon concepts such as security - and embraces a much wider concept of security - the environment , conflict prevention , trade and relations in all kinds of areas .
It encompasses development cooperation and naturally the traditional tools of foreign policy .
This has culminated in an enriched foreign policy for the EU and has also resulted in the integration of the Commissioner for External Relations , Mr CFSP , Mr Solana , and the Council who all have a particular role to fulfil .
It is unfortunate that Mr Solana was unable to be here to make a contribution of this kind .

We would actually like to emphasise that there are three priorities for which we need to find a balance simultaneously . Firstly , of direct concern are our neighbours , in other words eastward enlargement .
Our second priority is the strategic aspect within MEDA . This is the second area which touches upon traditional relations within NATO , the G7 and the other contexts within which we cooperate with America and the other traditional partners .
The third priority is easily forgotten but in our eyes essential , namely that of Europe as the bearer of values in the world , or , in other words ' a global player in a global village ' .
In this respect , it is essential to regard the fight against poverty as a key contribution in our policy , rather than according it a minor position within foreign policy .
Mr Patten , Mr Nielson , ladies and gentlemen , and the Commissioner for External Relations , you could , in fact , extract new value , new quality and effectiveness from this , working in tandem with Parliament .
We very much regret the fact that heading 4 , the role of our Parliament and the tasks which we actually have to fulfil in the process are still being sidelined to such a degree .
All too often , we find that the Council follows its own line of thought and this is no longer the way in which we can market modern foreign policy which covers a wide range of issues .
We therefore hope that we can once again drive our message home .
We hope that this new policy takes account of the budget and can be accompanied by an involved and powerful European Parliament that can have its say and is taken entirely seriously .
We would welcome a positive response from the Council and Commission with regard to this new policy in these matters too .
Mr President , I welcome the resolve that was shown here today by the French Presidency and the Commission in placing emphasis on enlargement as the key priority for the external action of the Union .
I hope that when we come to deal with the matter in the House tomorrow the Verheugen incident will have simply served as a timely reminder that we must get our signals clear and avoid giving mixed messages with regard to this strategic priority .
With regard to the matter in hand , I should like to pick up on a point made by the Commissioner earlier today when he talked about the attempt to make foreign policy more effective and to warmly welcome and subscribe to his view on the indivisibility of the Union 's foreign policy .
If we take the Barcelona process , the Middle East peace process , our relations with the Western Balkans , our relations with Russia , clearly there is a vast area of policy to be covered and a wide variety of instruments .
It is clear that a successful foreign policy cannot stand on one pillar alone .
Even if the conduct of foreign policy - and in particular , the security and defence dimension of foreign policy - is essentially for government , it follows that because of the nature of the policy terrain and the instruments available it cannot be government 's exclusive concern .
The Commission is right to demand its right of association under the Treaty and , through that , for this Parliament to demand its right of accountability and scrutiny .
A second general point I should like to refer to is in respect of the efficiency of policy .
Here too the new Commission - and in particular , Commissioner Patten - deserve to be congratulated , first of all for revealing to us the extent of the horror that much of the policy had become .
Let me recall one of the results of these inquiries : in the past five years the average delay in the disbursement of committed funds has increased from three years to four-and-a-half years .
For certain programmes the backlog of outstanding commitments is equivalent to more than eight-and-a-half years of payments .
That clearly is a farce in anyone 's analysis .
It has to be said in fairness that the former Commission led by Jacques Santer was as much a victim as an author of this process .
This is an accumulation of an ineffective and inefficient system over years .
We welcome the commitment to an urgent review of that process .
On behalf of the Liberal Democrat Group I should like to lay particular emphasis on our distress at the code of secrecy rather than the code of transparency normally promoted by the Council .
Blanket secrecy is not the way to legitimise an evolving Community policy .
My group deplores the fact that this code of secrecy was slipped in during the Parliamentary summer recess , with no Parliamentary consultation and by written procedure .
It amounts to a form of intergovernmental conspiracy against citizens ' right to know .
I want to hear from the Council today what role it feels it is prepared to accord to this House in terms of the scrutiny and accountability of issues which may be intergovernmental but which cannot stand on one pillar alone ?
Mr President , as the European Union assumes new powers we might expect that transparency in this matter and parliamentarian monitoring would increase at the same rate .
Now , it would seem that the European security and defence identity is making dramatic progress in the wake of the Helsinki summit .
It appears , however , that the Council has been resorting more and more to the intergovernmental process in this , so much so that it has threatened even to bypass the Commission , something quite unheard of , as far as I am concerned .
The Commission must have a strong role to play in this process .
Just like my colleague , Mr Cox , I too strongly condemn the fact that , during the summer recess , the Council produced very significant restrictions on the public ' s right to gain access to documents relating to matters of security and defence .
Obviously , nobody is claiming that confidentiality and even secrecy are not necessary from time to time , when it is a question , for example , of operational matters in defence policy .
But the Council ' s decision seems to be leading to a situation now where the whole development of the security and defence policy in the political sphere can no longer be properly monitored , being , as it were , beyond that .
The public can no longer follow the development of security and defence policy , and neither can Parliament monitor it properly .
We here in Parliament have discussed this situation , and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , in which I am involved in the discussion of the issue , is looking into whether Parliament should possibly take the Council to court on account of this decision , which is a clear violation of Parliament ' s rights , and weakens our citizens ' already barely attainable rights of access to documents .
I demand a clear explanation from the representative of the Council , and I would be very grateful if the Commission were also to comment on the situation .
I shall be very brief , Mr President , as I only wish to discuss one very specific aspect of the European Union ' s external actions . I feel that , although this is a very specific issue , it nevertheless deserves our utmost consideration and is of great concern to us .
I am referring to the obvious trend towards placing less and less value , in terms of both our attention and resources , on cooperation with developing countries .
I realise , of course , that we have other objectives and that these too must be given the appropriate consideration .
Nevertheless , I think that , because of the expectations that are created , because of the European Union ' s responsibilities and even because of the new problems facing developing countries , for all these reasons , taking account of these very important parts of the world must be a major factor in determining our actions .
I would emphasise one aspect in particular : we need , in this context , to have our own independent strategies that confirm the European Union ' s position in this field .
This concern has arisen mainly as a result of the successive budgetary cuts in the field of cooperation which , to a certain extent , illustrate and endorse the fears I have just mentioned , which I feel we must lay to rest once and for all .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by addressing a brief remark to Mr Patten .
The document on which we are preparing to vote deplores the slide towards intergovernmentalism which is creeping into our common foreign and security policy and that this somewhat contradicts the Commissioner ' s speech this morning , in which he said that foreign policy would remain a matter for national governments .
I therefore feel that the question should perhaps be broached with greater flexibility .
In politics , we never use the word " never " .
I think that the European Parliament is fairly reticent on this question , but Mr Brok ' s intervention demonstrated that no one here in this House continued to feel that it was still possible and absolutely vital to communitise foreign policy .
I should like quickly to ask the President-in-Office two questions .
I was interested to read of a recent Franco-German initiative to unite consulates .
Does the Presidency-in-Office entertain the idea of rapidly communitising foreign policy and , more importantly , of giving a Union embassy the task of representing all the Member States of the Union in the fifty countries in which no Member State of the Union is represented ?
My second question is this .
I was interested to note , Mr President-in-Office , your obvious lack of enthusiasm for the European Union / China summit , which pleases me greatly .
Does that mean that the so-called policy of critical dialogue with China is dead and buried and would you be prepared , as the President-in-Office , to address the question of the recognition of the Tibetan Government in exile at your next meeting with the Chinese if no agreement on the new status of Tibet is reached within a reasonable period of time ?
Mr President , I believe it is important not to lose sight of the objectives pursued in the course of this debate . In my opinion , there are two :
Firstly , to guarantee more effective , coherent and visible external action on the part of the European Union .
What would be the point of having more than 40 000 officials in more than 1 500 diplomatic missions between the Commission and the Member States - twice the number the United States has - if our activity really is not sufficiently efficient , coherent or visible ?
I believe that Mr Patten expressed this very well in his intervention when he demonstrated that he had at least read the joint motion for a resolution which we have negotiated in Parliament .
Secondly , to take note of the fact that the days when the European Parliament simply rubber-stamped the priorities established by other Community institutions have finally been assigned to history .
Mr Moscovici , in the coming months we will have to make important decisions in the field of the nascent , embryonic defence policy . During the Balkan crisis the inadequacies of the European Union were made blatantly clear .
In the United States there is currently a great debate taking place concerning defence expenditure .
We will soon have to hold this debate here in Europe . We in Europe will not only have to consider this expenditure but also the structure of this spending .
The incompatibility and heterogeneity of the Member States ' investments in this field - the national views - make this such a difficult debate that we will have to consider other added problems such as interinstitutional disputes .
This Parliament would clearly have preferred the figure of the High Representative to be answerable to the Commission .
Instead , it has been answerable to the Council , and this is something we have to accept , as we also have to accept that the Commission must play a role .
Mr Patten is right when he says that we have to clarify and resolve a series of tensions between the intergovernmental realm and the Community realm .
This dispute between the institutions must be resolved , and the European Parliament must not simply be serving at the table , but it also wishes to take its place in the kitchen .
Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , with my French colleagues in the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I naturally follow the external actions of the European Union with great interest .
In general we favour a strong European Union presence on the international scene .
That implies firm and unswerving commitment from the Council itself first of all .
You spoke of high ambition , Minister , and I was pleased to hear it .
But that also presupposes a Commission genuinely capable of action .
That is what the Commissioner wants and I hope he is getting , and will get , the political , administrative and financial resources he needs to put his ideas into practice and make the CFSP really effective and efficient .
But in this short speech , I want to focus on enlargement .
A recent interview with a German newspaper stirred up some turmoil .
For us , however , it is clear : there is no question of slowing down the enlargement process by introducing new requirements or a variety of delaying tactics .
On the contrary , we must do everything we can to move it forward , as you just reaffirmed , Minister , and of course that does not exclude either rigour or vigilance .
A slapdash enlargement would obviously be a great mistake .
Having said that , we are conscious of the problems due to public opinion both within the fifteen Member States and in the candidate countries .
Public opinion is very ill informed and can veer from irrational enthusiasm to a sense of discouragement to outright hostility .
A great deal of work undoubtedly needs to be done if the long and difficult process of enlargement is to have solid , clear-sighted and determined popular support .
Mr President , the foreign policy of the European Union can only be successful if it satisfies three main criteria : clarity , credibility and transparency .
Mr Patten , we will continue to push for this , even though you believe that we should at last put an end to the game of ping pong .
As far as I am concerned , it has started and can only finish if a constructive solution is found .
Otherwise this will lead to further competition between the institutions .
I believe the speech you gave in Paris was significant in this respect .
It is true that there should at last be open discussion on how to pursue a truly coherent foreign policy .
The European Parliament will play an important part in this .
You said yourself that it will only be possible to achieve credibility - your second point - if the European Union employs all its capabilities , i.e. all three pillars , and particularly the first with its financial and economic means , in preventive conflict management , and if the EU promotes stability overseas by making proper use of its economic instruments and using its political means to achieve real cooperation .
After all , we know that we must take a considerably broader view of the issue of protection .
Protection of the environment , the individual and human rights cannot be secured through one pillar alone .
In the same way , preventive conflict management is not just about the deployment of a police force ; it involves all three pillars .
As far as the last point , that of transparency , is concerned , my group has made it quite clear today that we do not accept , nor will we accept , that access to these documents should be restricted .
Transparency is Parliament ' s watchword , and we will continue to demand it from the Council and the Commission alike .
We will revisit this theme at a later stage .
Mr President , I was interested to hear the President-in-Office mention the four priorities which the Presidency-in-Office envisages for the future in the field of foreign affairs and defence . Two of these priorities also concern the resolutions , namely the selection of tools which are needed to achieve this and the development of the common foreign and security and defence policy itself .
Commissioner Patten , the Vice-President of the Commission , reacted to this in his own way and remarked that the European Union is in fact extremely resourceful .
The lion ' s share of aid - two-thirds in fact - originates from our European Union .
Enlargement is on the agenda and he also mentioned the promotion of stability , at which point I started to have my doubts .
When he then mentioned the fact that the EU should have its own identity on the world stage , I thought : I would love to share this objective with him but in a way which would take account of European responsibilities .
Needless to say , this identity can only find expression in true European policy .
European responsibilities can certainly not be divided among fifteen to thirty or perhaps more Member States .
This does not mean that there will be no Foreign Affairs Ministers in the Member States . They will certainly be kept on , just like the Ministers for Economic Affairs or certainly those for Education .
Once European responsibilities are identified , they should in any event not be divided up and they should also be truly based on a European vision and European values which we share here in this Parliament .
This is not about a simple bureaucratic division of powers between institutions or a power-crazed Parliament or such like .
This is about a practical solution : how can we solve the problems we have encountered ?
This is about the fact that our policy was unable to prevent the suffering in Bosnia , which claimed hundreds of thousands of victims .
That is what this is all about !
We need to ask ourselves how we can prevent this .
This is when we say as a Parliament : we need European policy ; otherwise we will not succeed .
Mr President , first of all , I want to say thank you both to the French Presidency and to Commissioner Patten for their excellent contributions this morning .
The priorities established deserve all our support .
Time permits only a couple of remarks on my part .
I choose to concentrate on the deficiencies in the implementation of the Union ' s development cooperation .
Commissioner Patten deserves praise for the openness with which he describes and has described the problems .
My own experience when , in a responsible post within the UN ' s development programme , I sought cooperation with the Union at national level with a view to assembling and coordinating forces in different areas was that , as a rule , it did not work , either because almost every decision in the EU ' s case needed to be taken in Brussels and also because of the lack of qualified staff within the area concerned .
All this made cooperation with the EU difficult and incredibly time-consuming .
The UN has its problems with bureaucracy and dilatoriness - I am the first to admit that - but , where development work and development cooperation are concerned , the EU was lagging far behind , in any case a few years ago .
The conclusion I draw is , first of all , that the Commission must radically decentralise the right of decision-making to national level .
" Brussels " , with all its administrative levels , must relinquish a large degree of control .
Secondly , it is important to ensure that the Commission has an adequate number of qualified staff to carry out the operations about which decisions are being made .
I know , Commissioner Patten , that this is the direction your politics are taking right now .
I would just emphasise that it is a matter of urgency .
If there are no rapid improvements , I fear that the Commission ' s support for development cooperation will gradually disappear .
That would be a pity , given that well-developed multilateral cooperation has many advantages and that the Union needs such an instrument in order to be able to play a proactive role on the international stage .
Mr President , the President-in-Office 's speech seemed to me to be rather on the biased and general side , but I found that Commissioner Patten 's speech was realistic and focused well on the different problem areas .
We therefore now need to discuss the different issues .
Firstly , tomorrow marks the start of a major UN session where 159 Heads of State will be present .
In what form will the European Union be present and at what level ?
I feel that it is extremely important for us to establish ourselves at the very highest level and to make our presence felt .
A discussion on priorities should include economic policy , but our economic policies are all inward-looking and only concern the interior of Europe .
It is also just as important not to let go of development policy , for that creates stability and peace and has to target Russia and China as well as developing countries .
In my opinion , it is not right to ask us to choose between the Balkans and developing countries .
The Member States need to take these factors on board .
Working towards constitutionalisation of the European Union , one benefit of which would be institutional citizenship in international bodies , the creation of a European diplomacy as per the Galeote report , the cultural concern which we must take on board in order to avoid fresh incidents of colonialism , the support and valuing of democratic processes which have also been established in certain countries such as Iran , and the regulation of relations with NGOs , which could become the operational arm of the European Union - these options could all contribute to an effective political initiative for developing countries , an initiative which would assert the supremacy of European civilisation in terms of a quest for solidarity to improve quality of life and bear witness to respect for human dignity , celebrating it in every corner of the world .
Mr President-in-Office , this morning you mentioned the report Parliament has asked me to present on Turkey ' s accession process .
I think I can announce the body of the conclusions today .
Like the Commission , Parliament salutes Turkey ' s endeavours in drawing up a programme for developing its legal arsenal to comply more closely with the requirements of the European Union , especially in terms of respect for human rights .
At the same time we understand the stir caused among the various political parties and public opinion as it recognises the magnitude of the reforms that country must agree to introduce before it joins the Union .
We want our partners to know that the European Union has no intention of interfering in their domestic affairs , but is offering them a contract under terms now redefined under the accession partnership and the agreement on the Charter of Fundamental Rights . It is up to them to accept or refuse that contract .
In that connection , I believe we must have the courage to tell the Turkish people that there are at least two prior conditions governing its accession to Europe . First , respect for the need for identity .
This is being demonstrated across Europe by our fellow citizens all the more clearly because they have the greatest desire to protect their roots in the face of the ineluctable progress of globalisation .
Europe is resolute in recognising that need for identity , aware that its diversity is the source of its wealth .
That is why it insists on the rights , but also the duties , of minorities . That is the spirit in which the Union proposes to help Turkey find a solution to the Kurdish problem .
There must also be a solution to the Cyprus problem as soon as possible , because nobody in Europe would accept a wall continuing to divide it , like those of Berlin , Beirut and Sarajevo ( amongst others ) , which have now , fortunately , come down .
Mr President , our debate today reveals a continuing difficulty at the heart of the European Union 's approach on foreign policy .
Is the intention to give an enlarging group of European nations a stronger voice on the world stage and improve the coordination and effectiveness of their policies on a range of issues ?
If so , I can support this .
Or is the ambition to move towards a European state , with its own foreign and security policy backed by its own diplomatic service and army ?
This concept I wholeheartedly reject .
It is certainly not wanted by the British people , nor , I believe , is it wanted by many of the citizens in the rest of Europe .
They have never been asked in honest terms .
Mr Patten today reiterated his view that for the indefinite future there will be national foreign ministers .
But this is only half the problem .
What will be the content of their jobs in ten years ' time if the EU continues on its present course ?
After all , once EMU is fully established there will still be finance ministers in the euroland countries .
But how much real responsibility will they have ?
Clearly there are many in this House who are quite open in their advocacy of a single foreign ministry for Europe and the Galeote Quecedo report which was voted on today with its proposals for a permanent Community diplomatic service is , I am afraid , a step in this direction .
I am also concerned by the extent to which many want to define European foreign policy in terms of its distinctiveness from the United States policies , sometimes even deliberate hostility to the United States positions .
A priority for the European Union must surely be to break out of this antagonistic mindset and instead seek , as a primary aim , to contribute to western solidarity .
The best forum for dealing with security policy issues is NATO rather than the European Union and the danger is that the common European security and defence policy , with its emphasis on an autonomous capability , will undermine the alliance which served us so well during more threatening times .
Mr President , some of us have asked the President-in-Office and Commissioner Patten specific questions .
I realise the debate has been particularly badly organised , being split into two halves , but could we at least have written responses ?
This is certainly an option , and I assume that the Commissioner as well as the Minister would be prepared to reply to the Parliament in writing .
Unfortunately , I have to say that we have no time left today to continue the debate and allow responses .
At the end of these explanations , I have received six motions for resolutions in accordance with Article 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday , at 12 noon .
Financial year 2001
The next item is the submission by the Council of the draft budget for the financial year 2001 .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Patten for being here .
Ladies and gentlemen , today , on behalf of the Council Presidency , it is my honour to present the draft budget of the European Communities , as drawn up by the Council on 20 July .
As you know , my colleague Florence Parly chaired that Council , but unfortunately she cannot be here today , so please accept her apologies .
First of all , I would like to pay tribute to the excellent work done by the Portuguese Presidency ahead of the Council ' s adoption , at first reading , of the draft budget for 2001 .
I would also like to highlight the excellent climate in which this budgetary procedure has opened .
This year , the provisions of the new interinstitutional agreement of 6 May 1999 have taken full effect .
The first session under the trialogue procedure bringing together the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission was held on 6 July , here in Strasbourg , and demonstrated its usefulness in terms of better mutual understanding of our respective positions and priorities .
The conciliation meeting between the European Parliament and the Council , which took place on 20 July , was , I think , very positive .
In particular , it became possible to find a great many points of agreement between institutions and make good progress on potential sources of disagreement .
I hope we can continue to work in the same spirit and produce a budget for the European Communities for the financial year 2001 which gives us the resources to meet the priorities and challenges the European Union is about to face .
Firstly , I want to set out the major guidelines which have determined the way the Council has drawn up this draft budget before going into more detail - though not at length - on the various categories .
In the first place , the Council has ensured proper funding , after identifying clear priorities and real needs , for the European Union ' s various actions , especially those in the area of external relations , which we were talking about just now - albeit with a gap .
So the evaluation of the likely implementation of the appropriations has been taken into account for commitment appropriations .
The Council has also paid special attention to the development of payment appropriations , setting their increase compared with 2000 at a maximum rate of 3.5 % , which in particular takes account of the capacity for implementation and the probable rate of payments entailed by the balances to be settled .
That growth , which is much higher than the Member States authorise for their national budgets , plus the forecast inflation for 2001 , is a mark of the Council ' s determination to ensure satisfactory financing of all European Union policies .
Finally , this draft budget remains totally in keeping with the interinstitutional agreement of 6 May 1999on budgetary discipline and improvement of the budgetary procedure .
In particular the Council felt it was absolutely essential to respect - and I stress this - each of the annual expenditure ceilings set by the financial perspectives which our three institutions , Parliament , the Council and the Commission , signed up to a year ago .
Those are the bases for the draft budget for the financial year 2001 , drawn up by the Council on 20 July , to provide for EUR 95.9 billion in commitment appropriations , an increase of 2.7 % over the budget for 2000 , and EUR 92.5 billion in payment appropriations , an increase of 3.5 % over the budget for 2000 .
Particular importance has been accorded to the increase in the importance of appropriations for aid to the Western Balkans , a repeatedly affirmed priority and one I reaffirm here , because I do not accept the comment earlier about ' chaos ' .
The situation is sensitive , but not chaotic .
There is work to be done , and work is being done .
The Council hopes to convert this priority into figures with a total appropriation 30 % higher than in 2000 .
The EUR 614 million adopted by the Council will ensure funding of all foreseeable needs .
I would add - and of course this is important in our discussions - that it has been possible to earmark such a significant amount without having to revise the financial perspectives aimed at strengthening category 4 , as proposed by the Commission .
The Council has also ensured the funding of all the European Union ' s other policy priorities .
Without launching into an exhaustive description of the Council ' s draft budget , which is in any case the subject of the detailed explanatory statement circulated to you , I would now like to present the Council ' s 2001 draft budget decisions in a rather more specific way , that is , by category of expenditure .
First , as regards category 1 of the financial perspectives relating to agricultural expenditure , the draft budget provides for an increase in commitment appropriations of 6.3 % in relation to 2000 in order to fund the CAP reform agreed by the European Council in Berlin in March 1999 .
Nevertheless , for sub-category 1a of the financial perspectives , covering CAP market expenditure , the Council decided on figures some EUR 330 million lower in total than those proposed by the Commission in its preliminary draft .
In fact , there is under-implementation of these appropriations every year .
The Council therefore felt that it could achieve a reduction by targeting some traditionally underspent budget lines .
By doing so , it is also demonstrating the will to make special efforts to achieve significant savings in the compulsory expenditure and not just in non-compulsory expenditure .
The savings made , in comparison with the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget , do not prevent the Council providing for an increase , which also responds to Parliament ' s concerns , in two budgetary lines : for the distribution of milk to schoolchildren , which I know has been the subject of massive correspondence for more than a year now , and promotion of product quality .
For expenditure related to rural development , taking account of the delays which have built up in the approval and implementation of national rural development plans , the Council felt that a margin of EUR 225 million , under the ceiling of sub-category 1b of the financial perspectives , could be earmarked .
The development of these appropriations , however , shows an increase of 4.6 % compared with 2000 , an increase which reflects the priority the Council accords the appropriations allocated to what now constitutes a second pillar of the CAP .
So the draft budget drawn up by the Council includes margins available under the ceilings of sub-categories 1a and 1b of the financial perspectives .
However , I want to specify that the Council is , of course , prepared to re-examine agricultural expenditure this autumn in the light of the content of the letter of amendment the Commission will be presenting and to reconsider , at that time , developments in market and rural development expenditure .
As regards structural actions , covered by category 2 of the financial perspectives , the Council has budgeted this whole category as commitment appropriations in line with the conclusions of the Berlin European Council of March 1999 and , in addition , it has renewed all the payment appropriations entered in 2000 .
But it hoped to increase the Cohesion Fund allocations by some EUR 360 million over provision in the Commission ' s preliminary draft , to take account of the forecasts for implementation of these credits in the Member States .
On category 3 of the financial perspectives relating to the funding of internal policies , the Council was primarily intent on ensuring the appropriate funding for the multiannual programmes while respecting , where applicable , the programming decided jointly with Parliament .
That is why it has accepted the amounts requested by the Commission in its preliminary draft budget for the framework programme for research and development as well as for the trans-European networks .
It has done the same with regard to the appropriations requested to improve the financial environment of SMEs and the start up of the LIFE 3 programme .
The Council believes the right amount has been identified to get the LIFE 3 programme off to a good start .
As regards the extension of the ' Employment ' initiative , agreed by Parliament to strengthen the employment dynamic begun by the Amsterdam European Council , the conciliation meeting between the European Parliament and the Council held on 20 July demonstrated that this subject represents a priority for both our institutions for the 2001 budget , especially in terms of building on the conclusions of the Feira European Council .
However , the Council is waiting for the assessment of the previous initiative soon to be delivered by the Commission with a view to seeking agreement with Parliament about its funding in the context of a global agreement during the second reading .
Furthermore , it has identified a precautionary margin of EUR 208 million more than the one in the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget , the objective being to have enough room for manoeuvre over and above a necessary margin under the ceiling of category 3 to deal with the new priorities shared by the Council and by Parliament , such as the ' employment ' initiative I mentioned earlier .
I now come to the financing of the European Union external actions covered by category 4 of the financial perspectives .
I do not need to remind you , after the debate we had just now , of the high priority the Council accords to aid to the Western Balkans . Here , as I have already indicated , the draft budget provides for an increase of 30 % in comparison with 2000 .
The EUR 614 million adopted by the Council will be enough to finance all the foreseeable needs .
This figure is based on the only evaluation of needs currently available , set out in the 1999 World Bank report on rebuilding Kosovo .
Wishing to be pragmatic , the Council is renewing but not increasing the appropriations intended for Serbia , as it is not yet eligible for Community assistance beyond the aid for democracy and civil society included in this envelope .
In general , the Council would like to see the implementation of effective and credible intervention in the region , based on an analysis of needs , adaptation of levels and types of aid to the nature of those needs , and distribution of effort between all the bilateral and multilateral donors .
As regards the other budget titles , although the Council has maintained the major allocations , for a limited number of budgetary lines it has not retained all the appropriations the Commission asked for in its preliminary draft budget .
I am thinking in particular of the TACIS programme , the funding of KEDO , the international fisheries agreements , the rapid reaction arrangements and the MEDA programme .
On the other hand , the Council has kept to the Commission ' s preliminary draft for the vast majority of the other cooperation programmes .
However I want to emphasise , as regards the MEDA programme , that the draft budget provides for an amount of EUR 701 million which is higher than the annual average allocation over the period 1995-1999 .
The reduction of EUR 150 million made by the Council in comparison with what the Commission is asking for , takes account of the stock of still unpaid commitments still on this programme , and that represents several years of implementation .
I take this opportunity to remind you of the Council ' s determination to contribute to better management of the programme , an indispensable prior condition , in our view , to enhancing our efforts .
Despite this reduction - motivated by the need to reabsorb the outstanding balance - the MEDA programme naturally remains very important to the Council .
The French Presidency ' s objective is to achieve the adoption of the new multiannual regulation for MEDA soon and it will in particular be listening to the European Parliament on this subject .
I would also like to reaffirm the Council ' s commitment to the accession process for Cyprus and Malta , and here I want to congratulate Mr Morillon on the conclusions of his report , which he outlined earlier .
We look forward to reading the report with interest , not to say impatience .
Consequently we have followed the Commission by grouping the appropriations asked for together under the heading of ' pre-accession strategy ' .
However we have not followed up the Commission ' s proposal for a revision of the financial perspectives , transferring these appropriations to category 7 , and we have kept them in category 4 .
Finally , I want to express my satisfaction that agreement was reached at the conciliation meeting between the European Parliament and the Council on 20 July on the amount of the appropriations to be included for the CFSP , as well as the transfer of the administrative expenses for CFSP special representatives , to the Council ' s budget , in accordance with the institutional agreement of 1999 .
This agreement has given rise to the drafting of two joint declarations , one of which specifies that the sums included in the Council ' s budget under the heading of CFSP administrative expenses should take account of their impact on the general position for category 5 , while the other commits the Council to ensuring that the estimates for administrative costs anticipated for each new CFSP decision are transmitted in good time to the other branch of the budgetary authority .
As you can appreciate , the Council has therefore tried to fund the various priorities in the field of European Union external actions appropriately and in doing so it has earmarked a margin of EUR 184 million under the ceiling of category 4 of the financial perspectives .
In drawing up its draft budget for the administrative expenditure covered by category 5 of the financial perspectives , the Council has been concerned to stabilise current expenditure , while taking account of the exceptional needs of the institutions , especially as regards staff for the Anti-fraud Office and the Court of Justice .
As regards the Commission ' s budget , the Council did not make any decision in July , as it was awaiting the letter of amendment from the Commission which has just been presented , so the Council will now be examining that proposal and applying the lessons from the reorganisation work headed up by Neil Kinnock .
The Council is ready to do whatever is necessary to examine this letter of amendment so that its incidence can be taken into account as from first reading by the European Parliament .
To that end , there is a margin of EUR 113 million under the ceiling of category 5 of the financial perspectives .
I wish to conclude this overview of the various categories of expenditure with the expenditure on pre-accession aid .
For these the Council has kept the Commission ' s figure for commitment appropriations .
For payment appropriations , the Council has adjusted the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget figure downward by EUR 300 million .
In line with the logic prevailing for the other categories , the Council has taken maximum account of the substantial underspend of these appropriations in 2000 .
Despite this reduction compared with the Commission ' s preliminary draft , the pre-accession payment appropriations recorded a strong increase of 10.8 % compared with 2000 , which again reflects the importance accorded this expenditure as absolutely vital to the proper preparation of our major political aim , the enlargement , a priority shared by the Council , the European Parliament and the Commission .
Naturally , I wish to take this opportunity to say that I am sure the discussion between Mr Verheugen and the European Parliament , tomorrow , will make it possible to eliminate a number of misunderstandings .
I know Günther Verheugen well , I know how committed he is to enlargement and how hard he is working for its success .
Before I end , I would like to take this opportunity to say how pleased I am about the agreement reached , at the conciliation meeting between the European Parliament and the Council on 20 July , on a statement on financial programming .
Under the terms of this joint declaration , the Commission will now be obliged to evaluate the financial consequences of each of its new proposals , in particular for categories 3 and 4 of the financial perspectives .
I am sure that will be a fundamental factor in clarifying the decisions of the budgetary authority .
Anyway it will undoubtedly mean better budgetary forecasting and should be extremely useful during future budgetary procedures .
To conclude this overview , which I think has been as brief as it could be , I think , the draft budget being forwarded to you offers a balanced compromise whereby the European Union ' s priorities can be funded while absolutely fundamentally respecting the Berlin financial perspectives - and we all know that it was not easy task to define them .
The 1999 interinstitutional agreement established conciliation between the institutions in the course of the budgetary procedure , and we are all bound to benefit this year and in the future .
In this connection , I am pleased with the progress we were already able to make , even before adoption of the draft budget at first reading by the Council , in bringing together the points of view of the institutions .
It seems to me that the draft I have just presented to you draws a number of lessons from that conciliation .
In any case I hope it gives you a good foundation for starting your work on the budget and that it will contribute to the establishment of a budget for 2001 which respects the priorities of each of the institutions , one which is satisfactory in terms of our joint mission , fulfilling our responsibilities towards Europe and its peoples .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , you will shortly be adopting two regulations that are highly significant in budgetary terms , one being the regulation on budgetary discipline in the agricultural sector , and the other being the regulation on own resources , that is to say , the financing of the budget .
On behalf of the Commission , I am able to tell you that we are most satisfied with the outcome of the discussions , and are delighted that these two difficult matters will soon be resolved .
However , the Commission takes a dim view of the outcome of the Council ' s discussions on Budget 2001 .
Accordingly , I am bound to contradict the assessment of the President-in-Office .
At first reading , the Council concentrated largely on cutting payment appropriations right across the board .
The end result was the lowest draft budget of the past ten years , when considering the budget in relation to the EU ' s Gross National Product .
Now I have already made it clear to this august Chamber on numerous occasions that the Commission considers budgetary discipline to be an extremely important guiding principle , but the Council ' s approach , i.e. to cut payment appropriations irrespective of the level of commitments entered into in the past which are due for payment , does not constitute sound budgetary policy .
The Council ' s draft budget would cause the following to happen : the payment of arrears , i.e. the arrears of commitments entered into which have not yet been paid , would continue to mount up .
The Commission , on the other hand , supported by Parliament , would like to achieve the reverse , that is to reduce the arrears .
I believe that since we are in the happy position in the European Union of having an economy with high growth rates , now is the time to cut the arrears back , not add to them .
The Council has cut payment appropriations in the agricultural policy sphere by more than half a billion euro compared with the Commission ' s draft .
This beggars belief considering the fierce criticism that certain of the larger Member States have levelled at the Commission , because we proposed to release EUR 300 million from agricultural policy in order to make the necessary payments in the Balkans available .
Obviously the Council now considers there to be far greater scope for making cuts in agricultural expenditure , but it is not prepared to make the funds available for the new external policy priorities for the Balkans .
As happened last year , there was a very heated discussion on how much aid should be made available for the Balkans , and I would remind you that during the discussions on Budget 2000 , the Council took the line that it would not be possible to release the appropriations for Kosovo in any case .
Indeed , all the appropriations for Kosovo have in fact been tied up already .
The Kosovo agency for reconstruction is proving highly successful in its work , and that is surely something we should all support .
I would like briefly to take up the matter of Serbia , which you also mentioned in your speech .
The fact that no provision has been made for Serbia in the draft budget , or only to a very limited extent , sends out the wrong message in my view .
We find ourselves in a situation where we are competing in political terms with the dictator Milosevic , and we must convince the people that the European Union is willing to provide assistance .
I am standing firm on this : by the end of 2001 we should have EUR 800 million more at our disposal for the Western Balkans than we do at present .
Part of this could perhaps be made additionally available before the end of this year .
I hope to enlist your support in this matter .
Another word on foreign policy : the Budget Council has cut the funding for the Mediterranean programme - which is also something you mentioned - by EUR 150 million .
Putting these cuts into effect would no longer just be a budgetary policy measure though , it would also constitute a change in the foreign policy in this field , a renunciation of the Barcelona process .
The Commission believes this to be unacceptable .
Turning now to administrative expenditure , i.e. staffing expenditure : I would point out that the Commission did not request any new posts in its draft preliminary budget , apart from those for OLAF , the European anti-fraud agency .
We have now submitted a letter of amendment containing two key points : firstly a request for 400 new posts for the Commission with effect from the year 2001 , and secondly , budgetary measures which will enable us to do without the vast majority of Technical Assistance Offices , as per Parliament ' s request , and , in particular , that of the Committee on Budgets .
I have just this to say about the requests for more posts : at the beginning of this year , the Commission set up a working group under the leadership of the President of the Commission , at my recommendation , which examined the tasks performed by all departments and completed a critical examination of the staffing situation .
We ascertained where there was scope for reallocation of staff within and between the departments , with a view to improving the availability of resources for the key areas and for the political priorities , and in order to ascertain where we need to create new posts .
Our findings are now available to you .
The Commission has estimated that we need 1254 new posts for key activities and political priorities .
We can create a vast number of these 1254 new posts through reallocation , which will mean requesting a total of 717 new posts - 400 in the year 2001 and 317 in the year 2002 - particularly if we are to strengthen the areas of external assistance , health and consumer protection and environmental policy , as well as justice and internal affairs .
In addition , we have proposed a one-off early retirement scheme for 600 posts , organised in such a way as to have no impact on the budget , which would drastically reduce the need for new posts .
As an interim solution - particularly for the purposes of external assistance - we would ask the budgetary authority to allow us , until such time as a new administrative structure is created , to use the funding that has been available hitherto for the Technical Assistance Offices , for contract staff within the Commission .
We would also like to increase funding for the delegations , which are to be more actively involved in the administration of external assistance in future .
The Commission has learnt from past mistakes , which boils down to making clear the fact that the Commission cannot perform miracles ; all it can do is make it its business to perform to a high standard . And if we are to acquit ourselves well of our tasks , we need the necessary resources , including the necessary staffing resources .
On a final note , it is fair to say that there are very testing times ahead again for all those involved in the budgetary discussions .
I hope we all find the energy and patience we need during this period to meet each other halfway and bring these discussions to a satisfactory conclusion .
Many thanks , Commissioner .
We will certainly need energy and patience .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am the rapporteur for the so-called remaining sections of the Budget .
This subject matter will seem somewhat dry after the eloquent presentation delivered by the Chairman of our Committee on Budgets .
I believe that whilst the small budgets may not be quite as fascinating in terms of policy areas , they are not without interest when it comes to the question as to how organisational and staffing resources can be used to guarantee the effectiveness of the institutions of the European Union .
I have a few comments to make on the Council ' s first reading in this respect , which I have already submitted to the Committee on Budgets in the form of a discussion paper .
I will start with the European Court of Justice .
The Council has recognised the difficult situation facing the Court in relation to the translations backlog , and has proposed that 47 new posts be created .
At the same time , however , the across-the-board cut was increased from 2.5 % to 5.1 % , which means that these newly created posts cannot be filled .
I believe this is a contradiction-in-terms which has still to be resolved .
As rapporteur , I will duly prepare proposals to this end .
The situation is further exacerbated by the fact that the funding for the freelance translator reserves , which we need so badly in order to clear the backlog , have also been cut .
In other words , for all the Council may have recognised the problem , this is not reflected in the budget in concrete figures .
I have taken a very detailed look at the promotion systems of all the institutions , and I have noticed that the Court of Justice has now followed suit and established a promotion model based on demonstrable merit .
Switching over to a new system at the European Court of Justice will necessitate creating a large number of higher grades , which is something we have no hope of achieving within a year .
However , we must tackle this over the next few years .
This is another issue that the Council failed to take into account at first reading .
Turning now to the European Court of Auditors .
The only question that remains to be answered here , relates to the financing of the Court of Auditor ' s new building in Luxembourg .
For reasons that are beyond me , the Council has cut the funding for 2001 from EUR 7 million to EUR 5 million .
During discussions at the Court of Auditors , I was assured that the total cost requirement of EUR 25 million at 1998 prices will not be exceeded .
I therefore think it would be of more benefit to the European tax payer if the payments were to be made once the respective invoices have been received .
I will propose to the Committee on Budgets that we redeploy the Court of Auditors ' proposal .
I shall now move on to the Economic and Social Committee .
My guiding principle for the budgetary procedure for 2001 can be summed up by the following new High German expression : value for money .
Needless to say , the same holds true for the Economic and Social Committee .
The ECSC ' s working method and public image are extremely dubious .
Hence my proposals are geared towards raising the productivity of the Economic and Social Committee .
In particular , the promotion policy of the Economic and Social Committee requires careful scrutiny .
I hope that , as budgetary authorities , we will be able to put our heads together and come up with ideas that will lend the necessary weight to the ECSC ' s endeavours in this field .
We should also reflect on the role of the Secretariat of the Economic and Social Committee .
The ECSC currently derives all its expertise from outside experts .
However , I ask myself whether that should be the aim of such an institution ' s work .
That is something else we need to discuss .
The same applies to the Committee of the Regions .
Here too it is my goal , under the ' value for money ' maxim , to promote the overall productivity of the committee through a variety of measures .
I am only able to mention one interesting aspect .
The committee has asked for an increase in the funding required to cover the travel and subsistence costs incurred by regional representatives of candidate countries attending plenary sittings as observers .
We have placed part of this money for the financial year 2000 in reserve .
To date , there has been no application for us to release these funds .
At the same time , however , the Committee of the Regions has declared that it has need of more funds for the year 2001 .
My response will be to propose that these funds should also be placed in reserve , because the need for funding allocations is evidently by no means as pressing as we are always given to believe during budgetary negotiations .
I only have a very brief comment to make in respect of the Ombudsman .
There is not a great deal to add here .
The Council has grasped the nettle and we support them in this .
I will not submit any further proposals on this matter .
To sum up : overall , we are being very sparing with the European tax payer ' s money in performing our role as part of the budgetary authority .
It is imperative that we take the same line for the administrative budget .
There are major tasks in store for us over the next few years .
We are in a position to create financial leeway for 2001 , which we will hopefully be able to turn to good account when it comes to dealing with the administrative side of enlargement .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President , Commissioner , honourable members , as the last person to speak on this agenda item , all I can do of course is make a few points and reiterate a few things that have already been said .
But as you are all yourselves aware , repetition is the only way to learn .
First of all , I would like to thank the Council for the constructive cooperation it has provided throughout the year ' s trialogues and in all the conciliation meetings .
However , it is not just the current Council Presidency that I should like to thank , but also the previous one , the Portuguese Presidency , for creating a thoroughly cordial atmosphere despite all the differences of opinion .
I shall therefore deliver the good news first : compared with this year ' s budget , both the Commission and the Council - albeit only temporarily - have proposed a total reduction of EUR 144 million in the budgetary lines for employment .
But Parliament has already made it clear in its guidelines that the issue of job creation is very close to our hearts , and that one of our first priorities in internal policy is to fight unemployment in Europe .
This is our determined aim , our goal , and we gave renewed expression to it in our resolution of July .
We have always found the Council ready to listen , both under the Portuguese and now under the French Presidency .
Accordingly , not only did the Council declare , in the course of the conciliation procedure , that it was willing to support our job creation initiative through suitable instruments for small and medium-sized enterprises , we have also agreed to come to an understanding , in the course of the budgetary procedure , on an amount within the meaning of number 33 of the Interinstitutional Agreement , which we intend to use to achieve our goal .
So far , so good .
So what exactly are the problematic areas ?
Where do Parliament and the Council differ ?
In view of the limited amount of time available to us all , allow me to mention just two .
Firstly there is the manner in which the Council seeks to finance those policies where there is fundamental agreement .
As Parliament made clear last year , we believe it is necessary to undertake a multiannual revision of Category 4 in order to meet the requirements for reconstruction aid in the Balkans in a stable and secure manner .
The Council flatly refuses to countenance such a revision of the Financial Perspective .
It obviously prefers a hand-to-mouth existence .
No revision !
That is the name of the game .
The Council has obviously made this its guiding principle , for how else are we to interpret the fact that it persists in refusing to commit the funds for the pre-accession countries Cyprus and Malta to Chapter 7 of the pre-accession strategy ?
After all , that is where they belong logically , and in terms of content .
But the Council does not want there to be a revision , even if it is not bound up with a financial amendment .
As a Parliament , we now have an extremely difficult decision before us with respect to Category 4 .
The second major bone of contention is the Council ' s tendency to focus time and again , in the course of its budgetary readings , on payment appropriations alone .
The Commissioner made the same point .
I cannot say whether it is because of our institutional view , or whether it also says something about our personally held views , that we both majored on this in our criticism .
The Council ' s declared aim was an increase in expenditure for 2001 of only 3.5 % in comparison with the figures for the current budget .
The outcome is a draft budget in which the ratio of commitments to payments is no longer sound .
For example , on closer inspection , it is possible to discern that the commitments for 2001 are not matched with adequate payment appropriations .
In category 2 , for example , the commitments are covered to a mere 2.1 % .
In categories 3 , 4 and 7 the situation looks better , but still not good .
In many lines of the draft budget , the payments do not even cover a quarter of the commitments .
In quite a few lines , no payments whatsoever have been earmarked for the commitments for 2001 .
This no longer has a great deal to do with serious budgetary management .
I need hardly emphasise again that the Interinstitutional Agreement - which , incidentally , we concluded only 1 ¼ years ago - sets out as a matter of course , at various points , that there should be an orderly working out of the European Union ' s expenditure , which should be regarded as being closely linked with the working out of the commitments .
In fact it means that a strict relationship should be preserved between commitment appropriations and payment appropriations .
The Council is neglecting this close relationship in the most criminal way .
Its aim is to reduce expenditure .
It argues that , at the end of the day , the Member States have to put their national budgets in order too .
That is all well and good , but it must not be allowed to bring our own common European budget into disorder from the very outset .
Aids
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on Aids .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , I shall indeed try to do as you say and talk about Aids .
Well , as you know , the Aids pandemic currently affects 33.6 million people , the majority of them living in developing countries .
According to UNAIDS , 5.6 million new cases and 2.6 million deaths were notified in 1999 , including 50 % women .
The epidemic has already wiped out the achievements of thirty years of development aid in the most affected countries .
The most tragic consequences are in Africa .
The African continent finally had the professionals and experts it so lacked at the time of independence .
Now the disease has taken a heavy toll among those trained adults of working age .
We cannot ignore the immense loss of human investment this first generation of victims represents , a loss which goes beyond the personal tragedy suffered by the sick and their families .
Nor do we forget the poorest and most destitute who are still deprived of treatment .
No one can forget the testimony of Judge Edwin Cameron , a white , homosexual , HIV positive man on the bench of the South African High Court .
He courageously came forward at the opening of the plenary session of the International AIDS Conference in Durban last July .
Only his social standing and income give him access to the treatment which is unfortunately inaccessible to the majority of his compatriots .
His testimony illustrates African injustice .
For around a decade , Africa has committed itself courageously to a difficult process of reform and structural adjustment .
But the epidemic is putting a heavy burden on the care system , making the modernisation of the health sector even more difficult .
Just when attempts are being made to establish methods of funding to guarantee better , more permanent services , the monstrous burden of AIDS falls on communities already assailed by the economic crisis , underdevelopment , an inadequate health structure and the lack of a social security system .
So the issue of HIV-AIDS lies at the very heart of sustainable development .
Aids decimates societies , threatens future generations and compromises economic growth .
The members of the UN Security Council now regard the issue as an absolute priority .
Beyond Africa , the pandemic is global .
Thirty-five million people live with the virus , but fewer than 500 000 have access to antiretroviral treatments .
It has to be recognised that , even here , there is a deep gulf between rich and poor .
Inequality of opportunity in terms of access to treatment , intolerable in itself , is all the more repugnant today because information circulates , and circulates fast , on this planet .
Today everyone knows these treatments exist .
Humanely , morally and politically it is not only desirable but crucial to seek solutions jointly with developing countries , which are suited to their situation , take account of their potential , and help them improve accessibility to these treatments , while pursuing cooperation in the areas of education , health , prevention , and the training of local medical staff .
The European Union has been aware since the beginning of the 1980s , of the need to give the developing countries practical assistance in the fight against HIV-AIDS , putting respect for the people affected , in particular the most vulnerable , at the centre of its concerns .
Hence it has participated in implementing actions in the areas of transfusion safety , information campaigns , raising young people ' s awareness , creation of documentation and information centres , as well as training and medical and social security benefits .
Some countries , France in particular , are also involved in initiatives to facilitate access to treatment .
The International Therapeutic Solidarity Fund has obtained encouraging initial results for the two access to medication programmes started in 1999 in Ivory Coast and Morocco .
New programmes are now being launched in Senegal , Vietnam and South Africa .
Even though these only affect a few individuals out of the millions of people in need , we feel sure they are contributing to international mobilisation and bringing in their wake the benefits of partnership and shared know-how .
Their effects are already apparent in the mother-child prevention programmes set up by UNAIDS and UNICEF .
So the international context is evolving .
The United Nations , its agencies and the World Bank are mobilising to strengthen international therapeutic solidarity .
An important , even historic , agreement has been concluded between WHO , UNAIDS and five pharmaceutical companies .
It means the price of medication used to treat Aids can be reduced .
Similarly , the recent decision to make nevirapine , an antiretroviral molecule effective in the prevention of mother-child transmission , freely available adds credibility to that agreement , because it proves that this is not just an announcement , and the pharmaceutical industry really can take practical action .
Finally , many countries are recognising that the indebtedness of developing countries is an intolerable burden on their economies and acts as a brake on their capacity to combat poverty effectively , let alone the pandemic .
France has taken specific steps to cancel that debt , while encouraging development and health education .
Such initiatives show that the mobilisation of the international community is strengthening , and it must not slacken .
But this is just a first stage in the struggle against the Aids pandemic .
At the international congress last July in Durban , on African territory , researchers , health professionals , non-governmental organisation campaigners and political leaders , were all unanimous in emphasising the urgency of the situation .
Contact with helpless health professionals , the resigned distress of mothers who have infected their own children , the powerlessness of the health authorities to act , visiting a paediatric hospital - all that further convinced me of the extent of the gulf between the inhabitants of the countries of the South and their fellow human beings who chanced to be born in our own countries .
New commitment is necessary .
We are convinced of that .
International aid must be strengthened urgently in the fight against HIV-AIDS .
Coordination of all resources at all levels remains one of the top priorities for international aid within the framework of the strategies defined at international level , in partnership with national Aids programmes and other donors .
We must urgently strengthen prevention programmes , improve the research effort geared to developing countries and give all patients real access to treatment .
Besides making antiretroviral medication available at reasonable prices to local health systems , access to treatment implies strengthening training actions , structural aid and support to patients ' associations .
Admittedly , mother-child transmission prevention programmes remain essential , but there is still a need for massive implementation of projects to provide access to treatment for chronic infection , because who is going to raise these children after we have saved them from infection ?
Access to medication poses complex ethical , medical and socio-economic problems , even political and cultural problems , which we must try to overcome by respecting the people we are dealing with and regarding them as partners to cooperate with .
Major cooperation must be established between donors , recipients , the pharmaceutical industry and associations to provide the operational systems for access to treatment .
Several initiatives have been launched .
First , a Commission round table will be held in September on Aids , tuberculosis and malaria .
A Japanese conference will also be held in the context of the G8 this autumn on these three diseases .
Finally , there is a proposal for a United Nations General Assembly Special Session to be devoted to Aids before May 2002 .
The presidency will support these initiatives to find lasting solutions to the problem of global and respectful responsibility for people suffering from the disease , by means of practical projects and partnership agreements with the countries concerned .
Guaranteeing access to quality treatment , information and the necessary resources for all must be the aim of the European Community .
Consideration of access to treatment is not new .
The road is hard , but it must be travelled .
We cannot succeed without everyone ' s participation : the pharmaceutical industry , the bilateral and multilateral donors , and the countries involved .
We know now that the epidemic can only be overcome through long-term commitment .
That commitment is all the more necessary because it would not be just immoral and dangerous for development and the progress of humanity , it would threaten world peace and equilibrium if recent advances , especially in treatment , were just to benefit the richest countries .
The Commission attended the 13th International Aids Conference , which took place in Durban , South Africa , from 7 to14 July 2000 .
The theme of the conference , ' Breaking the Silence ' , provided a framework which helped to strengthen national and international action against HIV / Aids .
The conference welcomed scientific progress in addressing Aids , especially news of the first efficacy trials for an Aids vaccine and the evidence that transmission of HIV from mother to infant could be largely prevented by cost-effective use of anti-retroviral drugs .
Also welcome was information on the many small-scale condom and safe sex empowerment education programmes that have proved their worth in stemming the spread of HIV / Aids .
I believe that the conference could have given more attention to the lessons of success stories as regards improving and expanding these prevention strategies because information and prevention is in fact the most important ways of fighting Aids .
Prevention is central to a successful long-term national , international and global response to Aids .
At the same time a full spectrum of care from basic treatment of opportunistic infections to entry retroviral therapy for HIV infection can no longer be denied to the vast majority of the millions of people infected with the virus .
The Commission welcomes the new initiatives being taken against HIV / Aids by some countries to produce cheaper generic drugs and would like to offer its support to help such countries provide technical assistance to other developing countries to enable them to pursue such initiatives .
Possibilities will be further discussed with the countries involved .
We recognise that the production of generic drugs could greatly improve access to care and treatment for HIV / Aids .
The statistics of the epidemic are frightening and still getting worse .
For example , one in four Zimbabweans will die from HIV / Aids , including one in three in the capital , Harare .
More than a million children are already orphaned by HIV / Aids in Zimbabwe , almost 10 % of the population .
More than half the pregnant women in some areas in Botswana are infected with HIV , and a third of them transmit HIV to their new-born babies during delivery .
The conference opened up exciting new opportunities and partnerships that will enable people who are vulnerable to HIV infection to gain access to technologies and procedures to make care more affordable for HIV / Aids sufferers and invest in new technologies and products to prevent and treat HIV / Aids .
These opportunities must be exploited immediately , and the Commission intends to play its part .
It is accordingly discussing innovative approaches with its developing country partners as well as with other donors .
We can and must be doing all that we should do about HIV / Aids .
We can and must also do everything possible to combat other major killer diseases affecting poor people .
Malaria and tuberculosis , both of which kill more than a million people a year , must assume new importance in our work to reduce poverty and ill-health .
Accelerated action on the three key communicable diseases - HIV / Aids , malaria and tuberculosis - has been addressed this year by a number of high-level meetings .
The Commission will shortly submit a communication to the Council and Parliament outlining proposals for accelerated action to improve access to proven key measures and commodities to develop active and effective delivery structures and systems for drugs and increase investment in research into and development of priority drugs and vaccines .
The communication points especially to the value of bringing condoms , bed nets and other preventive procedures to the poorest and most vulnerable more rapidly and on a sufficiently large scale .
The European Union accounted for 55 % of global development aid in the social sectors in 1997 and has increased its support for health , Aids and population programmes from 1 % of our total assistance in 1986 to over 8 % at the present time , compared to an OECD average of 5.5 % .
We are therefore focusing more and more on this field .
Total commitments of EUR 3.4 billion were earmarked for health , Aids and population between 1990 and 1998 , none of which was offered as loans .
This is in clear contrast to the recent offer from the United States to southern Africa .
The Commission is holding wide-ranging consultations on options for accelerated national and international action and innovative approaches to address these diseases .
On 28 September , in collaboration with the WHO and UN Aids , it will be hosting an international round table .
The meeting will consider how a comprehensive approach at national and international level might tackle these three diseases and how we can make a difference .
Madam President , I should like to express my thanks to the President of the Council and Commissioner Nielson for the statement they gave today with regard to the huge issue of Aids , especially in Africa .
When , in the early 80s , the full extent of the problem of Aids became clear , the Western world adopted a large number of policies in order to curb the illness and provide sound treatment to those who had contracted the disease .
A great deal of consideration was also given to prevention and consequently , in most Western countries , the illness failed to develop into the pandemic which was predicted in the 80s .
Each Aids victim , in Europe too , is one too many , but thank God there are not as many as was feared twenty years ago and survival rates have gradually increased .
How different is the situation in many Third World countries , especially in Africa !
There the tragedy has now exceeded everyone ' s expectations .
Out of the 18 million casualties this illness has claimed worldwide , the majority lived in sub-Saharan Africa , where the average life-span has fallen to under 50 years and will fall still further to 45 years .
Millions of African children are already having to go through life without parents , millions of families have broken up , millions of children and elderly people are having to manage without the support and care of an ever dwindling part of the generation in between .
And this is only the humanitarian tragedy .
Then there is the socio-economic tragedy .
Economic development is faced with more and more difficulties , investments are not being made because staffing levels are insufficient , schools are losing their teachers and hospitals can no longer cope with the problems .
In fact , we have to conclude that much of what has been achieved over the past 25 or 30 years in terms of development has been cancelled out by the Aids tragedy , and this is something which should alarm us all the more as the largest provider of aid to Africa .
What could Europe , the Commission , the European Union do to help Africa ?
I believe it is not helpful to try to copy European policy in Africa .
The situation in many African countries does not lend itself to European solutions .
Instead , we should start with a few positive examples , such that those in Uganda and Senegal , where there are opportunities to stabilise the extent of the illness to some degree .
And in our opinion , three key concepts apply : information and prevention , affordable treatment , and care of those left behind .
Information and prevention are essential , and the use of condoms is extremely important in this context .
As far as treatment is concerned , I believe it is important for the pharmaceutical industry to find affordable alternatives to the medication which is of some help in our Western countries , also where transmission of the illness from mother to child is concerned .
And as for the care for those left behind , I would draw your attention to the many orphans this illness has already created .
Finally , the Commission has announced that it will produce a memorandum to solve the problems but , to my mind , we have done too little so far , and the unit which is responsible for this care is too small .
I therefore hope with all my heart that the memorandum which Commissioner Nielson has announced will offer us a new perspective , with more people at the European Commission who are prepared to tackle this issue , with more coordination at European level and , more than anything , with more funding , because that is what is needed to help Africa leave this misery behind .
Madam President , in my view an important step was taken at the Durban International Aids Conference : although prevention also remains essential for combating this plague , the issue of access to treatment was finally placed at the heart of the debate .
Durban made it possible to approach the essential issues - the price of medication and the development of generic medication - frankly , and move forward in our thinking about intellectual property rights and compulsory licences .
It was about time .
The conduct of the big drug companies has too often contributed to imposing a two-speed treatment system : medication for the rich and despair for the poor .
That is why the initiative from the pharmaceutical laboratories on the price of medication , launched on the fringe of the conference , constitutes an encouraging beginning , as long as it was not just announced for effect .
The G8 Summit at Okinawa has also made it possible to set the seal on the commitment of the rich countries and set targets to lessen the ravages of Aids in Africa over the next ten years , but , unfortunately , the issue of resources was not really dealt with .
This very day a meeting should be taking place in New York , under the auspices of UNDP , between public and private operators to sign up to and finance the Aids action plan for South Africa .
There really is a feeling that people are finally beginning to ask the right questions .
Now perhaps the right answers should be provided .
Obviously the European Union is not standing on the sidelines of this mobilisation but I think we should step up a gear , and I heard the French Presidency express that hope .
We eagerly await the Commission ' s communication , with guidelines and proposals for combating the major transmissible diseases : Aids of course , but also malaria and tuberculosis .
Aware that the time has come not just for reflection but for action too , we expect really concrete proposals permitting very rapid progress .
I am thinking , in particular , of the debates on industrial property rights and compulsory licences .
I am thinking of the development of the International Therapeutic Solidarity Fund launched to raise international funds to give poor countries access to the new therapies , which must expand .
I am thinking of the organisation of an international conference involving poor countries , the pharmaceutical industries , the NGOs and the donors .
Perhaps the round table of 28 September , organised by the Commission , in liaison with WHO and UNAIDS could be the first stage in setting that up ?
Madam President , I am not going to repeat what has already been said , and said very well , and with very laudable intentions .
Rather , I am going to try to talk about facts .
I think the facts , today , are simple .
The facts are access to treatment and patient care .
UNAIDS itself acknowledges the ineffectiveness of the programme announced by the pharmaceutical laboratories , which were only trying to improve their image , in fact , and are now withdrawing when it comes to genuine negotiation of a reduction in the price of treatment .
The issue is no longer donations of medication , necessarily limited in time and subject to the selective interests of the laboratories , but adapting treatment price to purchasing power in the developing countries .
The European Union must urge the pharmaceutical multinationals to grant voluntary licences , a first step towards access to treatment for the deprived populations .
If that is not done , the European Union should impose respect for the agreements in case of medical emergency , and require the granting of compulsory licences , which would finally mitigate the problem of the price of treatment .
I think the agony of a whole continent takes precedence over special interests .
Madam President , I agree with Mrs Carlotti that the merit of the Durban conference was to make it clear that Aids is not being fought in the same way in Europe and in Africa .
Aids lays bare all the economic and social deficiencies of developing countries and grafts itself onto the more general problem of destitution .
Prevention cannot succeed unless it is accompanied by access to treatment .
So , and here I agree with the previous speaker , the pharmaceutical companies with the monopoly of manufacture and marketing of triple therapy and even AZT charge a high price for them .
We would not be having this debate if triple therapy cost a dollar .
And as the director of UNAIDS recognises , we need to increase the amount currently invested tenfold even to make a start on a real policy of prevention and social security .
Besides , medication cannot be distributed like sacks of rice .
Doctors , dispensaries and social support structures are needed .
And , by IMF dictate , poor countries are cutting public expenditure , in particular on education and health .
The European Union must contribute towards the rapid cancellation of the debt of African countries , which costs them 15 billion annually , so that those resources can be allocated to establishing the health infrastructure and new social programmes .
Finally , the research priority must be to perfect a vaccine .
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of the Members of the Bonino List .
I have taken note of the words of the Council representative to the effect that France will allocate part of the African countries ' debt to the fight against Aids .
This is a major initiative which we hope will be echoed by all the countries of the Union and countries outside the Union as well .
We call upon the Union to make a contribution as well so that more funds are invested in the fight against Aids in Africa , where 95 % of deaths caused by the HIV virus occur .
It is true that we currently spend USD 300 million per year on Africa , but , at the same time , Africa has a debt of USD 15 billion owed to the industrialised countries .
I would like to end by drawing attention to the great pervading silence and condemning it : I refer to the campaigns which aim to deter people from using condoms on religious grounds .
They are requesting people not to use condoms in the name of life , but that is to condemn the children to certain death .
Madam President , as a member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , I would like to express my distress at the outcome of the 13th Aids Conference in Durban , South Africa , which is at the very least alarming , and my deep concern for the future of the developing countries , particularly the African countries .
This new resolution supplements the resolutions tabled last year in Lusaka , Zambia .
However , sadly , the situation is tragic and has shown no improvement at all recently .
On the contrary , it is assuming huge proportions if we consider that , in Africa , five people die of Aids every minute .
The statistics presented by the experts are tragic , including the substantial population decline and the dramatic decrease in life expectancy in Africa , which will fall below the age of 45 by the year 2015 .
In the sub-Saharan area , as many as 10 % of the population will be affected by the virus .
I therefore feel that there is a need for the Commission and the Member States of the Union to make an ad hoc intervention , in consideration of the European Union 's major responsibility precisely towards developing countries .
Indeed , I would argue that we should relate the cancellation of the external debt of the poor countries to the fight against the Aids epidemic , and it is precisely with a view to this that we support the request of the specific programme Debt for Aids contained in the resolution .
The Cairo EU-Africa Summit on debt cancellation procedures and the Durban Conference are , in fact , closely related .
The grievous impact of Aids on economic growth and the close relationship between the fight against poverty and the fight against Aids requires coordination and closer and more effective cooperation between the WHO , the World Bank and the United Nations , with the involvement of the civil society of the countries concerned , the local Churches and the non-governmental organisations .
Madam President , despite significant scientific progress in treating Aids , the Aids epidemic is still ravaging more and more poor countries , thereby compounding problems in dealing with its multiple and serious consequences .
There is no doubt that preventive measures and treatment over recent years have considerably improved patients ' chances of survival in developed countries ; however , the same cannot be said of poor countries .
The spread of the disease has exceeded every worst-case scenario , especially in Africa ; as has already been mentioned , five people a minute die from Aids , which has now reached the point at which it is a threat to public health .
Every day , children infected with this virus are born in these countries due to a complete lack of suitable programmes for mothers-to-be .
Similarly , the cost of treatment is so high that few patients receive this , their rudimentary right .
In this context , I think that the proposed reduction in the price of drugs for the victims of Aids in these countries is extremely important and I should like to urge the Commission and the Council to support this endeavour by exerting pressure on pharmaceutical companies .
Similarly , a concerted effort must be made to develop integrated educational , preventive , treatment and welfare programmes for developing countries , at least until the vaccine is safe to use , which is what we are all hoping for .
Until then , prevention and therapy are the most important factors in controlling the spread and dealing with the disease and these are services which all citizens should receive , irrespective of where they live .
Madam President , everyone in this debate has emphasised the importance of preventive measures .
As we know , there is an old saying , prevention is better than cure .
With the approximately 15 years ' experience we have had of this epidemic - I myself have been active in connection with both the UN and the Red Cross - I can , however , see that we have not listened especially carefully to that saying .
As long as ten years ago , it was extremely clear how serious this epidemic could become in certain developing countries , but too little was done both in those countries and by the international community .
It is debatable what the reasons are why this epidemic hit poor countries especially hard , compared with how it affected countries in our own part of the world .
It obviously has to do with poverty , with lack of information and education , with patterns of sexual behaviour and , specifically , with young girls ' lack of education of a kind which would better enable them to resist sexual advances . It also has to do , of course , with the shortage of money within the health care sector .
I welcome the fact that both Commissioner Nielson and the French Presidency now regard and describe the work on combating the HIV epidemic as a main priority .
Money is not enough , however . Instead , we must ensure that the Commission obtains a sufficient number of qualified staff so that it is not isolated employees who are trying to push ahead with these issues .
It is also important to have new kinds of cooperation with the pharmaceuticals industry so that we can produce not only vaccines , but also medicines .
This applies not only to HIV but also to malaria .
We need to be guided by innovative thinking in this area .
When , finally , we talk about partnership , it is , as Commissioner Nielson said , extremely important to seek out whatever proves to have worked and to support it .
There is a whole host of programmes which are crying out for money and where contributions from the EU could be of use .
We talk a very great deal about Africa .
I am afraid that , in five to ten years ' time , the situation will be similar and very serious in parts of Asia .
I welcome Commissioner Nielson ' s conference on 28 September 2000 and hope that it will lead to something of a crash programme for tackling these problems still more vigorously in the future .
I have received seven motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , to wind up the debate on this statement .
Before closing the debate , I invite the President-in-Office to reply to the debate or at least conclude it .
Thank you , Madam President , for giving me a moment to say how moving it is to hear such powerful words spoken in this Parliament today , clearly demonstrating that we are of one mind in recognising that Aids truly reveals the state of poverty and injustice reigning on our planet .
We Europeans have a moral obligation to mobilise and it comes through from all these speeches that we are ready .
We are very grateful to the Commission for preparing its communication which we impatiently await and which will allow us to pool our energies and unite in a determination to act .
The time for thinking really is over .
We must act without delay because this is an emergency , and the French Presidency stands ready to put that determination to act into practice at European level .
To respond to the immense challenge we face , we need to mobilise all the partners , as I said in my earlier remarks , which drew a wholly positive echo from Parliament .
I can tell you that the presence on the Durban platform of the Director General of WHO , the European Commission representative and the President of the Health Council created immense hope .
We have no right to disappoint that hope and I will be at your side .
We will meet the challenge together .
We must denounce campaigns of disinformation , combat obscurantism , but not abandon any field of action .
I believe we must be conscious always of the need to promote information and training , prevention , access to care and treatment , and research - particularly into vaccines and medication .
. I just want to thank you for these contributions .
We are aware of the enormous challenge facing us .
Prevention works , but it takes time .
Uganda is a good illustration of this .
For us as donors , this means that we have to be able to show what I would call donor stamina .
We have to be able to continue and to support the right strategies .
Mr Mantovani said that we should forgive debt and use the money instead to combat Aids .
When we forgive debt , we have used the money .
You are suggesting that we use it twice .
That is a good innovative approach , but still not that easy .
This is , in fact , why I mentioned that the offer the United States has made is to make available on a loan basis USD 1 billion for buying medicine from US companies .
That is in my view not the right approach , because it will actually increase the already double problem of Aids and existing debt in African countries .
That is why I made the point that Europe is actually providing funding that does not increase the debt of our partner countries .
Finally , I would warn against the dream of a quick fix in terms of new medicine .
We are supporting this .
We are trying to crack the code of protective rights for the companies but it is not easy .
In the meantime , the scale of the costs here makes it more necessary to emphasise prevention rather than cure .
A cure is still far too expensive .
I want to thank the President and the Commissioner for their understanding .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at12 noon .
Creating a monitoring centre for industrial change
The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on creating a monitoring centre for industrial change .
I invite Mrs Péry to speak on behalf of the Council , and I know she will feel at home in this Chamber as she served as Vice-President of Parliament for many years .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me say how delighted I am to be speaking here , discovering these acoustics , as this is in fact the first time I have spoken in this Chamber .
First , I must present apologies from Martine Aubry who very much regrets not being here personally .
I want to thank the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and the parliamentary Group of the Party of European Socialists for the draft resolution to be debated , and the rapporteur , Mr Hughes .
I very much hope that our debate will contribute to progress on setting up European arrangements for monitoring industrial change , something the French Presidency takes a particular interest in .
You will note , Commissioner , that I said European arrangements , and I am deliberately non-specific about the name , because it is the principle that is important .
Before talking about the arrangements themselves , I think it is useful to give a brief review of the context in which this proposal was born .
The Special European Council in Luxembourg on 21 and 22 November 1997 tasked a high level group of experts with analysing industrial change in the European Union and looking at ways of anticipating and managing change as well as its economic and social repercussions .
The closure of the Renault Vilvorde plant is still a vivid memory .
All of us , in our own countries , are experiencing the radicalisation of certain social conflicts reflecting despair - I do mean despair - and incomprehension before the challenges of globalisation .
In its final report to the European Commission , the group of experts drew up an inventory and made recommendations .
These include the interesting proposal to the Commission to create a European monitoring centre for industrial change .
This centre would be a tool to help identify and analyse change in order to anticipate its consequences and ensure positive management of those developments .
This recommendation was received without comment as to the principle , the monitoring centre being perceived as a tool to assist restructuring , but debate arose around the work on its creation .
I believe there was also debate in the Commission and amongst both sides of industry .
I am now being told that positions have moved very close together on both on the tasks and on the structure of the centre , and I think that is a highly important factor .
Recognising this , and with your help , ladies and gentlemen , we need to create the conditions for rapid establishment of the European monitoring centre for industrial change .
The acceleration of the process of mergers and acquisitions in Europe is forever prompting us to think about the social and legal aspects of the issues raised .
The emergence of new information and communication technologies in the organisation of relations between the great principals and their sub-contractors - I am thinking of aeronautics , the motor industry - is bringing in its wake new ways of organising work liable to alter the industrial fabric substantially and promote the arrival of new territorial systems going beyond national frameworks .
As regards the future of employment , we need clarification to be able to make real forecasts successfully .
But clarification is also needed for developing vocational training both for learning a trade and for lifelong learning , which should become a right for everyone .
I very much hope , as the draft resolution underlines , that this will be included in the Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The nature and importance of the social dialogue accompanying these transformations goes hand in hand with the extent of restructuring or technological evolution .
The European monitoring centre for industrial change may respond to this problem if its tasks and structure are defined in that way .
The centre should identify and collect information relating to economic , technological , and labour market developments .
It should also identify and disseminate positive practical solutions to be implemented at various levels and promote exchange of experience on the evolution of and adaptation to change .
These tasks should respond to the needs of the European institutions , the social partners at all levels , the national and regional institutions and business .
There remains the question of how this monitoring function should be organised .
It is useful and necessary to remember that this centre should be a tool , not a place for political decision-making and industrial negotiations , and should be available to the publics I mentioned earlier .
It must be organised so as to fulfil its missions , and in our opinion that means a light , flexible structure .
For logistics it could rely on the existing European institutions .
In our opinion , European social partners and the Commission should naturally be involved in the management of the centre in appropriate ways .
A scientific council could determine the main guidelines and underwrite the work done .
A proposal that this European monitoring centre and the Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin should be close together makes sense and would receive our support .
In fact , the experience of that institution , its scope , the results of its work and its tripartite management , represent solid foundations for launching the centre .
In the view of the French Presidency , that proposal for a foundation should facilitate the rapid establishment of the centre .
France will do everything possible to ensure that it can be in place before the end of this presidency .
Madam President , I have not forgotten how precious time is in this institution , so I have made a point of respecting my speaking time .
Thank you , Madam President .
In 1997 , the closure of one Renault factory near Brussels employing 3 200 people focused public attention on the negative consequences of industrial change .
After this , in response to the European Council , the Commission invited a high level group of experts to report on the economic and social implications of industrial change and make recommendations on ways to prevent consequences of the kind witnessed at the Renault factory .
In its report the high level group recommended the creation of an observatory .
This report has been endorsed by the Council .
It is true that mechanisms and structures for the anticipation of change exist in the majority of Member States .
But at European level there is no kind of observatory or mechanism to support policy makers and social partners in responding to these changes .
I am convinced of the need to provide European social partners and policy makers with a tool which enables us to adopt a forward-looking approach where industrial change is discussed at European level , with a view to managing it through positive and preventive action .
We have already discussed it three times in Parliament .
We really believe that there is an urgent need for a new structure , an observatory or whatever we like to call it .
The Commission has already proposed in the social agenda presented in 28 June 2000 to invite the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin - which is an existing structure - to put in place an information mechanism for change .
This mechanism could also serve as a forum on change .
What is the role of this mechanism ?
This information mechanism should assist the social dialogue between employers and employees and it could support public authorities by providing information data and analysis of existing information on industrial change .
We all agree that it must be a lightweight and cost-effective structure and that it must be established as quickly as possible .
The social partners indicated their interest in this mechanism in the forum of 15 July and committed themselves to finalising their approaches and presenting their ideas on the possible structure for this mechanism .
Of course we shall take their opinion into account before our final proposal .
My last point is that anticipation of change and response to it must be multidimensional .
Coordination across all policy areas has been central to the Commission 's deliberations in this area .
So what we could say is that we can ensure that the employment DG will collaborate with other DGs , in particular the internal market , education , culture and enterprise DGs , to present an integrated approach for this mechanism .
We believe that the output of this mechanism will be available to support the decisions of EU institutions and EU partners and this could be done in a flexible way within the European Treaty .
Mr President , may I say from this side of the House as one who served in the last Parliament that it is a great pleasure to see Mrs Péry here in this Chamber in Parliament .
I would like to make several points about this issue of an observatory or monitoring centre .
First of all , existing bodies within the EU institutions are already doing this work and are capable of doing it .
It seems curious to me to propose another agency , more machinery , and more budgetary expenditure to duplicate work that is already taking place .
For example , the Joint Research Centre Institute in Seville that deals with prospective future technologies is looking at this area .
The Dublin Institute has been mentioned already .
Secondly , governments and other types of public sector organisations do not have a particularly good record or an aptitude for predicting change in industry , in commerce , in business and in enterprise .
Nor , in my view , should they try to do that .
Let the economy and market forces get on with it .
I am curious about the socialist emphasis on industrial change when we in the developed economies now live in a situation in which 20 % or less of the work-force is employed in conventional industry and everyone else works in the services sector in the new economy .
I am surprised because that emphasis denotes unawareness of this particular form of change .
In other words , it is all happening , it has happened already and furthermore it has happened probably despite , rather than because of , the fact that governments second-guess what is going to happen and how it should happen .
Moreover , if there is a need for study on an academic or research basis , then it is surely better to use existing bodies .
By all means involve the two sides of industry in the research work , but let us not set up yet another EU agency or body .
In short , we should not try to reinvent the wheel .
Instead , we should leave the economy and the market to get on with it , since this is the best way to promote change and renewal and create new jobs .
I too would like to welcome Nicole Péry back here in the Chamber and perhaps I could say , Nicole , that we miss you particularly when we have extremely difficult votes to transact .
Perhaps you could pop back periodically .
I would like to say that the compromise resolution tabled by my group and others has been cut down to the bare essentials to make it absolutely clear what we are calling for , but even so there seems to be a tremendous amount of confusion over exactly what we are calling for and I would therefore like to spell out two things that we are not calling for .
First , we are not calling for the creation of a new expensive agency or institute .
The tasks we want a monitoring centre to undertake can be handled at the Dublin Foundation and / or the Seville Joint Research Centre at little extra cost .
Second , we are not seeking to stop mergers , transfers , restructuring or globalisation itself .
That would be a ludicrous notion , but we want to see a socially responsible and anticipatory approach to these developments .
We want the establishment of a coordinating centre for the monitoring of industrial change as a contribution to a more pro-active approach to the management of medium and longer-term industrial change in terms of its impact within the European Union and I would draw Mr Chichester 's attention to the fact that service industries too are industries and we are looking at industrial change overall .
This would be a centre to gather information and intelligence from all possible partners and actors , business itself , institutions of higher and further education , the employment services both public and private , the social partners from all relevant actors and again I would say to Mr Chichester , we are not saying here that governments should try to predict change .

We want to work with all partners including business itself to try to assess the direction of change .
The task of such a centre then should be to channel relevant information on anticipated changes to decision-makers at all levels to help increase our overall capacity to prepare the policy changes necessary to harness the opportunities to be gained from the perceived direction of change .
This is not an idea we have plucked out of the air .
As both the minister and the Commissioner have said , this follows on from the Gyllenhammar High Level Group following the Vilvoorde closure by Renault .
The recommendation to create an observatory is one in fact that has been picked up in several EPP resolutions in recent months and I am therefore very surprised to see such a hostile resolution from that quarter here this week .
The Liberal and EPP resolution says that such a centre would try to interfere in the markets and in commercial decisions .
That is not the case at all .
This is not about interference in commercial decisions but about making sure that we maximise the chances of us all being winners rather than simply the passive victims of change .
But who knows , Mr Chichester , maybe even the world of commerce would benefit from the improved intelligence such a centre could provide .
My final point is this : the resolution by the EPP and the Liberals is factually incorrect .
It states that both Council and Commission have pulled back from the decision to create such an observatory , such a centre .
We have heard from both the presidency of the Council here today and from the Commission that they are actively pursuing the idea .
Your resolution is factually incorrect .
It is missing the point and I hope even that at the eleventh hour you will recognise a good idea when you see it , withdraw your resolution and support ours .
But perhaps I am a hopeless optimist .
Mr President , the debate is most interesting but , as you can see from the screen , Question Time is due to start at 6.10 p.m.
It does not matter if Question Time is late starting but can you guarantee that it will last one and a half hours because otherwise we shall run out of time and numerous questions on the agenda will not be discussed .
And , while I have the floor , I too am delighted to welcome the representative of the Council presidency to the House .
I greatly regret the situation , just as you do , because I am inheriting the problem .
The fact of the matter is , however , that I can only guarantee us one hour here .
I will communicate this problem - and you will probably do so as well - to the Conference of Presidents and to Parliament ' s Bureau , because it may occur once as an exceptional case , but when it happens more than once we must tackle the problem and find a solution to it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner and Mrs Péry , it was agreed at the Lisbon Summit that fifteen European Member States would be developing a common strategy for a smooth transition to a new economy .
This is in the interests of our citizens as well as industry .
The Liberal Group is totally against the setting up of a new administrative body that will further increase European bureaucracy .
A European Monitoring Centre for industrial change is at odds with the liberal principle that governments should not interfere in commercial decisions .
Do not pick the winners and let the winners pick .
That was also the conclusion at the Lisbon Summit .
I was therefore amazed to learn that less than three months after the event , both Mrs Péry , on behalf of the presidency and Mrs Diamantopoulou , on behalf of the Commission had completely changed tack .
I was really taken aback by this .
And there was I thinking we were dealing with reliable partners .
Remarkably , European government leaders , including those of social-democratic persuasion , do embrace the liberal principles and the new economy while in this House , the left wing falls back on old reflexes time and again .
The spectre of the repairable society is on the loose once again in Europe .
Therefore , my group has also failed to achieve a compromise with the Socialist Group on the resolution before us .
Europe and the European economy are doing well .
The blessings of the internal market and particularly the introduction of the euro have given employment a shot in the arm .
However , some large Member States are fearful to take the required measures , as a result of which they lose out on the benefits to be gained from economic growth .
A new Monitoring Centre is no antidote to this .
This is not the first time that this Parliament is discussing political interference in industry and business management .
The same arguments crop up time and again .
I do hope this time is the last time .
Mr President , the European Union is facing far-reaching changes in our economy , globalisation , the new economy , the expansion of new technology and all kinds of demographic factors as well .
These developments have a major impact on employment , the balance between rich and poor , social exclusion and the environment .
There are all kinds of frictions within the labour market , we will have to adapt our education system and , at the end of the day , these developments also have all kinds of effects on individual companies , some of which are closing down while others are being set up again , etc .
However , one minute we are pulling out all the stops to fight unemployment and the next we are attracting employees from third countries in order to solve the problems within the labour market , for example in the care or ICT sectors , just to quote a couple of odd examples .
What we have noticed is that sometimes the policy is ad-hoc or belated and , in a sense , Lisbon , with its " dotcom approach " , is a good example of this .
We need to take a more consistent line .
Secondly we need involvement , involvement in the support networks , and this is the social implication that needs to be developed .
We are of the opinion , therefore , that in order to accommodate this development within industry and sectors of industry , the advice of the working party must be followed at a high level and a coordinating centre set up to observe these changes . This centre should not be an unwieldy , new body but rather fall under the remit of an existing body .
This type of industrial change relies completely upon the full involvement of social partners , citizens and politicians at local , regional and national level .
Success will depend critically upon how well this change is managed . From this perspective , the Commission and Council should also ensure that topics such as the right to information and consultation , revision of the law on works councils and the role of employees and citizens in mergers and business closures with their serious social consequences can be brought up for discussion sooner rather than later .
This too seems to us to be essential for the purposes of managing industrial change .
We are not going to oppose the creation of a monitoring centre for industrial change .
The right ' s unanimous opposition to it only confirms their rejection of the slightest transparency on the disastrous consequences for society of the factory closures and redundancies people have the nerve to present to us as inevitable responses to change .
But this monitoring centre can only be a statistical instrument , and not even an objective one , in this class society .
A monitoring centre cannot replace the political will to prevent big business sacking workers to make bigger profits .
Calling for social cohesion amounts to asking workers made redundant by a firm which is closing down , and unemployed people who are victims of restructuring , to endure their fate patiently .
Most of the mergers or restructurings are financial operations quite unrelated to industrial change .
And it is always the workers who have to pay the price , never the shareholders .
That is why I say to the workers that they can and must defend themselves , in particular by imposing a ban on redundancies on any company which is making profits .
Accumulated profits should be used to finance the distribution of work amongst all , with no decrease in wages , no precariousness and no flexibility .
I have received 7 motions for resolutions to close this statement , tabled in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
My group would have preferred it if we had not concluded this , in itself interesting , debate with resolutions .
This is in response to the comments made by Mr Hughes .
I believe that the Council has indeed introduced new elements today .
Judging from the discussion , the Council has made some progress .
The Commission statement was also extremely clear and , in my opinion , we should all examine it very carefully once again . This would be the best way forward .
Secondly , it is true that we need to avoid excessive bureaucracy .
I fully share the view of my neighbour , Mr Chichester on this matter .
This is a key point .
However , I was also reminded of what happened to the Titanic .
It sank because there was no observation system for icebergs in those days .
Needless to say , after the sinking of the Titanic , such a system was introduced without delay .
Surely over the past few years , we have seen a few cases , also in respect of industrial changes , where a little prescience might have prevented the worst from happening .
I personally take the view that we could explore this route a little more , provided it does not lead to further bureaucracy , especially in our host country .
We are constantly being faced with all kinds of states of affairs , blockades and such like , and I believe it would be of great benefit if more objective information on future changes could be provided so that we could perhaps prevent a few mistakes from being made , as might have happened in the case of the Titanic .
I like the film , but I would hate to see it time and again .
Mr President , let me start with a quotation : ' Unregulated mergers , based merely on dominant capitalist concerns , have a devastating effect on the Union 's social cohesion .
That face of the European Union is unacceptable to men and women who wake up one morning to discover that the company they work for has changed hands and that they are at the mercy of their employer 's economic strategy options .
The effect on the lives of those people , their families and their entire region is traumatic and , let 's face it , inhuman .
Among Parliament 's various proposals , the idea of setting up an observatory for industrial change is of particular interest . In so far as such an establishment will be independent and will have appropriate resources to carry out its research , and its work is made public and can serve as a basis for democratic debate , it can make a powerful contribution to developing intergovernmental cooperation which , in this area of social policy , remains predominant . '
That is not a quotation from some irresponsible or lunatic left-winger .
I am in fact quoting our President , Mrs Fontaine , who made those statements at the Lisbon Summit on behalf of us all .
Now , listening to certain leaders of the uptight right , here , today , I wonder if these honourable Members of Mrs Fontaine ' s group really want to spend their time giving the lie to what our President said before the Heads of State and Government in Lisbon .
Of course , Mr Chichester and Mr Plooij-van Gorsel tell us , respectively , to ' leave it to the markets ' and ' not pick winners ' .
We know the old refrain only too well , privatise profit and nationalise losses .
My friend Steven Hughes has explained that the Socialists and the two other political groups tabling a joint resolution do not want a bureaucratic monster .
We do not want a new institution or agency but - as Mrs Péry , the representative of the presidency , says , and I welcome her too - a light arrangement , a light structure , which could coordinate the existing work .
In fact , the Commission has plenty of documentation available , and Eurostat can provide very interesting statistics on industrial evolution in Europe and beyond .
There are the national governments and research institutes .
There must be no duplication of existing work but coordination of it and a report , at least every six months , which can be debated in the Council and in the European Parliament .
We do not want to be mere spectators of the progress of industrial and social change .
We want to shape the future , and shaping the future does not mean fighting a rearguard action or useless protectionism , but accompanying change .
We are for the new technologies , we are for the new economy , but we also want to help the old sectors adapt .
Our aim is a pro-active policy . We want to anticipate change , because the future , and especially the economic future , is being built now .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , I would like to put this debate into context .
As a native of Auvergne , I would remind you that just about a year ago we were debating the Michelin crisis in this Chamber .
Michelin announced massive redundancies in its European factories at the same time as record profits on the stock exchange .
At that time , in this very House , we were collectively engaged in reviewing European regulations on company mergers .
I would suggest to the Commission that it might be worth having another look at Directive 94 / EC and Regulation 4064 / 89 to strengthen information to and consultation of employees before major change - a euphemism for redundancies - whether due to restructuring or merger .
A year later , as a first concrete step , we are offered a monitoring centre for industrial change .
Fine , but let it really serve the cause of the employees .
For that , two conditions seem indispensable . The Commission must be allowed to evaluate the implementation of the directive on collective redundancies and closures of companies , and make proposals so that effective sanctions can be applied in case of non-respect of regulations .
The two sides of industry must be associated with this initiative by means budgetary resources allocated by the European institutions .
Minister , it is a great pleasure to see you here again .
The new economy and globalisation are producing an acceleration of industrial change and Parliament has several times discussed this issue and has established -I myself was the rapporteur - a certain number of procedures and the European works councils , and has done work on information to and consultation of workers .
We are awaiting the results of these , Commissioner , because you know we are very committed to them .
We have also established procedures like the participation of employees in the capital , profits and results of the company , all indispensable procedures during industrial restructuring and change .
Of course there is still a great deal to be done in this field , but it seems to me that if we need to improve this type of procedure , as my colleagues have said , and it is not uptight to say so - we now have bodies in Europe like the Foundation in Dublin and the European Agency for Health and Safety in Bilbao , with which our Committee on Employment and Social Affairs cooperates , that are in a position to evaluate the consequences of these industrial changes effectively .
And we should not forget that both sides of industry also have an indispensable role to play as regards industrial change at the European and the social level .
More particularly , I hope the existing bodies will be required to contribute to making industrial change increasingly transparent and , Commissioner , I hope the texts we are waiting for , on information to and consultation of workers , and the European company , will one day be submitted to this Parliament .
Mr President , Mrs Péry , Mrs Diamanopoulou , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Péry for the clarity with which she outlined the Council 's proposal , which I fully support .
As has been said , the European Parliament has on several occasions , at times of crises , restructuring or conversion of production plant , decided by a large majority on the need for the European institutions and social dialogue partners to intervene early enough to be able to find all the possible solutions in order to avert avoidable serious social conflict and prevent the deindustrialisation of entire territories and the triggering-off of processes of serious social exclusion .
What Parliament was complaining of was the lack of information which would have made it possible to analyse these processes in due time and , more generally , to examine the changes taking place in production and employment in these firms before such an analysis lost its value due to the precipitous adoption of irreversible decisions .
I feel that the creation of a monitoring centre - a centre coordinating all the information useful for predicting restructuring and conversion processes - could be a valuable service for the Community institutions and facilitate social dialogue at European level .
For we are talking about a service activity , not a new institution , a service activity which would contribute to producing a high-quality , timely intervention which is the responsibility of the Union institutions alone .
Therefore , I call upon all those Members who voted on the resolutions on the restructuring processes , from Verwoord onwards , and especially those who voted on the Michelin affair in a resolution which explicitly provided for the establishment of a monitoring centre for industrial change , to show consistency on this occasion .
Mr President , with a tool such as this , it will , indeed , be possible not only to inform the workers concerned in advance and to explore the possibilities of averting or reducing redundancies - as stipulated by the Community Directive of 24 June 1992 - but also to facilitate at local and Community level dialogue which would make it possible to ascertain the existence of alternative solutions to those put forward by the companies .
These could be partly implemented through public intervention as well as through initiatives to find alternative employment for workers whose jobs are under threat and , in particular , initiatives for the vocational retraining of workers .
This is the only way we will be able to ward off the danger represented by restructuring processes or mergers of large companies for large numbers of workers and for certain areas which are undergoing a radical process of decline or exclusion , particularly affecting young workers .
Without such a tool and without such preventative analyses , Parliament is destined to remain a centre of belated , ineffective claims .
Mr President , Mr Hughes says he does not want a new agency and yet his resolution plainly calls for a new agency and to deny it is merely playing with words .
He says he wants no interference in industry , and yet Mrs Diamantopoulou talks about preventive measures .
She clearly thinks that change is a bad thing .
She wants to keep loss-making industries on life-support systems when we should be releasing the resources of labour and capital so that they can work in viable new enterprises .
If we want to survive and prosper in the 21st century then we must welcome and manage change .
We must not monitor and prevent it .
So I was deeply disheartened to hear of this proposal for an observatory .
The rule seems to be : another day , another quango .
For the benefit of colleagues I should perhaps explain that a quango is a recently-coined English word short for " quasi non-governmental organisation " , in other words , a new piece of bureaucracy , more money spent , more jobs for the boys , more patronage for their bosses .
And all for what ?
To produce fat reports which will be translated into 11 languages but which nobody will read .
We seem to have only two responses in the EU to any real or imagined problem .
We either create a new regulation without any concern as to whether existing regulations are working properly or we create an observatory .
Then we stand back proud and happy that we have solved the problem .
But we have not solved the problem .
We have simply postponed it .
We have wasted time and money and we have raised expectations which will not be fulfilled .
As with so many EU initiatives - I am thinking particularly of the proposed food standards agency - this observatory will simply duplicate the work of other organisations , of innumerable private research companies and accountancy firms , of academic and university institutes , of trade unions and chambers of commerce , and national and local government .
I put two questions to colleagues .
First , do we need this observatory at all ?
I think not .
But if we do , would it not be far quicker , cheaper and more cost-effective to commission one of our great European accounting firms to do the work ?
I am sure it would .
. ( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , just two sentences .
I have listened carefully to the debate which has taken place in this Chamber .
What I want to say is that all those who support the idea of a European monitoring centre agree on its mission and its form .
I find that approach interesting .
A mission of information , a mission of exchange , and as to the form , the structure , a flexible , light , efficient structure , relying on existing structures .
I see Parliament , the Commission and the presidency united , so I shall leave here quite optimistic that the monitoring centre will come into being .
Mr President , I shall be brief because I know time is short .
It was a very interesting debate and there were two dimensions . The first is the political one and the second is the technical one .
The political debate raised the question whether we should intervene in the new economy or not and I will make just a political point .
The new economy is not a natural phenomenon , it is a political phenomenon .
That is why there is a need for mechanisms and institutions - not to stop the changes but to manage the changes and to prevent their negative social consequences .
As regards the second dimension , the technical dimension , I agree with the EPP Group that there is no need for a new structure and I agree with all the others who say there is a need for a lightweight and flexible mechanism .
This is why we are not proposing a new institution or a new structure .
We are proposing to cooperate with the Dublin Institute and to take account of all the other resources ( the resources of the Commission and other European institutions such as EUROSTAT and the European Employment Observatory , the evaluations and other studies we have ) ; all these will be taken into account and this mechanism will support the social dialogue between partners , employers and the public and will support policy makers in managing this change .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0535 / 2000 ) . We will examine questions to the Council .
You know that we have very little time .
According to the Rules of Procedure , for supplementary questions - which are not obligatory - you have 1 minute , but there is a Parliament recommendation that only 30 seconds be used .
I am not going to insist on 30 seconds , but I would ask you only to ask questions that are essential .
I must point out that Question Nos 1 , 3 and 4 were included on the list of questions for the July Question Time but could not be replied to by the Council , because there was not sufficient time to translate them beforehand into all languages , and they are therefore being presented once again at the beginning of this part-session .
Since they deal with the same subject , Question Nos 1 and 2 will be taken together .
Question No 2 by ( H-643 / 00 ) :
Subject : United Nations General Assembly Special Session for Children What action does the Council intend to take in order to ensure that the EU makes a positive and constructive contribution to the United Nations General Assembly Special Session for Children , in September 2001 , when all states will review commitments and goals set ten years ago at the World Summit for Children ?
Does the Council agree that it is important that Member States , the Commission and the Council have a coherent approach to this Summit ?
Mr President , I would like to answer the questions from Mr Theonas and Mrs Kinnock together , because they both deal with the need to ensure that child labour is abolished for once and for all .
As regards Mr Theonas ' question , I must emphasise that the European Union fully recognises the importance of abolishing the exploitation of children , which deprives them of their right to a normal childhood and education , and their right not to be subjected to forced labour .
The European Union actively supports the action of the United Nations , the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations Children ' s Fund , better known here as UNICEF . It salutes the adoption of the ILO Convention concerning immediate prohibition and action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labour , ratified by the United States on 2 December 1999 , and it will work to ensure that this convention does indeed help eliminate the most intolerable forms of child labour .
The European Union regrets that the United States has not yet ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child .
Our representatives have been urging the United States to ratify it in bilateral contacts .
The Convention has been ratified by the Member States and is of capital importance for the European Union which is actively involved in the current preparations for the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on Children , scheduled for September 2001 , to assess progress achieved in the field of the rights of the child over the last ten years .
The European Union often raises human rights issues in the context of its political dialogue with the United States and the Council takes note of the case raised by the honourable Member .
On Mrs Kinnock ' s question , the Council entirely agrees with her on the importance of good preparation of September ' s UN General Assembly Special Session devoted to follow-up of the World Summit for Children .
The European Union has started actively preparing for the event .
It is one of our priorities for the 55th session of the UN General Assembly .
Although the success of the event depends in large measure on the commitment of the international community as a whole , the Council recognises that the European Union can and must play a major role in the preparations , a role encouraged during informal contacts held with representatives of UNICEF .
In addition , the Council is constantly attentive to the rights of the child wherever issues relating to human rights are dealt with .
The preparations for the special session are on the agenda of the Council ' s human rights group , and it intends to devote a special section of the European Union ' s annual human rights report to this issue .
Finally , the French Presidency has proposed holding a European Day of the Rights of the Child to its partners , possibly on 20 November 2000 - but I say that with reservations , because it has not yet been made official .
One last point : the Council is promoting the signature of two optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted and opened for signature by the United Nations General Assembly on 25 May 2000 , and we hope a lot of countries will sign at the Millennium Summit , which opens tomorrow and will implement these two optional protocols .
Mr President , I really must thank Mr Moscovici for the quality and content of his reply and for the fact that the European Union feels that the international conventions of the United Nations Organisation , such as the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child , should be ratified .
I should just like to observe , by way of a supplementary question , that ratification is extremely important , but often it is not enough .
Because , if I am not mistaken , the United States have ratified the new International Labour Organisation Convention on Child Labour but the convention is not being applied .
And where I think the minister needs to add to what he has told us is on whether the European Union , whether the Council will also demand at a practical level during the two days of contacts that the United States apply the provisions of the International Labour Organisation Convention and the United States convention on the Rights of the Child .
. ( FR ) It is true that the important thing is implementation , but it is difficult to implement a convention which has not been ratified .
That is why we want to start having a much more determined political dialogue with the United States on this issue and press for ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child by the United States .
We will also hold informal consultations to try to convince them of the need not just to ratify that convention but to adhere to it .
Question No 3 by ( H-0627 / 00 ) :
Subject : Involvement of labour and management In various Member States there is no dialogue of substance or effective cooperation between government bodies and representatives of labour and management on employment-related issues or , in a broader context , efforts to modernise the European social model .
The conclusions of the European Council held in Santa Maria da Feira referred to the need for labour and management to play a more significant role .
How does the Council envisage strengthening the role of labour and management ?
How will it monitor their involvement more effectively ?
The Council has always regarded social dialogue as enormously important .
But you will appreciate that it is not up to the Council to advocate any particular model of social dialogue at national level , because that lies entirely within the competence of each Member State .
However , in terms of the social dialogue at European level , both sides of industry in Europe are already heavily involved in two aspects of Community action : coordination of economic policies , and the effort to implement the European strategy for jobs .
On the latter aspect , both sides of industry participate , with the Council and Commission , in the work of the standing committee on employment with a view to facilitating coordination of employment policies in the Member States by harmonising them with Community objectives .
Our social partners are also associated with the work of the committee on employment , consultation of both sides of industry in this context being informal .
As regards the efforts to strengthen the European strategy for jobs , when the employment guidelines are revised in 2001 , both sides of industry , including those at national level , will be invited to play a more important role in their definition , and in implementing and evaluating the guidelines which fall within their scope .
The stress will be on modernising the organisation of work , education for lifelong learning and raising the employment rate , especially for women .
There are also grounds for suggesting that it is up to the Commission , pursuant to Article 138 of the Treaty , to consult both sides of industry on the possible orientation of a Community action before presenting proposals in the area of social policy .
As an example , the Commission has recently consulted its social partners on the possible orientation of a Community action on modernising and improving working relations .
As regards the modernisation of the European social model , both sides of industry will be associated with the work of the new committee on social protection , just as they are already associated with the work of the old committee on employment and the labour market and its successor , the committee on employment .
Following the conclusions of the Lisbon European Council , the Fifteen are due to adopt a European social policy agenda at the Nice European Council in December 2000 .
That is an important priority for the French Presidency .
The working document for that agenda is a communication from the Commission adopted on 28 June .
There will be contributions to it and consultations on it under the French Presidency , and naturally both sides of industry are expected to be closely associated in drawing up the social policy agenda .
Mr President , I should like to thank the minister for his reply ; I naturally endorse the fact that the importance and value of the social partners in shaping a new model are much greater than anyone can imagine .
But what I should like to ask is this : when a tripartite dialogue takes place between the two sides of industry and the national government , how far can the national government ignore what was jointly agreed and proposed by the social partners ?
Or , taken the other way , how binding on a government are proposals decided jointly by the social partners , who know better than anyone what the problems of society and the causes of unemployment are and what problems need to be solved in order to deal with unemployment , or how binding should they be on any national government ?
Council . ( FR ) Mr Folias , it would certainly be desirable to make things more restrictive , but this is not the route which has been adopted within the European Union .
On the one hand , there is the subsidiary nature of social problems and , on the other , the selection of a method we call the open method of coordination .
We are currently succeeding in reconciling the problems of economic coordination , the major objectives of economic policy , the problems of coordination in social terms , the guidelines for employment and the various methods , and the various bodies working on it .
I think that this is an approach which must be continued because , as we know , Europe is very diverse .
Europe must not and cannot interfere in everything .
At the same time , the involvement of both sides of industry must be continually intensified .
Mr President , the social partnership should be a forward-looking partnership .
The first priority should be to implement what both sides want for themselves , and I believe that dialogue is an essential and important prerequisite in this respect .
What do you perceive the role of the existing Economic and Social Committee to be in this context , and what changes do you think will need to be made here , to enable it to become more actively involved in the work in future ?
The Council does not have any response to this question at this stage .
Question No 4 by ( H-0697 / 00 ) :
Subject : Professor A Pelinka and Austria Is the Council aware of the case of Professor Anton Pelinka who has had his work in the European Monitoring Centre deliberately impeded and sabotaged by the Austrian Government and who has consequently had to resign from his position as Vice-President and member of the Management Committee of the Monitoring Centre ?
Does the Council not believe this to be a clear case of political interference of the kind many of us believed would follow from the entry into government of the Austrian Freedom Party ?
Does the Council not believe that this case justifies the imposition of sanctions and makes it all the more important for the sanctions to be maintained ?
The Council is indeed aware of Professor Pelinka ' s resignation from his post as Vice-President of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia on 31 May this year .
However , the measures adopted by the 14 Member States on 31 January , which are going to be reassessed , or , at least , which are due to be reassessed in the light of the report of the Wise Men , are of a strictly bilateral nature .
As such , they do not implicate the institutions of the European Union and , consequently , the Council is not justified in declaring an opinion on whether or not they should be maintained .
As you know , three experts were designated by the President of the European Court of Human Rights on 12 July in order to check specifically whether the Austrian Government had contravened common European values since taking office on 4 February , and also to look into the decidedly unique political character of the Austrian Freedom Party .
The Member States will , of course , be very interested to peruse the experts ' report when it is published , which , according to my information , should be very soon .
Mr President , I had the privilege of being a member of the Council of Ministers ' Consultative Committee on Racism and Xenophobia , along with Professor Pelinka .
He was a highly valued if not slightly boring member , who tried to prevent us going too far in our recommendations and acted as a brake on some of us who were more enthusiastic about pushing forward .
Is the Council aware that the management committee of the Monitoring Centre has passed a resolution expressing regret at the resignation of Professor Pelinka and the events leading to that resignation and is the Council prepared to draw the attention of the Wise Men to this particular incident and ask them to include that in their report because it clearly seems to be a possible example of how our common European values are being undermined by the current government in Austria ?
Mr Ford , I have my own personal opinion on the matter .
I imagine that you know something of my views as a member of the French Government .
They are known to Austria at least .
The fact remains , however , that I am speaking right now on behalf of the Council and , let me repeat , these measures are bilateral measures , not measures undertaken in the context of the European Union .
As far as the report of the Wise Men is concerned , it is , by definition , a matter for them alone . I have no doubt but that in the detailed study they make of the Austrian situation , after a number of consultations , they will be able to take the diversity of individual situations into consideration , or , at least , I hope so .
That , in any case , was the mandate given them .
I have listened to the French Presidency ' s answer with a great deal of interest .
The Pelinka case is a very serious legal case which may be said to constitute direct interference with freedom of expression in so far as the legal apparatus is being used in practice to silence political criticism .
The Council has now explained that it cannot comment " in its capacity as the Council of Ministers " , but the French Government may perhaps comment in its own capacity .
Is this matter not thought to be serious and to need to be included in the assessment being made in the Wise Men ' s report ?
I believe that the stance of the French Government and even the French authorities on this matter has been known from the outset .
We were by no means the last to demand the bilateral measures which were taken .
The fact remains that I am speaking right now , let me repeat , on behalf of the Presidency of the Council of the European Union , and that those measures are not measures undertaken within the context of the European institutions but rather a set of bilateral measures undertaken by 14 Member States with regard to the fifteenth .
That , sir , is all I wished to say , and I repeat , once again , that , by definition , if we want the Wise Men ' s report to be truly wise , we must allow them to work wisely , and not try to influence them one way or the other .
I place my trust in these important political and legal figures , especially the former Finnish President , Mr Ahtisaari , since he has shown in the past that he is capable of assessing complex situations .
Question No 5 by ( H-0597 / 00 ) :
Subject : Request for a documented assessment of the education of children in the countries applying for EU membership In view of the economic crisis and profound structural changes that the majority of the applicant countries in the enlargement process have undergone , will the Council say whether all children in these countries are receiving an education ? To what age is education in these countries compulsory ?
Is there any means of guaranteeing that all future citizens of the EU receive an education ?
The Council is in possession of the latest statistics provided by Eurostat . I have them here and I am willing to offer them to the honourable Member .
The data refer to the now distant school year 1997-1998 , and show that in 11 countries which are candidates for membership of the European Union , the duration of compulsory schooling is nine or ten years , i.e. until the age of 15 or 16 , depending on the case .
It is therefore possible to estimate that the percentage of young people in education at 16 is approximately 90 % and at 18 approximately 60 % .
Reliable statistics are not yet available for Cyprus and Malta , and Eurostat has not yet begun to collaborate with Turkey on educational statistics , but it is , understandably , not a simple matter where retrospective data is concerned .
If she requires further details , the Honourable Member can also consult a collection entitled " Key Data on Education in the European Union " , produced by Eurydice in collaboration with Eurostat and published by the Commission in French , German and English .
Let me do a little advertising by announcing that the 1999-2000 edition is now available .
Finally , on the subject of the education of all European citizens , you should remember that it is up to every Member State and every candidate country to ensure that this objective is achieved .
Once more , I should like to make the statistics , in the form in which I have them , available to Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines .
In fact , I have consulted the statistics and I have consulted the information provided by the European Foundation for Education , and I am surprised by the rosy picture they paint of the situation in the countries of the East .
The news we ourselves have received all indicates that , while the system has fallen , an enormous crisis has been declared . There are problems in very many places .
In rural areas , many teachers are in practice not being paid , and I do not believe that , with the crisis of structural change suffered in the rest of the system , education has been kept in the wonderful state indicated in the statistics .
It therefore concerns me that there is no way of searching or taking soundings .
It is clear that , beyond subsidiarity , even beyond formal legitimacy , there is a moral legitimacy , which is based on our commitment to ensure that in the rural areas , in the new Europe , in the new countries which are going to join us , not a single child should remain without access to education or be deprived of the right to education which they deserve .
I was basing my answer on the facts available to me , i.e. the statistics .
I am not willing to make a qualitative judgement which might not be justified .
Let me repeat to the honourable Member that I have available a table which , in effect , shows that what I have said includes the disparities .
There is an average , of course , but there are also cases of greater or lesser advantage , which undoubtedly illustrate situations at grass roots level which are not at all equal .
I can give you this summary table if you wish , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines .
Mr President , I should like to take advantage of the question by Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines to touch on an aspect of tertiary education in candidate countries which affects young people not from these countries but from other Member States of the European Union , such as Greece , who attend universities in candidate countries in large numbers .
My question to the President-in-Office is this : is there any thought , are there any prospects , are there any plans to extend the scope of the directive on the mutual recognition of tertiary education diplomas which applies to the Fifteen to the candidate countries ?
And if so , when ?
Will this be done once the accession procedures have been completed or could it be done earlier in order to solve the present problems ?
I understand that the President-in-Office may not be able to give me an answer right now but perhaps he could inform us if or when he has an answer .
At this stage I can give you an initial answer , to the effect that one of the objectives of the French Presidency , as you perhaps already know , is what we call the European Research Area .
It is something we are working on together with Jack Lang , the objective being to remove all obstacles to the mobility of students , teachers and researchers . This , of course , also involves harmonising the recognition of qualifications .
This is what we wish to do for the European Union .
It is not an easy task .
I think that , as far as we ourselves are concerned , it would be ambitious to set a target of five years .
For the rest , however , it is a complicated matter to attempt harmonisation with countries which are not yet members of the European Union .
It must be considered , however , that if this is made a requirement within the European Union , then this is the requirement within the body to which the candidate countries wish and are going to accede .
The question of whether it should be an approach like that used for the internal market or like that in use for the Schengen countries can be posed at a later date .
The fact is , however , that we still have a few years to consider the matter .
Question No 6 by ( H-0605 / 00 ) :
Subject : Negotiating mandate covering the agricultural section of the free trade agreement with the Maghreb The Commission has submitted its proposal for a negotiating mandate for the free trade agreement with Morocco , Tunisia and Israel to the Council ' s ' Maghreb ' Working Party .
The proposal covers all theoretically possible liberalisation measures , from increasing quotas to reducing customs duties , with various formulas for handling entry prices .
What are the scope and substance of the mandate ?
Morocco , Tunisia and Israel are the three partners of the European Union whose Euro-Mediterranean association agreements have entered into force .
These agreements include a periodic review clause for agriculture , according to which the parties undertake to plan for the increased liberalisation of their agricultural trade , with this process complementing the gradual dismantling of the tariff system in preparation for the setting up of the industrial free trade area due in 2010 .
It is strictly limited to agriculture .
It does not , therefore , concern , for example , fisheries products which are dealt with as part of other negotiations .
The Morocco , Tunisia and Israel association agreements make provision for examination of the agricultural trade situation , as of 1 January 2000 , with a view to the establishment of gradual liberalisation measures , beginning on 1 January 2001 .
The negotiations which are due to open must therefore make it possible to strengthen this Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
They are also designed to achieve a better balance in agricultural trade with the three countries concerned , with regard to which the Union has a structural deficit .
The European Union is the prime outlet for the agricultural production of its partners , and takes up two thirds of their exports .
Currently , 95 % of exports of agricultural products from Morocco , Tunisia and Israel to the European Union are exempt from customs duties .
On 20 July 2000 , the Council approved the Commission ' s negotiating mandate , which comprises general guidelines .
It is a matter of facilitating improved access to the markets of the partner countries for Community products and of greater balance in mutual preferences , including by means of exempting new products from customs duties .
It also defines the room for manoeuvre the Commission is allowed in restoring balance in trade and concluding negotiations .
At the request of the Member States , the measures which may give rise to concessions are strictly delimited .
The mandate therefore authorises the Community negotiator , if necessary , to grant the Mediterranean partners tariff preferences for new products or to improve existing concessions , while , however , taking the vulnerability of certain products and the mechanisms of the common agricultural policy into consideration .
In this respect , it specifies that the Commission is , in collaboration with the Member States , to carry out an assessment of the potential impact of the concessions on the economic and commercial interests of the European Union , and obviously the Council will not take a decision until it has consulted the results of this assessment .
Mr President , I am happy that the Council is also taking account in this negotiation of the sensitivity of certain regions and certain products , especially in the agricultural sector .
At the moment there are agricultural sectors in the Mediterranean and also in the outermost regions of the Community , which could be threatened as a result of the very generous proposed concessions by the Commission .
I would just like to repeat what I said and encourage the Council to persist in maintaining the greatest possible vigilance so that those sectors are not fundamentally damaged by overly-generous concessions .
I believe that this is exactly the philosophy which will be guiding our negotiations .
I can therefore only endorse what is more a compliment than a question .
Question No 7 by ( H-0610 / 00 ) :
Subject : EU-Turkey partnership In the process of adopting Regulation EC / 764 / 2000 regarding the implementation of measures to intensify the EU-Turkey customs union , on a proposal from the Commission , Parliament 's amendments concerning democratisation , respect for human rights and the rights of minorities in Turkey were effectively rejected .
This development has given rise to fears as to whether the ' partnership ' , which will reportedly be discussed in the Council at the end of the year , will abide by the political terms and conditions laid down by the Helsinki Summit .
Does the Council , therefore , intend to adopt the proposal for a Regulation ( COM ( 2000 ) 169 ) regarding the implementation of measures to promote economic and social development in Turkey , together with the partnership ?
Can it give assurances that the Helsinki political criteria will be clearly defined within the partnership and that the mechanisms for monitoring Turkey 's progress towards democratisation will operate as they do for the other states applying for membership ?
Following the adoption , on 10 April this year , of the regulation regarding the implementation of measures intended to intensify the EU-Turkey customs union , on 13 June this year the Council adopted its common position on the proposal for a financial regulation on the implementation of actions to promote Turkey ' s economic and social development .
This common position was sent to the European Parliament for second reading at the July 2000 part-session .
The Council awaits Parliament ' s opinion with interest .
You know that , in December 1999 , the Helsinki European Council recognised Turkey ' s candidacy on an equal footing with the other candidates in terms of rights and obligations and decided to implement a pre-accession strategy for Turkey .
In Feira , the Heads of State and Government invited the Commission to submit proposals regarding the single financial framework for aid to Turkey and the accession partnership as soon as possible .
As you know , at the end of July , the Commission approved a proposal for a Council regulation on launching Turkey 's accession partnership . It is on the basis of this regulation that the Commission will , at a later date , submit its proposal for partnership , but it will include the short- and medium-term priorities and objectives to prepare for accession in accordance with the model adopted for the other candidates .
The Commission will present its proposal on the implementation of a single financial framework at a later date .
It goes without saying that , in working out this partnership , the Council will pay particular attention to compliance with the political criteria for accession , particularly in the areas of human rights , rule of law and the legal system .
It will also ensure monitoring to verify that Turkish legislation is made compliant in this and in other areas , in order to ascertain that this is carried out in the same way as in the other candidate countries .
In this connection , it should be noted that preparations for the examination of Turkish legislation in all the areas of the acquis communautaire have been undertaken within the EU-Turkey Association Council .
In addition , the Feira European Council requested that the Commission submit a progress report to the Council on the work undertaken in this area .
I would like to thank the minister for his reply ; however , I note that , whereas I specifically asked if the Helsinki criteria would be defined within the partnership , he evaded the question .
I should therefore like to repeat and specify and update my question .
The 15 , and first and foremost the presidency , received a letter from Mr Gem a few days ago asking for the partnership between Turkey and the European Union which is now on the drawing board not to mention Helsinki Articles 4 and 9 relating to Greek-Turkish relations - in his words , border differences - and the question of progress on the Cyprus issue .
I should therefore like to repeat my question to the minister and again raise the issue which he evaded : will mention be made of the Helsinki criteria on the Cyprus question and Greek-Turkish relations or will Mr Gem ' s proposals be accepted ?
What is the Council ' s reply to Mr Gem ?
I do not have a specific answer on this issue .
What I do recall is the European Council in Helsinki , as I took part in this discussion there , having just a short time before been on a brief diplomatic mission to Turkey and Greece , and the Helsinki conclusions are the ones which are binding upon us and upon everyone .
That is the general rule .
That is the basis on which we conducted our negotiations .
Minister , nine months after Turkey was granted candidate status in Helsinki , and irrespective of my opposition to Turkey ' s accession , do you believe that there has been any progress with democratisation , which was one of the criteria for accession , or have you concluded that what we forecast at the time has come true , i.e. the Helsinki resolution has encouraged the Turkish regime to continue its inhumane policy ?




What we have concluded , as you too can see , is that there has been no progress whatsoever in democratising the constitution and the penal code , parties such as the Communist party have been banned , the prison situation is festering , political prisoners are being treated inhumanely , new F-cells have been created for harsh , inhumane solitary confinement , lawyers who defend political prisoners are being humiliated , Kurdish villages in Iraq have again been bombed , more beatings have been carried out and arrests have been made in Diyarbakir , Istanbul and elsewhere for the events of 1 September , which is the international day of peace .
Similarly , not only does Turkey continue to occupy 38 % of Cyprus following its barbaric invasion in 1974 , contrary to repeated UN resolutions which Turkey disregards in the most provocative manner , but Mr Ecevit states that the Cyprus question was resolved in 1974 and refuses to apply resolutions to pay ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I do not share the viewpoint which seems to underlie your question , namely this opposition to the candidacy of Turkey .
Turkey ' s candidacy was in fact made possible by a welcome rapprochement between Greece and Turkey , which , I hope , will continue , particularly under the enlightened leadership of the two great diplomatic leaders , Mr Papandreou and Mr Gem , both of whom I consider my friends .
Having said that , let me repeat , Turkey ' s candidacy has been accepted on equal terms with regard to both rights and duties .
In order for Turkey to become a member of the European Union , it must respect its values and therefore make the necessary efforts .
At the same time , we must greet its efforts positively .
Nine months may be a long time for a human being to develop before birth , but it is an extremely short time for a candidate country .
Question No 8 by ( H-0614 / 00 ) :
Subject : US farm subsidies Has the Council of Ministers considered the recent substantial increases in agricultural subsidies provided for its farmers by the US Government , which now represent more than EUR 16 000 per farmer .
Are these subsidies in violation of WTO agreements and does the Council propose to take any action on this ?
The United States have not yet notified the WTO of the measures to which the Honourable Member refers , which could warrant investigation under Article 18 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture .
Moreover , I should point out that agricultural subsidies are among the subjects dealt with in the WTO negotiations which commenced in June 2000 .
The implementation of the reduction commitments agreed at the time of the 1994 Marrakech Accord is also scheduled for examination in the course of these negotiations , which are based on the principles outlined in Article 20 of the Agreement on Agriculture .
The relevant Council bodies receive regular progress reports from the Commission with regard to the negotiations and other activities undertaken within the WTO ' s agricultural bodies , and if the Commission considers it useful , the matter of the compliance of the United States ' subsidy policy with the commitments signed in the Uruguay Round and other measures to be taken in this respect will be referred to the Council .
I wish to raise the question with the President-in-Office of the change in American policy since we in the European Union changed the whole direction of the support we give to agriculture following the last round of GATT negotiations .
The United States Government has more than doubled the level of subsidies per farmer .
At the same time the European Union , in pursuit of its policies which were forced on us by the clearance group and the United States , has reduced its share of world markets in the dairy sector , in the cereal sector and in the meat sector .
I consider that since the American Government has doubled the level of aid that it extends directly to its farmers the European Union has in fact been wrong-footed and that the policy which has led us to a reduction in our share of world markets is in fact outdated and should be reviewed .
I shall not go into the details , but these are , in fact , the sort of considerations which justify our rejecting attacks which may have been made on the common agricultural policy and our own system , and that is also the reason why the European Union adopted an overall negotiating mandate designed to safeguard the social model and the farm model , not to mention the European cultural model , with regard to the WTO .
Rest assured that , as far as we are concerned , the mandate is still the basis for further negotiations .
Question No 9 by ( H-0616 / 00 ) :
Subject : Change to the unanimity required for cultural issues in view of the Intergovernmental Conference Europe ' s common cultural heritage , alongside the development of the Member States ' cultures and respect for diversity , has been considered an important aspect of European integration and has been incorporated into the EU Treaties , in Article 151 .
This article specifically provides for the encouragement of cooperation between Member States , in order to support and supplement actions in various particularly vulnerable areas .
However , decisions in this area are subject to the unanimity procedure , which makes it difficult for important decisions on cultural issues to be taken .
Cultural realities and cultural policies vary widely , and large cultural disparities can be seen in the field of infrastructure , which are exacerbated by the introduction of new technologies . I believe that more decisions should be taken in the cultural field , and that they should be taken in a more flexible manner .
Therefore , in view of the Intergovernmental Conference , is there an intention to change the current legal regime and for the qualified majority procedure to be used for decision-taking ?
Secondly , how has Article 151 ( 4 ) on the inclusion of cultural aspects in all the EU ' s actions been implemented to date ?
It is true that extending qualified majority voting to European Union sectors of activity which currently require unanimous votes is indeed one of the major issues of the Intergovernmental Conference currently taking place .
This is a crucial issue of democracy .
In a democracy , decisions are agreed by the majority not by unanimity .
In this context , Article 151 is one of the provisions likely to be converted to the rule of qualified majority voting .
I am sure that Mrs Zorba would agree that it is still too early to ascertain what direction the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference are going to take , even though I would hazard that , quite possibly , consensus will be reached quickly regarding Article 151 , for not everything can be a source of disagreement .
As regards the manner in which Article 151 ( 4 ) of the Treaty has been applied , I shall simply respond by saying that respect for and furtherance of the diversity of the cultures of Europe remain at the heart of the entire Community structure .
Minister , everyone who knows that we urgently need a cultural policy in the European Union also knows - and I agree with you - that the Intergovernmental Conference represents a huge chance to change the unanimity rule .
The Intergovernmental Conference is not a procedure which is foreign or bears no relation to the Council and it obviously takes account of all points of view and all types of need .
It does not operate in a vacuum .
My question therefore is this : is the Council doing anything to change the unanimity rule and push for a change at the Intergovernmental Conference .
The more economic policies progress , the more we need to study their cultural impact and develop a structural cultural policy .
That was the meaning of my question ; I do not think we should just stand around and wait because it may be too late by then and an agreement may not be so easy to reach .
The Council as such is not , by definition , a member of the Intergovernmental Conference .
I would urge you to trust the French Presidency of the Council and the European Council to further the cause of extending qualified majority voting .
Let me abandon my official role for a second to say that we would like to see qualified majority voting become the general rule and unanimous voting the exception , rather than the opposite , which is the case at present .
Question No 10 by ( H-0617 / 00 ) :
Subject : Cost of enlargement and Mediterranean agriculture In the light of forecasts and the most recent legislative proposals on Mediterranean agriculture , which concern products such as cotton , rice , fruit and vegetables , tomatoes , nuts and olive oil , among others , and will have adverse effects on employment and social development in these poor regions of Europe , and bearing in mind also the budgetary plans for EU enlargement , what will the Council do to ensure that Mediterranean agriculture does not end up bearing the brunt of the costs of the forthcoming enlargement ?
Would you be prepared to make some sort of recommendation with a view to preventing the negative impact of enlargement on the Mediterranean ?
In truth , through his actions and proposals , Mr Fischler , the Commissioner responsible for Agriculture , has made the anti-Mediterranean impact of enlargement a reality .
It is a fact that the whole of the Mediterranean area is frightened about this .
As I can see that the Council is standing firm in its political will , and in order to prevent - as you say - anything like this happening , not through good intentions but through facts , I would like to ask you whether the French Presidency , before it ends , would be willing to make , in the way it considers appropriate , some kind of recommendation which would dispel these concerns , that is to say , which would ensure that Mediterranean production would in no way pay the price for enlargement .
This is not a subject that I am prepared to make impromptu comments on .
I can assure you of just one thing , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , and that is that , as far as we are concerned , the financial perspectives , which were the product of tough negotiating in Berlin , represent a framework which it would be extremely difficult for us to shift .
We do not wish to do so , and so , once again , we shall discuss the matter again in 2005 .
Question No 11 by ( H-0619 / 00 ) :
Subject : Attack on Greek minority in the village of Dervitsani in Albania The Greek inhabitants of Dervitsani , a village in Albania , passed the night of 3 to 4 July 2000 in shelters after being attacked by anti-tank missiles from the neighbouring village of Lazarati .
The police who arrived on the scene failed to make any arrests .
This is not the first attack against the Greek minority .
The previous week the Council of Europe had recommended that the Albanian government take measures to protect the minorities living in Albania .
Given the fact that the Council of the European Union adopted the action plan for Albania on 13 / 14 June 2000 , will the Council say what political measures it intends to take and what immediate measures it will promote in order to strengthen security in the region and ensure the physical safety and the fundamental rights of minorities in Albania ?
The Council is aware of the armed attack upon the village of Dervitsani from the village of Lazarati which occurred during the night of 3 to 4 July 2000 , during which automatic weapons and explosives were used .
According to the information available , the firing was carried out by a small group of people allegedly wishing to prevent the Albanian policy carrying out arrests in their village .
Even though the Greek minority was not the target of the attack in question , the attack nonetheless contributed to creating a climate of insecurity in the region .
The European Union supports the efforts of the Albanian Government to restructure and modernise its police forces in order to increase the security of Albanian citizens and of the region .
The Multinational Advisory Police Element in Albania , formed under the authority of the WEU Council and deployed in Albania since 1997 , has widened and developed the scope of its mission following the adoption , in March 1998 , of a joint action on the European Union ' s contribution to re-establishing a viable police force in Albania .
Following the adoption of the action programme for Albania and the neighbouring region , the Council is currently examining the proposed measures in order to identify those which can be implemented speedily .
The action programme is basically devoted to matters relating to problems of migration and asylum .
The proposed measures do , however , include projects in the field of human rights and the protection of minorities .
The European Union is , moreover , already active in these fields .
Since Albania is eligible for an association and stabilisation agreement , its performance in terms of respect for democratic principles and human and minority rights and in terms of public order and the rule of law , are closely monitored by the European Union , I can assure you .
I should like to thank the Council representative for his reply .
However , the purpose of my question was to draw attention once again to the huge problems in the Balkans , problems caused by economic and social deprivation and , more importantly , the fact that there is no democratic infrastructure .
The attacks on the Greek minority were just one in a series of incidents which occur in Albania on a daily basis .
My question therefore , minister , is how far are you prepared to give real support to Albania so that the rule of law can operate ?
We saw no such support in the action programme decided for Albania .
You place greater emphasis in the action programme on how to stop immigration and how to send refugees back to Albania , which is clearly not a safe country , than on how we can give his country the means to develop .
We seem to have promised the Balkans a great deal but are unwilling to put our promises into practice .
I should like answers to these questions , minister .
I share your view , Mrs Karamanou , that the incidents mentioned appear , at first sight , to indicate a general problem of security and public order in Albania rather than a campaign of deliberate attacks on the Greek minority .
This is a general problem which must be dealt with as such .
The action plan for Albania to which you refer is a High Level Working Group on Asylum and Migration action plan for Albania and the neighbouring region , adopted by the General Affairs Council on 13 and 14 June this year , intended , in effect , to define and coordinate European Union resources with a view to responding to the problems of asylum and migration in Albania and the neighbouring countries and , as such , it is not intended to promote the rights of any particular minority .
Nonetheless , the suggested actions do include projects or programmes seeking to step up democracy and respect for human rights and minority rights in general .
The Council working groups are currently proceeding to examine the various measures proposed in order to identify which of them could be implemented in the near future .
An interim report is expected for the European Council in Nice in December .
Question No 12 by ( H-0622 / 00 ) :
Subject : Reduction of TACIS aid to Russia The European Union has punished Russia for its military action in Chechnya by reducing aid paid under the TACIS programme .
At the Feira European Council it was decided to relax sanctions .
Under what conditions does the Council consider that the TACIS funds should be granted to Russia for this year and next year ?
In the wake of the Feira European Council , the General Affairs Council on 10 July this year requested that the Commission resume preparations for an indicative TACIS programme in favour of Russian , to cover the years 2000-2003 , and to draw up a proposal for a TACIS action programme targeted at the year 2000 .
The relevant management committee is scheduled to examine these proposals on 17 October this year .
The priority objective of this programme will be to support the rule of law in Russia , complying with the democratic requirements of a modern democracy and benefiting Russian society as a whole .
Special attention is to be paid to supporting institutional and economic reforms , schemes undertaken for the democratisation and reinforcement of civil society and the protection and development of independent media .
Moreover , the Council has agreed to adopt further decisions on guiding cooperation with Russia and the use of the available instruments , in the light of the development of the situation in Russia .
I would thank the President of the Council for that answer .
I should like to ask a follow-up question : What conditions are being laid down for in fact providing this aid ?
Does the Council believe that the present situation in Chechnya is such that it is reasonable to provide this aid to Russia ?
Yes . In 2000 , only EUR 34 million have been committed to date , following the reorientation of the Helsinki programme .
A second tranche will be allocated to aid in support of the reform process initiated by the Russian authorities recently in order to establish a genuine rule of law , which will bring the TACIS appropriations allocated to Russia in 2000 to EUR 92 million at the most .
The only answer I can give you regarding the budget released in 2001 is that it will depend on the decisions the Council is induced to make at a later stage in the light of development of the situation in Russia .
This situation will be assessed in relation to the criteria for the progress to be achieved in terms of institutional reforms , democratisation , the strengthening of civil society and human rights protection throughout the territory of Russia .
Examination of the situation in Chechnya will thus clearly be part of the assessment process .
Question No 13 by ( H-0624 / 00 ) :
Subject : Incidents at the Matosinhos market During the night of 22 June 2000 , various groups - probably coastal fishermen from Poboa de Varsím and Matosinhos according to various sources - used blunt instruments to break open the doors of four Spanish lorries containing sardines in front of the premises of the company Docapesa S.A. at Matosinhos market .
They then removed the fish from the lorries and sprayed it with diesel oil or similar products in order to damage it permanently , while uttering threats .
Apart from the damage caused to the four companies concerned - one of them calculated that the damage to the fish amounted to nine million pesetas and the damage to the vehicles to 300 000 pesetas - incidents of this kind should not be allowed to happen ( a similar incident involving mackerel occurred in 1998 ) .
What steps will the Council take to prevent any recurrence of such incidents , which are against the law but in particular are contrary to the spirit and principles underlying the European Union ?
Does it plan to make any arrangements to compensate for the unfair and deliberate damage caused ?
Mr President , the Council deeply regrets the incidents which occurred at the Matosinhos market during the night of 22 June 2000 and the losses incurred by the victims of these acts of violence .
It is important to stress , however , in this connection , that it is up to the individual Member States to ensure compliance with the regulations of the common fisheries policy and the free movement of goods , and to take appropriate measures within their national legislative systems .
The offences in question should be punished in accordance with the terms of the criminal and civil law of the Member State concerned .
To this end , let me remind you that on 7 December 1998 the Council adopted Regulation ( EC ) No 2679 / 98 on the functioning of the internal market in relation to the free movement of goods among the Member States , establishing procedures for the Commission to take action to require Member States , who alone are responsible for maintaining public order , to quickly remedy serious barriers to the free movement of goods caused by the actions of private individuals .
Mr President , first of all I would like to say that relations between Galicia and the North of Portugal have always been special , because the Miño river has never marked a boundary , it has not separated , but rather united .
However , unfortunate events such as those which took place on 22 June , caused by a small number of people , must not become the general rule .
It is therefore important to adopt measures which will prevent , in all events , their repetition and that the sanction adopted by the competent parties shall serve as an example .
Therefore , those of us from the other side of the river - and we are all Europeans - wanted to know how this issue is being dealt with and whether exemplary decisions have been taken so that these events will not be repeated in the future .
I can only repeat my previous answer , namely that the maintenance of public order and any application of penal sanctions are a matter , respectively , for the jurisdiction of the police forces and the legal authorities of the Member State concerned .
Let me quote the relevant part of the Regulation , which stipulates that , " Where the Commission considers that an obstacle is occurring in a Member State , it shall notify the Member State concerned of the reasons that have led the Commission to such a conclusion and shall request the Member State to take all necessary and proportionate measures to remove the said obstacle . "
I therefore feel - and I am not saying that in order to duck the question , as we say - that the honourable Member would do better to address the question to the Commission , which does have the necessary means to provide a reliable and up-to-date response .
Mr President , Mr Moscovici , very serious attacks have also taken place in Finland on one certain means of livelihood , namely fur farming .
The principle of the freedom to pursue a trade is firmly upheld in the European Union .
Now , however , one Member State , Great Britain , has just banned fur farming in its territory .
Do you not think this might have harmful repercussions for the internal market in fur goods ?
I would ask you to reply now , as President-in-Office of the Council , and not so much as a representative of the French Government . The French Government has already expressed its own views on the matter in the Agricultural Council .
I am answering on behalf of the Council and not on behalf of the French Government .
The situation you mention may share some of the features of the previous situation , but it is not the result of the same regulation , which is to do with fisheries issues .
I consequently feel entitled to ask you , please , to submit your question in the usual manner , i.e. in writing , and the Council will be pleased to respond .
I am not going to respond ad hoc to a question on such a difficult subject .
In support of the President-in-Office of the Council , I must point out that the Rules of Procedure for this Question Time state that supplementary questions must be closely related .
Question No 14 by ( H-0625 / 00 ) :
Subject : Public Council meetings One of the three goals of the French Presidency is to bring Europe closer to its citizens .
The logical consequence of this aim should , therefore , be to make Council proceedings more open .
How many fully public Council meetings will be held during the French Presidency from 1 July to 31 December 2000 ?
The French Presidency attaches special importance to ensuring that Council proceedings are accessible to the European citizens and that its legislative decisions are made in a transparent manner .
The public debates are , moreover , an established practice .
They lead to the European Union ' s long-term evolution towards greater openness towards civil society .
Moreover , Rule 8 of the Council 's Rules of Procedure provides for the organisation of public debates .
One of the top priorities of the French Presidency was , therefore , to draw up a list of public debates , covering a wide range of subjects , which was adopted by the Permanent Representatives Committee ( COREPER ) on 5 July 2000 .
Two debates were held in July , a debate on the presentation of the presidency ' s programme at the General Affairs Council on 10 July 2000 , and a second debate on the presidency programme at the ECOFIN Council on 17 July .
I must specify that six further public debates are scheduled to take place before the end of the French Presidency : a debate on general interest services on 28 September 2000 at the Internal Market , Consumers and Tourism Council - I shall have the honour of chairing this council meeting ; a debate on maritime safety on 2 October 2000 at the Transport Council in Luxembourg ; a debate on noise protection on 10 October 2000 as part of the Environment Council ; and a debate on information , consultation of workers regarding employment on 17 October 2000 , as part of the Employment and Social Policy Council , again in Luxembourg .
On 9 November 2000 , there will be a public debate on young people and Europe as part of the Education and Youth Council .
Finally , on 20 November 2000 , there will be a debate on food safety as part of the Agriculture Council .
I should like to draw the attention of the Members of the European Parliament to the fact that a substantial effort has already been devoted towards informing the public about the Council debates organised .
Over 3000 detailed reports of the public debates have been delivered by post .
Furthermore , any interested parties will easily be able to access the Internet networks which deal with this subject .
In addition , television channels have the opportunity to broadcast these debates , in total or in part , via the ' Europe by Satellite ' channel .
Finally , the French Presidency strives to make as much information as possible on all Council proceedings available to the public on its Internet website , as well as subject indexes for the main topics under discussion .
I want to thank the Council for its detailed answer .
In an ordinary democracy it is , of course , the rule that all decisions concerning new laws are made publicly in a parliament and that the debates too are held in public .
The curious situation in the Council of Ministers is that the public only has access to certain debates .
There is therefore an obvious risk of meetings being closed in cases where more controversial subjects are being dealt with .
I therefore wonder whether the French Presidency , given its high level of ambition , will hold any entire meetings in public , that is to say ministerial meetings which , from beginning to end , with all the debates and all the decision-making , take place in public , without the doors being closed for any part of them .
Quite the opposite . I think I have shown that the French Presidency is determined to open debates up to the public as much as possible , and I believe that our programme is perfectly sound .
I should just like to remind the honourable Member of the different roles of the various institutions of the European Union .
It is true that the Council is co-legislator alongside the European Parliament , which does not fit into the pattern of the clear separation between executive and legislative power in the form that it may exist in a parliamentary democracy in the context of a State .
Let us be aware , at the same time , however , that the European Council is not just a legislative body but also an executive body , a function which , this time , is shared with the Commission , and that it undertakes a whole range of debates which have nothing to do with the legislative process .
Consequently , in the same way that these things are managed within a government , for that is what we are talking about here , the intergovernmental aspect , debates often take place in camera .
I am fortunate enough to be a member of the cabinet in the government of my country .
The French Council of Ministers in the Elysée Palace is not open to the press , nor is it filmed .
I consider this to be reasonable , as it is a context in which decisions must be taken which are then passed on to the citizens quite openly .
So there you are . It is because of this concept of the separation of powers that debates are designated as either open or closed .
I think that it is , quite frankly , to the Council ' s credit that they have opened up some of these debates , running counter to what I was saying earlier about the operation of a government .
This is the situation we have , if we take the hybrid nature of the Council into due account .
Thank you very much , Mr Moscovici , for showing such dedication to Parliament this afternoon .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed , Question Nos 15 to 40 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Question to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. ) .

Economic and social development of Turkey
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Mr Morillon ( A5-0206 / 2000 ) on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council regulation regarding the implementation of the measures to promote economic and social development in Turkey [ 7492 / 1 / 2000 REV - C5-0325 / 2000 - 1998 / 0300 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , the Council common position whose aim you have just stated has been referred back to Parliament for a second reading , not because of its content , but because of its form .
This could seem ridiculous , but it is not at all .
With regard to content , Parliament has agreed to commit EUR 135 million over the next five years to measures aiming to compensate Turkey for the sacrifices it has agreed to make in order to enter into a customs union with the European Union , and on this point there is no divergence with the Council .
With regard to form , we wanted to specify a number of areas in which the corresponding measures should be agreed as a priority , and the Council did not want to accept three of our proposals regarding the wording of a precautionary principle on the development of nuclear energy , in particular in earthquake zones . The protection and recognition of the cultural identity of minorities and support for measures seeking to abolish capital punishment and , finally , perhaps most importantly , the development of any form of cooperation seeking to resolve the Kurdish problem .
I say that these matters of form are not trivial in a debate that precedes the one which is due to take place on accession in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy in October , and following which , in November , I shall have to present the report on the state of progress of the work and any changes in attitudes within the European Union and Turkey .
Since the way to accession was reopened in Helsinki , nobody has been able to say where this newly-cleared path will lead , nor how long it will take to reach the end .
I think I can say that there is a broad consensus for granting Turkey a privileged position for geographical , historical , economic and political reasons , but I would also say that this privileged position can and must be envisaged within the European Union itself just as much as in close cooperation with the Union .
I say that this choice belongs , by democratic right , to the citizens of the European Union whom we represent here , and to the Turkish citizens themselves .
I understand that this was probably your opinion , Commissioner Verheugen , and I think I can guarantee you the support of a large majority of my colleagues in this area .
The decision on Turkey ' s accession is too important for the future of the European Union and Turkey for it to be made in veiled silence , or even in secrecy , behind closed doors .
Long debates will be necessary , both here and in national parliaments , which is why everyone agrees that the road will be long and hard .
As rapporteur on enlargement , I was convinced of this , not only by the richness and passion of the debates that have already taken place in Parliament , but also by observing the reactions in Turkey itself , both in government circles and in civil society .
I shall come back to these contrasting reactions in detail when I present my report .
Today , I shall simply come to the main conclusion .
The people of Turkey consider that entry into the European Union will require not only a painless revision of their legal arsenal and the partial loss of their sovereignty , to which they remain attached , but also a radical change in their habits and mentality , for which they do not seem prepared .
This is why Parliament has proposed the creation of a Euro-Turkish forum , bringing together qualified representatives of the Turkish community and those Members of the European Parliament that have been given the task , for in-depth discussions .
I shall repeat this proposal in my report and I think I can say that the Turkish Government is not hostile to this , but quite the opposite , it would seem .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the beginning of this long road , aware of the realities , I think the time has come to leave hypocrisy behind and not to continue to ignore the most important obstacles , including the Kurdish problem .
It would not occur to the French today to deny that a Corsican problem exists , even if the French citizens and their government are divided on the solutions .
There is a Kurdish problem in Turkey .
The Council must not forbid the European Parliament to propose its contribution to the solution .
If the text of this regulation is referred back for a second reading , it is not purely for a matter of form , but because Parliament refuses to accept this kind of political sleight of hand .
Mr President , I wholeheartedly concur with Mr Morillon ' s suggestion that we abandon the hypocrisy with which we sometimes deal with certain real problems for reasons of political or other expediency .
There can , in my opinion , be no doubt that the issues covered in the three amendments rejected by the Council are real issues and that the Council position , or the sub-text at least , indicates a hypocritical disposition to sweep them to one side or underestimate their importance .
And yet , these three amendments , which reflect the firm views of the European Parliament , are all of fundamental importance and the rapporteur is right to insist that they be adopted : they contain a safeguard against the Turkish authorities ' constructing nuclear power stations in earthquake zones , an express reference to the death penalty and a clear indication of Turkey ' s obligation to recognise and protect the cultural identity of minorities , within the wider context of its obligation to respect the rule of law and human rights , and they highlight the undisputed Kurdish problem and the need to resolve it - but not , of course , by dropping Turkish bombs on civilians , as in the most recent bombings in the Kendakor region on 18 August .

I should like to hope that Parliament ' s insistence on certain points being adopted will also help the Turkish side to understand , even if - as Mr Morillon rightly comments - it appears to be somewhat unwilling to understand , that the road towards Europe is not a one-way street of determination and patient understanding on the part of the European Union in the face of Turkey ' s so-called special circumstances ; it requires the same measure of determination on the part of the Turkish authorities and Turkish society to adjust to the rules of law and ethics which govern the European Union and which apply indiscriminately to all candidate countries ; rules which , unfortunately , continue to be violated by Turkey , not only when it comes to the Kurdish problem and its democratic shortcomings , but also in numerous other cases , such as the Cyprus question and Greek-Turkish relations .
A real sea change in Turkey ' s behaviour and attitude would go some way towards encouraging all those who , in a spirit of perhaps excessive optimism , opted to speed up Turkey ' s advance towards Europe and would help to shorten the long and difficult road - to quote Mr Morillon once again - of Turkey ' s admission to the European family .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like first of all to thank Mr Morillon very sincerely for the good work he has done and for his persistence in pushing through the demands and the most important amendments .
I am able to support him on behalf of my group , and I believe it must be possible to reach an agreement with the Council .
We are keen to use this instrument to promote economic and social development in Turkey .
Naturally , we hope that , parallel to this - and perhaps even as a result of it - political development in Turkey towards democracy and respect for human rights , in particular respect for its own Kurdish population , will also be strengthened , and the death penalty abolished .
However - and I have to say this again and again in this Chamber , and I also say it in Turkey- we are very dissatisfied with the pace of political development .
We could of course say that it is not our problem , and the fact that it is not prepared to make progress in this area more obvious and is not creating the political institutions for doing so is indeed Turkey ' s own biggest problem .
Not so long ago , Turkey elected a new State President - a judge , and a highly respected one at that , and in fact with the support of the government .
And what does the government do as one of its first acts ?
Over the summer , it sends its new State President a kind of emergency decree with a view to restricting some of the rights of people in government service . Then it wonders why , as a former high court judge , the President rejects the decrees he has been sent and says that the matter in question is one which Parliament must deal with , as is in fact fully to be expected in a democracy .
Now , I have as little sympathy for Islamic militants as many others in this House , especially when they adopt the fundamentalist approach much in evidence in these regions and also manifested today in the debate between the Presidents of the Israeli and Palestinian Parliaments .
The issue in question is one which has to be settled on a legal basis .
It is just not on , using an emergency decree suddenly to remove all Islamic fundamentalists from office , as the government wants to do .
Is there really a problem here ?
Then it is one for Parliament to deal with .
The Kurdish problem has already been mentioned .
In that area too , scarcely any progress has been made .
Again and again , we see first positive , then negative signs .
Those who know that this is a crucial problem lack the courage to do anything about it .
You mentioned the Corsican problem .
I have to say that , in France too , the necessary courage is called for to tackle the problem after so many years .
I should like to see just a little of this courage in Turkey with a view to finding a real solution to the Kurdish problem too .
Of course , there are also other problems involving minorities .
The death penalty was mentioned .
How many times have we heard the conviction voiced that it must be abolished , and how long will it be before the relevant steps are taken ?
The fact that Turkey is not taking these steps is something which cannot but disappoint those in this House - and I count myself among them - who would dearly like to see Turkey become a member of the European Union .
I nonetheless believe that , if we persist , we shall achieve what we have pledged .
Our pledges can , and will be , fulfilled , and precisely on the issue of promoting economic and social development .
We are now waiting with bated breath to see whether Turkey will push ahead with political development on its own initiative .
Mr President , our relations with Turkey should promote democracy , stability and consistency .
The path to those goals is partly by way of social and economic development , and the way to social and economic development is partly by means of foreign investment .
The Union ' s finance package will be an incentive to further investment in Turkey and , in the process , will also promote and consolidate democracy and human rights .
We have seen this strategy succeed in former dictatorships in Southern Europe , we shall see it work in Eastern and Central Europe , and it ought also to work in Turkey .
Parliament should support this strategy , and we should , at the same time , insist that , before there can be any question at all about membership negotiations , the Copenhagen criteria should be met as these relate to democracy and human rights .
Finally , I would emphasise the need to rebuild the thousands of Kurdish villages razed to the ground .
This ought to be an express priority in our policy on Turkey , and we must insist that the Turkish Government too make it a high priority . In the same way , we must insist that the rights of the Kurdish minority are respected , just as the rights of minorities are respected in the countries of the Union and in the other candidate States .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his recommendation for second reading .
He is very familiar with the situation in Turkey .
He is aware of the problems of this country and of the people who live there .
It is no secret that Turkey cannot be democratic in our sense of the word until such time as the economic and social problems there have been solved .
It is also widely appreciated that Turkey will not be able to get on top of these problems alone and without our aid .
The demands contained in the rapporteur ' s amendments - he talks of the protection of minorities , rightly demands the abolition of the death penalty and calls for a solution to the Kurdish problem - are in no way conditions designed to stand in the way of aid . Instead , they are valuable proposals for the necessary democratic reforms in Turkey .
At the very end of the day , Turkey will benefit from these reforms being put into practice .
To that extent , we support the rapporteur ' s recommendation and thank him again for the work he has done .
Mr President , just nine months - or perhaps I should say already nine months - have passed since the Helsinki resolution granting Turkey candidate status .
At the time , we predicted that this resolution would not help , as many maintained , to bring about democratisation and improved living conditions for the Turkish people and that it would only encourage the regime to exercise ever greater oppression .
Nine months later , we are sorry to say that we were right because , to tell the truth , we would have preferred to have been proven wrong .
Now the Council has proposed releasing EUR 135 million for the economic and social development of Turkey .
We fear that a substantial proportion of this sum will be used , despite any controls carried out , to strengthen the machinery of oppression .
Allow me to give you some facts and figures .

As we all know , despite promises made from time to time , the constitution is still seriously undemocratic , the death penalty remains , Turkish jails currently house over 15,000 political prisoners in inhumane conditions , which are now being modernised with the introduction of solitary confinement , provoking outrage in Turkey , including in the Law Society of Istanbul , which has issued a special paper condemning these measures .
There were arrests recently during events for world peace day on 1 September , Cyprus continues to be occupied and , as we are preparing to release funds , Turkish Prime Minister Ecevit has said that the Cyprus question was resolved in 1974 , i.e. with the barbaric invasion and continuing occupation , demonstrating his disdain for UN resolutions .
And , I would add , Mr Gem says the same about Greek-Turkish relations .
Some people would do well not to boast and brag because these Greek-Turkish relations constantly result in the Greek Government ' s backing down and that in itself is a source of further tension .
So do you want to use this money as bait so that you can penetrate the Turkish economy even further , so that you can plunder the Turkish people ' s wealth even more ?
We do not intend to say give it or withhold it , we simply want to point out the conditions under which and the reason why this money is being given .
Mr President , I fully support Mr Morillon ' s excellent work , as presented by him and supplemented by Mr Swoboda .
I do not therefore intend to repeat arguments which I accept overall .
However , I should like to make a few comments .
The strange nature of relations between the European Union and Turkey , which we have experienced for many years , from the beginning and throughout , is due to the political problem which we call Turkey .
Thus , 9-10 months ago , Helsinki set a procedure in motion , essentially with an eye to resolving the problem which we call Turkey .
In this sense , and because Commissioner Verheugen , the Commissioner responsible for enlargement , is here with us , and given that there is a whole atmosphere surrounding the text which will shape the partnership between the European Union and Turkey , a text which we shall receive at a later date , I am certain that he will advocate incorporating everything included in the Helsinki resolutions on human rights , on Cyprus , on the Aegean and on crises in the text of the Treaty rather than in the preamble .
Take a look at Turkey .
It is a law unto itself .
It radiates crisis on every side .
Those of us who live in the region are sick and tired of crises .
It is because of its political system that Turkey radiates these crises .
We recently heard statements by Turkish-Cypriots in Cyprus , who have at last come forward and condemned Turkey as an occupying force .
Only yesterday on the BBC I heard the head of a party of Turkish-Cypriots - Turkish-Cypriots , not settlers - half of whom have remained in Cyprus , appealing to the Turks to let them join the European Union . Turkey wanted to join and he felt that it should let them join earlier .
In this sense , given that these relations gamble with the political face of Europe and with Europe ' s prospects and principles , I am certain that Commissioner Verheugen will want to assure us that the Commission , as the guardian of these principles , intends to base the integration process for Turkey firmly on these principles .
And I think that the main issue is precisely this process and this road .
Because I do not think , Mr Verheugen , that we can all agree to vote for parliaments , to vote for governments , on the one hand , and yet still have military rule dictating political terms on behalf of us all on the other .
From this viewpoint , the Morillon proposal is an encouraging prospect .
We , as Greeks , want Turkey in the European Union , we want a democratic Turkey , because a democratic Turkey will be the beginning of the end of crises in the region as a whole , crises which we have lived with for many , many years and from which none of us has profited .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Morillon , most sincerely for his most thorough report .
I am glad that we have been able to achieve far-reaching agreement .
I am also pleased that Parliament has responded very quickly to the common position unanimously adopted in the Council . Above all , I am glad that Parliament is able to accept far and away the greater part of this position , as proposed by the Commission .
The report now proposes adding three points to the draft regulation .
I am able to tell you that the Commission shares Parliament ' s view on these points .
The Commission will therefore examine the relevant amendments proposed by the European Parliament , inform the Council as soon as possible of its position and ask it to conclude the legislative procedure .
A special importance attaches to this draft regulation for it constitutes the last of the three pillars of financial aid for Turkey , the others being the measures in favour of Turkey in the framework of the MEDA programme and the regulation issued by the Council in April .
All these financial resources are designed to support implementation of the pre-accession strategy .
The purpose of the strategy is to equip Turkey for entering into negotiations .
That will only come about when basic political , economic and social reforms have been implemented .
Improvements in relations between the Union and Turkey following the European Council , meeting in Helsinki , have enabled us to speak openly and frankly with each other on all issues .
The strengthened political dialogue at all levels characteristic of the climate following Helsinki has made a decisive contribution to this state of affairs .
I also have to say that open and frank discussions which sometimes address painful themes and touch upon sensitive issues are indispensable if we want to travel all the way down the path which lies before us .
I should like to take the opportunity to re-emphasise that we await a firm commitment on the part of Turkey to continuing with the process of reform that has been begun .
A few weeks ago , Turkey signed both UN conventions on civil and political rights and on economic and social rights .
I believe that this is of a piece with the decision we made last year and may be regarded as a successful outcome .
I welcome Turkey ' s signature of these documents as an important step in the right direction .
However , I should also like to emphasise that it is now a question of both conventions quickly being ratified by the Turkish Parliament and of the commitments contained in these also being put into practice .
On my last visit to Turkey in July , I was informed in detail of an inter-ministerial commission ' s report , then before the government , on the reforms needed if the Copenhagen criteria are to be fulfilled .
The report contains a host of proposed reforms for improving the human rights situation .
However , it is now a question of the Turkish Government ' s putting the proposed reforms into effect within the framework of a consistent legislative programme .
I also expressly insisted upon this in the course of the discussions in Turkey .
As you know , the European Council , meeting in Helsinki , has confirmed that it is essential for Turkey firstly to comply with the political accession criteria if its relations with the European Union are to become any closer .
This will also be the theme in preparing the Accession Partnership which the Commission is to submit in the autumn of this year on the instructions of the Council .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Community audiovisual policy in the digital age
The next item is the report ( A5-0209 / 2000 ) by Mr Veltroni , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - Principles and guidelines for the Community 's audiovisual policy in the digital age [ COM ( 1999 ) 657 - C5-0144 / 2000 - 2000 / 2087 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the document on the Community 's audiovisual policy in the digital age , presented by the Commission , is important because this technological innovation has , to a certain extent , a direct bearing on our cultural future and therefore on sensitive issues such as pluralism and the quality of democracy in our continent .
The digital age and convergence of media will change everything : our way of gaining knowledge , communicating , working , producing and understanding .
There are risks - as there always are when innovation bursts forth - but the transition to digital technology will bring with it huge opportunities for pluralism and massive production possibilities for the system .
It is no coincidence that the British Prime Minister , Mr Tony Blair , proposed a few days ago to put digital television frequencies up for auction in order to speed up the process , revolutionising the prospects of the conventional management of the electromagnetic spectrum .
And it is also no coincidence that Mr Blair also proposed free distribution of set top boxes , perceiving that this would benefit both the economy and the information and cultural pluralism of his country .
Changes in technology bring changing perspectives and therefore changes in legal approaches as well .
The Community therefore has to keep up with progress and endeavour to ensure that digital technology fulfils its potential as an opportunity for culture , pluralism , cultural and linguistic diversity and for the European economy and technical innovation and research in Europe .
We consider that the instruments which have already been defined in the Commission 's text will make it possible to achieve these goals .
However , the debate generated in Parliament , which has looked at different points of view and has pulled out all the stops , as did the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , in order to find a common point of agreement with the result that the report was adopted unanimously , proposes a limited number of nevertheless important supplements .
Firstly : the need for a rapid revision of the legal instruments governing the sector , in particular the " Television without Frontiers " Directive which has been in need of revision for a long time .
Secondly : in order to avert the risk of dependency of our cultural industry in the event of expansion , of growth of the number of channels , we would like to introduce the possibility of production investment in the audiovisual sector .
It is vital for the media to be financed but I feel that , following the example of certain countries , we should also provide for the television broadcasting companies themselves to set aside funds , dedicating a proportion of their revenue to the production of European programmes .
I consider that this is a useful , important action for it both supports the industry and acts as an incentive for it .
Thirdly , monitoring the concentration of media ownership , in the future maybe on the basis of specific regulations at European level safeguarding pluralism , taking up once again the idea of a media directive and a body which would monitor at European level the application of the rules in this sensitive sector ; in addition , a policy which , in the age of convergence , would also safeguard a universal service with regard to access to content , which is taken to mean non-discrimination and affordable access to services .
As the importance of the role of the public broadcasting service in the digital system is recognised , the service will , of course , have to be reviewed and revamped in the light of changes in technology , but it will also have to perform the function of guaranteeing the quality of services to a large public , which will continue for a long time to use its common or garden television sets and wireless reception on a daily basis ; therefore , strategic recognition of the role of land-based digital television , whose growth can only be considered to be an opportunity here as well .
Finally , the report proposes a supplement to ensure that particular attention is paid to safeguarding cultural diversity , international negotiations and the need to consolidate the European audiovisual industry to make it competitive on the global market .
This is therefore the spirit of the report and its attempt to operate within the bounds proposed by the Commission 's report .
The TDI Group has tabled amendments characterised by a different vision , a different legitimate cultural and political inspiration .
My opinion is that , if these amendments were to be adopted , the report would then be devoid of those characteristics which prompted agreement in the Committee , the very characteristics which are our basis for considering that the report could be a positive supplement to the Commission 's report .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of Mr Tajani , as a member of the same delegation and the same committee , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate the Commission on the complicated content of its initiative , but we must not let go of the importance of regulating the audiovisual policy in the age of high technology in which we live and which will become more and more important for our lives in the near future .
Due to the complexity of the material and the short time available to me , I will restrict myself to a few recapitulatory statements which I consider essential and which I hope the Commission will take into due consideration .
The free movement of information and freedom of expression serve now to safeguard rights and freedoms and will always do so .
The citizens ' confidence in the audiovisual service must be won through compliance with the principles of the protection of human dignity and of minors .
The area in question , which is constantly developing , is in need of detailed rules , but they must not be too rigid or they will rapidly become obsolete .
Technology and content cannot be governed by the same legislation : technology must be neutral and content must be regulated .
The system of funding must comply with the principles of proportionality and transparency and must not influence the market or competition .
Where a commercial activity is associated with a public service , the keeping of separate accounts will make the compensation for the service rendered transparent , making it possible to prevent any disguised State aid and to allow private firms to provide the public service as well .
No national restriction must be placed on transposition , in order to achieve genuine European harmonisation , both now and in the event of future growth .
Including self-regulation codes in the legislative framework will ensure transparency , responsibility and the equal status of public and commercial operators .
Clearly , in the context of new technologies , a situation where State subsidies to public service broadcasters are used for commercial ends must be avoided , as this would distort the principle of competitiveness with private companies instead of ensuring compliance with specific content obligations .
Lastly , we must guarantee multiplicity and pluralism of bids and provide all operators with the possibility of playing an innovative and leading role , thus liberalising access to public financing .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank Mr Veltroni .
As rapporteur , he has done some very good work , including work of a very cooperative nature , and I should like to thank him very much for that .
However , thanks are similarly due to the Commission which has provided an outstanding basis for the discussions between the Committee and Parliament .
The audiovisual sector basically faces the task of having to develop in two main fields .
Firstly , it is a means of generating future jobs . Secondly , however , it is also of great significance for securing cultural diversity and freedom of speech in Europe .
It is therefore important always to keep both perspectives in view .
I should like briefly to illustrate this by way of three examples .
Firstly , it is necessary to regulate content and methods of transmission differently and independently of each other .
We need a form of technology which can respond very quickly and very flexibly to the technological revolution .
I would just mention the buzz word ' Internet ' at this point .
However , we not only wish to guarantee people universal access to all networks but also need to ensure that young people are protected and human dignity assured by means of legal regulations which , independently of the method of transmission , safeguard these values that are indispensable to us all .
Secondly , consider the level at which decisions are made .
Where the issue of technology is concerned , we need increasing cooperation among the Member States at European level .
When it comes to issues of content , however , we want to know that , in the first place , the Member States are willing and able to safeguard cultural pluralism and diversity of opinion .
Thirdly , television in Europe .
We have both commercial and public service broadcasting which both require clear statutory frameworks in order to be able to develop in competition .
We therefore say a clear yes to the protocol of the Treaty of Amsterdam on public service broadcasting and to the Member States ' responsibility for commissioning and for securing finance .
We are also , however , saying just as clear a yes to the task of developing and promoting commercial television companies in Europe so that they can compete effectively worldwide .
That is the crucial precondition for safeguarding European cultural content , with the conditions of future technology in mind .
Thank you very much to Mr Veltroni for giving us such a valuable report .
It is a welcome clarification on where Parliament stands on digital and audiovisual sector issues for the forthcoming revision of TV without frontiers .
However , I want to confine my remarks this evening to public service broadcasting in the digital age because there are some very important public access issues that we need to address when defining the principles from the crossover in our current media to the development of digital broadcasting .
Defining the values and principles underlying public broadcasting gives us some difficulties anyway , as Member States , corporations , and broadcasters all have very different ideas of what public broadcasting constitutes .
However , this should not prevent us from defining it in the digital age , because these principles are very important to us all , and , as infrastructure has developed , so content is going to develop as well .
We are all being told that we are entering a knowledge-based society , and if that is the case , then knowledge in a sense becomes power that defines the powerless and the powerful , the information poor and the information rich .
Overcoming that divide , to my mind , should be one of the key points that we emphasise in this report .
There are a number of reasons why this is important to us from the perspective of European content .
First of all , if we are in a knowledge-based society , we need growth in knowledge-based and creative skills .
Secondly , we are a democratic society , and digital policy in the audiovisual sector can connect our local citizens to our citizens at the centres of power .
In terms of cultural richness and diversity , it is important both that we should have individual centres of cultural excellence and that we be bound as a European continent .
And , finally , we have to ensure that the switchover from analogue to digital is attractive to all of our citizens : that is the end which we should work to achieve .
Mr President , Commissioner , the airwaves are buzzing .
You cannot open a newspaper or put the radio or television on without being confronted by new developments in the IT or digitalisation sectors .
Things are happening fast , in fact they are happening at the speed of light , which is why my group is delighted with the communication from the Commission and with Mr Veltroni ' s exhaustive report , which looks into every aspect of these new developments .
As the rapporteur rightly points out , the AV sector is an extremely important sector in terms of employment , but also in terms of freedom of expression , democracy and cultural diversity in Europe .
But as far as the Liberal Group is concerned , that does not mean that Europe should set about regulating absolutely everything .
This would not be possible , and nor would it be desirable .
It is a self-aware sector and is perfectly capable of standing on its own two feet .
As the Liberals see it , for one thing this means that there is no need for yet another additional subsidy over and above Media Plus for the European film industry .
Complementary measures and cooperation with the business community , and fiscal measures , these are the key words of a more effective policy intended to increase the financial resources and to improve the marketing and distribution .
That is why we have requested split voting for Recital N. Nor are we in favour of quotas .
The TV operators must decide for themselves , on the basis of quality , what programmes they want to show .
It is not Europe ' s business to regulate this , so no artificial protection .
The industry in Europe is more than capable of making interesting and quality productions that will attract viewers .
As I have already said , it is only the marketing and distribution that need to be improved .
On a final note : we attach a great deal of importance to the freedom of the user and therefore the same applies to parents .
They have the right and the responsibility to decide for themselves what is suitable for their children .
So we do not need complex censorship and filtering systems in programmes .
It is often very doubtful as to where the boundary lies .
And we certainly do not want a legal framework , where the powers that be set the rules .
My group will vote accordingly .
Mr President , first and foremost , I must apologise on behalf of my colleague Mrs Echerer , who felt unwell and has gone to see the doctor .
So if I go over my allotted time slightly , I would like to pick up some of her speaking time .
Needless to say , I can only congratulate Mr Veltroni on his first-rate report , which , as someone has just said , has come at a good time .
In the past , as well as the present , Europe has taken a fairly progressive stance on the telecommunications front , when it comes to a European single market , and we are none the worse for that .
I believe it is high time for us to take a look at the content side of things , because , unfortunately , Europe is still lagging behind a little in this respect .
It is a marvellous idea to create a whole network that responds to the requirements of convergence , and which enables the public to receive information via a GSM , a computer or a television , but we must also be aware of what sort of information it is and , above all - and I am also thinking about what may be of positive value to our audiovisual industry - we must beware of being inundated by American products alone .
After all , the fact is that our European cinema , as I have said on other occasions , is light years behind , and we cannot allow this situation to continue indefinitely , particularly in the light of the history of European cinema .
I am not calling for quotas .
I am calling for a European investment fund to be set up , which will enable the creative producers we have in Europe to at long last enter into real competition with America , in a manner which fully meets with the requirements of the free market .
No , this is not regulation , it would simply be a means of enabling creative producers to get down to work in Europe , and a way of avoiding seeing all the talent , intelligence and capital - for this is the new trend - disappearing over to Hollywood .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether she does not think that the time has come to work on a new directive for the cinema .
Is it not time - since this is one of the distinguishing features of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , which I belong to , - for us all to sit down together one day and consider how we are going to rescue the European film industry ?
And I repeat , this is not a petition for rules and regulations , this is taking a long , hard look at how films are made , for there is no mystery about it .
Films cannot be made without a major injection of capital , and that is where we fall down in Europe . I believe this presents a unique opportunity for the European Investment Bank .
Mr President , the Commission has set itself the short-term task of defining what a European audiovisual work is .
I am very interested by this definition , which naturally complements today 's discussion .
The effect of the " Television without Frontiers " Directive has been that a large percentage of national works are still broadcast in each country , without managing to have these works circulated between countries .
The aim of defining European audiovisual works must therefore be to achieve the circulation of these works .
In this context , we agree that the cultural diversity that is advocated today is not a simple addition of the respective identities of each Member State , but the exchange and circulation of these identities .
However , the circulation of works , like the origin of their funding , will probably be insufficient to define the European audiovisual work .
The issue of the work ' s content concerns us all .
What content can define a work , if it is not content founded on a pluralist approach to production ?
Partnerships are necessary for current and future audiovisual creation , but hegemonic strategies and monopolies are counter to creation itself .
There is nothing more dangerous than the current concentrations of operators who have both the broadcasting capacity as well as archives of material .
At a time of digital revolution and technological change , Mr Veltroni 's excellent report clearly shows the economic and cultural need for a European audiovisual policy .
I would like to end by emphasising the essential points of this report .
What could protect diversity and pluralism better than a " universal service " ?
What would ensure free access to information , entertainment and knowledge ?
Public television is not a monopoly and should not be one .
One of the goals of the public service , however , is the general interest , and for this reason it must be valued .
Public television channels are developing autonomously in each Member State , pursuant to Protocol 32 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , but they are agreed on taking on similar tasks , such as information , innovation , room for exchange and integration etc .
All that remains is to make their funding transparent , not so much to conform to rules on competition as to enable public service to really diversify its activities and enrich its services .
To put it plainly , not to die off in the digital age , but to perpetuate the accomplishment of its goals which should , it seems to me , constitute guidelines for the Community audiovisual policy .
Mr President , I would like to start by complimenting the rapporteur on managing to combine so many proposals in one report .
However , I would like to touch on a few points .
In the first place , I agree that there is a need for policy-makers and the law to be able , or rather to be as good as under obligation , to adapt to the speed of technological progress .
In the case of the audiovisual sector , clear and , most importantly , timely legal instruments will mean that the institutions are able to regulate these changes : to provide better protection for the public and for users , establish the necessary restrictions to protect minors , lay down new rules to protect copyright and set regulations in place before certain developments occur , such as the fact that electronic commerce will soon be taking place via the medium of television .
Moreover , we must not be intimidated but take pride in the entire audiovisual sector in the digital age as a great vehicle of freedom , information and movement of ideas .
We have a vast European heritage of culture and communications which must be fully exploited , and for this more funding will certainly be necessary , but this purpose could also be served by opportunities for discussion , such as the Forum proposed by the rapporteur : this would be an opportunity for discussion aimed at the creation of a future audiovisual policy which would take advantage of the infinite number of openings provided by the newest technology and use them to further progress towards the goal of producing increasingly high quality products .
Therefore , our objective is to achieve an interactive audiovisual policy where there is more participation in order to give expression to the countless individual characteristics and differences in which our great European identity is rich .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Veltroni , on behalf of the Italian radicals , I cannot support the positive view you have expressed of the report under discussion on the Communication from the Commission on the guidelines for the Community 's audiovisual policy in the digital age .
I cannot support your view because the communication is a reproduction of the old European TV and cinema cliché : direct public intervention through State agencies , welfarism and disregard for the nature of the market , a cliché which is characterising the audiovisual sector more and more .
All this has been dredged up and ' modernised ' to suit the new digital age of multimedia convergence and the extraordinary spread of the Internet .
The impression therefore persists that European audiovisual companies are incapable of growing or standing on their own two feet and that users are incapable of discerning from among the vast amount of multimedia products on offer which products are better and most suited to their needs , as if past welfarism and paternalism had not been responsible for the difficult situation in which the sector finds itself today .
Everybody - companies and users alike - would benefit from the freedom of choice provided by a bold opening of the market and State withdrawal .
Moving on to some specific points of the report under consideration .
The regulation refers to the separation of infrastructures and content , serving up for content the old regulations once again .
But what does this mean ?
Perhaps Mr Veltroni could enlighten us .
It may be , for example , that the intention is to extend the law governing the press , including related contracts and the need to be registered in the register of journalists and to be certified , to on-line publications .
In my view , this would be a serious error .
Or to extend the current stifling TV regulations to all the other programmes which are broadcast via the Web .
This would be a serious mistake , an illusion , for which the European companies and citizens would have to pay the price all over again .
The boom of the Internet was made possible by the State 's inability to curb it with a mass of bans and regulations .
This was the right way for things to happen and it is right that they should remain that way .
With regard to intellectual property and copyright - another point covered by the report - I feel that it is pointless and damaging to the positive development of the Internet to strengthen the directive on copyright , as it is proposed to do .
Remember the Napster and the New Tell cases .
We consider that a critical revision of copyright ownership rights needs to be carried out in such a way as to facilitate and increase the transparency of the transmission of knowledge and products , and , on this point , the companies and the large corporations know that they will have to come to an agreement with the Web .
With regard to cinema , additional funding is requested for European cinema .
As Mr Veltroni is aware , there is a 50-year-old battle going on in Italy between the liberals , Sturzo and Ernesto Rossi , and those who want to continue with cinema subsidies .
We are of the opinion that the freedom of choice of the citizens to determine the success or failure of a film is also the best and most efficient way of ensuring the growth of the cinematographic sector .
We have tabled an amendment calling for a cost / benefit analysis of what has been done to date .
Lastly , on the subject of the privatisation of television , we call for a revision of the Amsterdam protocol which is referred to here as if it is set in stone .
The Financial Times has raised the issue of the privatisation of the jewel of European public television , the BBC .
Public television networks must be privatised or increasingly high licence fees will be imposed for new investments .
If we want to maintain a public service , the television broadcasting right must be auctioned off between all the operators : programmes will then be more efficient and there will be a saving for license payers .
I call upon you to consider the amendments we have tabled , which would change the intention of the report , following a system of aid incentives which has not worked in the past and will not work in the future either .
Mr President , I believe that the work carried out by the Commission and also by the rapporteur , Mr Veltroni , contains many important elements .
It is clear that a great effort has been made to introduce new issues and to take new steps in European audiovisual policy .
However , I believe that we still have a lot to do on certain points , both in the Commission and in Parliament .
We are very much lagging behind in relation to the huge changes taking place in the audiovisual sector , particularly as a result of digitalisation .
To fail to act would be like an ostrich burying its head in the sand .
I am sure that that is not what we want .
We all know that digitalisation began about five years ago and therefore this work on audiovisual policy is timely to say the least .
There are five points I would like to highlight because I believe that sooner or later they will have to be reviewed :
First is the definition of public service .
This is important if we want to have a public service in Europe in an environment which is truly competitive - and this can be seen from the audience for public services - and also for the good of the private audiovisual service .
There are still many issues to be resolved : one of them is the separation of the requirements established for each of these .
Secondly , it seems to me essential that there be a review of the " Television without Frontiers " Directive .
In this respect we are behaving like the aforementioned ostrich .
Thirdly , we must define in some way - and I believe that this document does not deal with this adequately - what is to happen with interactive TV services , what is to happen with the Internet on television .
The fourth point refers to the transfer from analogue TV to digital TV and its consequences for users in terms of the use and acquisition of new terminals .
Lastly , there is the implication of the laws on competition and mergers .
The audiovisual policy should tackle these points and also go into more depth in the field of competition .
Mr President , Mr Veltroni ' s excellent report received firm support in Parliament ' s Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , and the same seems to be happening here , too , in plenary .
The move into the digital age is a massive revolution for the media .
This technical development offers the consumer still greater opportunities for using audio-visual products , in terms of time , place , content and equipment .
At the same time , it means a splintering of the media and more pressure on development and commercialism .
The audio-visual sector is of the utmost importance to competitiveness , employment , and culture , too , in Europe .
The Commission ' s initiative in this is also very welcome , as is the clarification of roles in respect of the information society and the main areas of culture .
Amid this technological revolution it is vital to bear in mind the social and cultural importance of media communications .
It cannot be a matter of equipment or financial gain .
The importance of the equality of information must not be underrated .
For that reason , I wish to stress the importance of safeguarding public service broadcasting in the future as well .
In that connection we must honour the Additional Protocol of the Treaty of Amsterdam , according to which Member States decide how to organise public service finances .
We also have to make sure that people ' s rights to receive information and cultural services in their own language are protected .
As a certain European historian said , a person ' s native country in Europe in the future will be that person ' s native language .
Television and film , as cross-border media , attract more interest than radio .
However , the importance of radio , particularly in minority language areas , should not be underestimated .
For radio to remain part of the digital age development it is important to establish a DAB standard for it .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about the " Television without Frontiers " Directive .
At the same time , we know that the transition to digital TV involves a risk of its being precisely TV with frontiers that we end up with .
It will not be possible to watch the BBC in the Irish Republic .
It may no longer be possible to watch Swedish television as easily in Finland .
It has in the past been possible to watch television across national borders .
It is difficult to buy digital cards for existing pay TV .
I appeal to the Commissioner to bear in mind the urgent request made unanimously by the groups in Parliament in conjunction with the reading of the technical directive on digital TV and really to examine this issue which has a very great deal to do with the fact that the copyright organisations have not agreed upon sensible conditions for selling TV rights .
I would therefore urge the Commissioner to bear this in mind .
At the same time , I want to support a good deal of what Mrs Iivari said about minority language areas .
Those of us who are interested in defining public service on a national basis must be watchful .
We must be careful that , for example , competitive aspects do not have the unfortunate effect of undermining our national right to define the kind of public service we want to provide .
Not all languages are in fact equal in the EU in this respect .
Mr President , Commissioner , ever since they came into being , audiovisual means have been an important factor in ideological intervention .
Controlling them is of strategic importance in the digital age in order to mould consciences and a modus vivendi , because whoever controls them decides what information they should carry .
In the view of the Communist Party of Greece , they should be controlled by the public sector .
Not because we are labouring under the illusion that governments in a capitalist system will allow full and fundamental information , but because then we can have maximum possible social control .
The Commission , however , has relegated the public sector to the role of poor relation and market legislation to the role of basic regulator .
The purpose of this apparently anti-monopolistic policy is to create oligopolies , which will be equally unconducive to objective information but which will guarantee huge profits and more secure ideological orientation , with the flow of information controlled by a few European monopolies , to the detriment of any notion of freedom and democracy .
As far as we are concerned , the problem is not whether information will be controlled by American or European monopolies .
The real problem is that the people need to develop their resistance and enforce their right to fundamental information .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , digital technology is changing our lives , and this change is taking place whether we like it or not .
We have to make use of it and create the relevant statutory framework .
I should like to add to what the previous speakers have said by expanding briefly upon a few points .
The Lisbon Seminar on Digital Television , held under the Portuguese Presidency of the Council , unfortunately came up with little apart from an incomplete overview of the subject .
That is why I am calling for a Digital Europe initiative with clear plans for the harmonised introduction of digital television and the digitalisation of content .
Merely setting deadlines according to a motto to the effect that the whole of Europe is to go digital by 2010 is not enough .
Secondly , the industry should be given a fair chance to regulate itself along the lines of the code of conduct for added value telecommunications services in Austria .
Not everything needs to be over-regulated by the legislator .
Thirdly , audiovisual policy concerns infrastructure and content .
We know that , where the latter is concerned , we have fallen far behind the United States , despite quota rules .
Only those who provide exciting content for a large number of viewers are taken notice of .
We must therefore do everything to support European content suppliers and to make their work easier instead of more difficult .
Fourthly , the approach according to which content and infrastructure are closely regulated should be maintained .
In my own country , the blueprint for the media authority KOMMAUSTRIA presents an exemplary way of doing this in line with the eight draft EU directives we have on the information society .
We need to keep pace and ought not to lose any more time .
Mr President , the document presented by the Commission in relation to its policy in the audiovisual sector in the digital era includes , amongst other things , two ideas which I consider to be fundamental .
Firstly , we must safeguard the future of the dual system of public and private television , and it is essential that European public operators can make full use of the possibilities offered by the new information technologies .
Secondly , cultural and linguistic diversity is a fundamental objective of Community policy in the audiovisual sector .
To this end , I wish to propose that the Commission , in its action and aid , prioritise positive discrimination in favour of the audiovisual sectors of the regional and minority cultures and languages of the European Union .
A good way of favouring diversity is to give particular support to the weaker elements .
Similarly , I propose that Community legislation and the decisions of the Commission itself favour the idea that broadcasts of all mass events - ceremonies , shows , sport , etc. should be considered to be of general interest and can therefore be followed in all the languages of the European Union , including regional languages .
That is the only way we can make Europe into a true union of diversities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a glance at German cable television , where some 30 channels are now already jostling for attention , is enough to show that multiplicity is not the same thing as diversity .
In competition with commercial suppliers , there is easily a danger of succumbing to demands for mass appeal and neglecting less lucrative areas of interest .
That is why it is so important for audiovisual strategy to be linked to protection of the pluralism and diversity of opinion which are now the crucial bases for democratic opinion-forming , as well as for public service media to be guaranteed an equal opportunity to develop in the media market of the future .
There must be non-discriminatory access to this future market for all citizens , and there must also be non-discriminatory access for suppliers of all types of content .
Specifically , this means market transparency and preventing developments whereby economic power turns into the concentration of media ownership and finally into the abuse of political power .
These key considerations define the most important premisses for the further development of statutory frameworks .
Mr Veltroni 's report makes important proposals in this area .
However , not everything can be regulated by law .
I should therefore like to address a matter which has still not been mentioned in this House , namely the acquisition of media-related skills .
You have to get to know your way around what the multimedia world has to offer in order to be able to separate the wheat from the chaff , select what is of value and hone your judgement .
The transfer of media-related skills must become a component of the Community ' s audiovisual strategy .
To that extent , the Commission ' s communication still does not go far enough .
Mr President , as Chairman of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , I would also like to personally acknowledge the extremely valuable work carried out by Mr Veltroni .
I am pleasantly surprised that such a major , essential measure has been able to obtain the unanimous consensus of the Committee , for I honestly did not think that it would have been possible .
Digitalisation will enable citizens to access a substantial quantity of new , innovative content and this is why I can only fully support Mr Veltroni 's consideration that all this has implications for democracy , the organisation of Europe and the States and the quality of the communications that we provide for our citizens .
This is why I consider that the period of transition from the analogue to the digital system must be our opportunity to entice the user to sample a series of new programmes on offer , not just a mere duplication of the programmes currently available on unencrypted line-aside channels .
Mr O 'Toole is right in saying that simulcasts would not make it possible to attract a group of substantial users and he therefore believes that a trial period for new audiovisual products on channels made available through digital transmission , possibly only over sections of territory , will enable operators and users to achieve the same objective .
The Commission is right to say that the system of funding adopted by the Member States must comply with the principle of proportionality and must not influence market conditions and competition in the Community in a way contrary to the interests of society .
In the audiovisual policy , the two fundamental criteria to be applied when drawing up provisions for funding are proportionality and transparency .
Transparency implies that the Member States should define a clear public service mission , that financial transparency should be guaranteed and that , if public service operators carry on purely commercial activities , separate accounts should be kept .
I consider that this separation has prompted the Commission to produce the best policy currently possible for the States and Europe , a policy worthy of the changing technologies and which will lead to the switchover of the entire system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is pleased with the report drawn up by Mr Veltroni and the draftsman of the committee ' s opinion , and I would like to thank the chair of the competent committee and its members for the pleasing unanimity they have managed to create within their committee on this draft report .
As you know , the Council also supported the Commission 's approach in the conclusions approved at its meeting of 16 May this year , which makes for pleasing unanimity .
For once , the three institutions seem to be on the same wavelength and in perfect agreement , which makes me very happy .
In particular , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's support on the regulatory principle described in the communication .
As you are aware , the Commission is to carry out a series of studies on the audiovisual sector and an extensive consultation with all the interested parties before proposing any revisions of the " Television without Frontiers " Directive , if the analyses suggest a need for this .
At this stage , before the research and consultations have been carried out , it would be extremely imprudent to speculate on any changes that might be decided by the experts and politicians .
The Commission takes note of Parliament 's comments on this directive and will take due account of them in carrying out the examination planned for the end of 2002 .
Just one detail , Mr Veltroni ; in the Commission ' s communication , it did not state that legislation on advertising needed to be revised in order to take account of the new digital technology .
It only said that it would carry out a study of this technology in order to verify whether or not a revision was necessary .
They will all decide together , however , whether or not a revision is necessary .
The Commission also agrees with Parliament that the principle of a clear demarcation between editorial content and advertising should be maintained in all forms of media .
With regard to the comments on the draft report concerning the pluralism of the media , it should be noted here that digital technology and in particular the Internet presents unprecedented possibilities for creating and developing a pluralist society .
For example , digital technology allows for a colossal increase in the number of channels , thereby reducing barriers to access for content producers .
This - and another speaker has said this - would mean ensuring that access does not end at borders , be they hypothetical or real .
The Internet also , at least potentially , allows each citizen to become a content producer themselves and creates the opportunity for a world-wide forum in which anyone can take part , with the advantages and dangers that that implies .
I think that one day we will have to discuss in depth what this advantage may also imply .
All of this changes the issue of pluralism , however , and makes it more complex .
The obstacles to pluralism in the digital world include poverty and a lack of education and training .
This issue was also raised by some Members and is something that prevents the general public from fully participating in the digital age .
The issue of the digital divide has been raised .
It is clear that we should all make a great effort to ensure that the gap between the information rich and the information poor , between those who participate and those who do not , is not too great .
I also agree with Mrs Junker when she says that we need to think , but also to propose plans of action to learn to read the media .
This is something that is very dear to me , and also to Jacques Lang with whom I have already discussed the possibility of developing this approach .
We will succeed , Mrs Junker , because we think that it is very important , not only to know how to read , write and add up , but also to know how to read images .
That is something we do not teach our little darlings .
With regard to the operators of digital media , the application of competition law currently seems to constitute an effective means of ensuring pluralism .
Nonetheless , other measures could , obviously , also be adopted , in the light of experience of the digital age and in response to Parliament 's questions , the Commission will carry out consultations on these issues during its examination of the " Television without Frontiers " Directive .
I would also like to warmly welcome the quasi-unanimity on the MEDIA programme .
The digital revolution will open up many new ways of exploiting audiovisual works : video on demand via the Internet , for example .
The European industry must be able to make the most of these opportunities .
Nonetheless , we know that the European industry is still fragmented and weak in comparison with its American competitor .
Progress has already been made , however , in the past ten years .
For example , in almost all the Member States now , the most successful television programmes are national productions and not American productions .
A change has therefore already taken place .
At the same time , with regard to cinema , we can see a significant increase in the number of European successes .
So we must not stop , ladies and gentlemen , and I know that I have your support in this , but I need money to be able to carry out the new MEDIA plus programme .
This is the great danger that will affect the final decision on this project .
I hope that in the interests of European cinema in all our Member States , we will obtain good results in this area at the forthcoming ' Culture ' Councils .
I would also like to draw the attention of those who are not here now but who have expressed criticism , saying that MEDIA and MEDIA plus only work at European level in addition to national systems that invest in production .
The MEDIA plus programme invests in promotion , distribution and digital training .
It is not , therefore , redundant , it is not something superfluous , but something that is absolutely necessary if we want our European films to circulate beyond the borders of their country of production .
With regard to certain proposals contained in Parliament 's report on the cinema , the Commission has announced in its communication that it intends to draw up a communication dedicated specifically to the cinematographic sector , which will deal with questions such as the definition of European works , and although Mrs Fraisse is no longer here now , I would nonetheless like to say to her that this will not be easy and that if she wants to give us a hand , it would be very welcome .
The Commission communication will also consider State aid to cinematographic production , an issue that concerns us all .
Furthermore , this communication could also assess the need for intervention in this field at Community level and the opportunity to develop financial engineering mechanisms in favour of cinematographic productions .
One of today ' s speakers has already referred to this .
You are well aware - I have said this to you several times - that discussions are underway with the European Investment Bank to create a capital risk fund in the autumn , if appropriate , with the intention of remedying the under-financing of our industry .
At this stage , the Commission takes note of Parliament 's comments , but is not yet able to provide any further details .
But it must be clearly understood that we fully recognise the importance of public financing for audiovisual production and the need to provide for specific treatment in this area .
I would like to emphasise this last statement , as it is of primary importance for our whole political future .
Now , you all know that public service broadcasting is a very sensitive and highly complex issue , and the Commission has clearly explained its position many times , in particular in this communication .
Ladies and gentlemen , I agree that public service broadcasting plays a fundamental cultural and social role in our Member States and must therefore be safeguarded and authorised to play its role .
In light of technological developments and changes in the market , this role could change , but this subject must be debated in the Member States since , as the Amsterdam Protocol clearly specifies , it is up to the Member States to define the public service broadcasting mandate and decide on its financing system .
The Commission does not intervene in this area and the text on transparency is clear on this point .
By virtue of the Treaty , nonetheless , the Commission has a duty to ensure that the financing system does not affect trading conditions and competition in the Community to the detriment of the common good .
For the Commission to be able to do its job and in order to assess whether the advantages granted to the businesses in question correspond to the public service goals which are their responsibility , these goals must be defined by the Member State and their financing must be transparent .
Any commercial activity practised by these businesses must not , directly or indirectly , benefit from funds intended for public service .
Transparency requires this , and I believe that the recent texts issued by the Commission contribute to making these principles understandable , clear and transparent to all .
On this topic , the informal ' Culture and audiovisual ' Council , which was held in Lille on 20 and 21 July this year , debated the future of public service broadcasting .
Certain ministers considered that a new additional stage of the Amsterdam Protocol was necessary , given the rapid technological development in this sector , and I have stated my readiness to discuss this issue with you and with those Ministers in the near future .
It should also be noted that the Commission recently adopted a revised version of the directive on transparency , as I have already mentioned .
This directive , most importantly , does not apply to public service broadcasting companies that do not practise any commercial activity .
Therefore , the public services defined by the State , with public financing clearly contained in the definition of public service , are not affected by the directive on transparency .
The concept of universal service is mentioned in the report .
In this respect , it should be noted that universal service is a concept borrowed from the telecommunications service , which in my opinion cannot be automatically transposed to the audiovisual sector .
Guaranteed access for citizens to certain broadcasting services and certain types of content is a question of defining the public service broadcasting mandate and , in accordance with the Amsterdam Protocol , is therefore the responsibility of the Member States .
The call for a European forum for discussing matters concerning all types of audiovisual content is an interesting proposal which the Commission will consider and study with the interested parties in its examination of the " Television without Frontiers " Directive .
It should be noted that , within the framework of the current directive , a contact committee has been created to examine all aspects of audiovisual policy linked to the directive .
With regard to international commercial negotiations in the audiovisual sector , I can tell you that there have been no developments .
The Commission has clarified its position many times .
It should retain its freedom , acquired during the Uruguay round , to draw up and implement financial and regulatory provisions in the audiovisual sector with a view in particular to safeguarding cultural diversity .
In its conclusions of 26 October 1999 , the Council gave the Commission to undertake the forthcoming negotiations on services and I can frankly assure you that my colleague , Commissioner Lamy , is in full agreement with this direction .
We can be sure that he will safeguard and assist the European audiovisual sector in the way we want , the way you want , and if each person carries out the task assigned to him or her , we will all succeed in future in safeguarding and strengthening our audiovisual service , which is crucial to creating jobs and maintaining cultural pluralism .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Socio-economic background of Erasmus students
The next item is the report ( A5-0199 / 2000 ) by Mr Heaton-Harris , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the report from the Commission : " Survey into the socio-economic background of Erasmus students " [ COM ( 2000 ) 4 - C5-0146 / 2000 - 2000 / 2089 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , it is not often that a politician of my calibre gets to speak to such a packed and huge audience .
I should like to thank all the interpreters for staying behind .
I understand that my speech leaked out to the rest of the Members of Parliament beforehand , hence their disappearance in mass numbers .
Many of the interpreters , I am sure , would have liked to have studied on a Erasmus course when they were learning their languages and studying at university .
I , as a British Conservative , often find fault - and it is very easy to find fault - with many of the programmes organised and paid for by the European Commission and the European Union .
However I have a soft spot for Erasmus because it is very difficult to find fault with that particular programme .
It seems to achieve some of the results that it actually expects .
This survey is a fascinating one , carried out in 1998 .
It was fascinating that so many students actually bothered to take part in filling out a form and sending it back to the Commission .
The one problem , I suppose , with the results of the survey was that they were reported after we had decided on the Socrates II programme and the Erasmus parts of it .
We could have drawn some very useful information from this survey on the socio-economic circumstances of students on Erasmus courses at that time .
There are a number of interesting facts and figures .
I could bore you with them but they are all contained within the explanatory statement of the report and in the Commission report itself .
But there are a few that I have a great deal of interest in .
Certainly of the people who took an Erasmus course in 1998 and bothered to reply to the questionnaire 98 % found that the programme was extremely positive or at least very positive .
Ninety-one percent were over the moon with what had happened to them on the course .
It is a shame that 57 % of them experienced financial hardship as a result of their particular Erasmus course .
One wonders whether , when only half the money is being spent on the Erasmus places being taken up , ( half are left open at the end of each year ) the money could not be better redistributed within Erasmus itself .
When I initially tabled my report I put forward a few controversial ideas just to see if anybody bothered to read what was going on .
Fortunately two or three Members ( and the Commission as well ) did read them .
A number noticed little points that I had to then retract .
But one which is still there in point 4 of my report , which I would like to underline , is the part that condemns any internal discrimination practised in Member States .
If you had trouble getting on a higher education course in Austria for example , because you were of a certain race , this place would have been in a complete uproar .
But that is exactly what is going on in my own country at the moment , with English students who want to study in Scotland being penalised financially by the Scottish Executive .
So I really wanted to keep that in my report .
I sneaked it in there and it stayed pretty much hidden until now , and I would like to reveal it to the very few people who are in the Chamber tonight .
I look forward to my new Labour colleagues voting on this particular matter .
I believe it is slightly too late to ask for a split vote .
I have also tabled a couple of amendments .
One helps with a bit of punctuation , a bit of grammar on the particular passage in point 4 , the second in point 6 .
In the committee stage of this report part of a sentence was added which said : " considers that the survey 's findings should be taken as an opportunity to review national higher educational policies " .
I do not think it is in the remit of this report or this place or the Commission to ask for that .
So I have tabled an amendment which would delete that .
A third amendment which I have tabled has changed just one word in the English language version from " regrets " to " notes " .
I really enjoyed working with the Commission and all the people that have helped me .
I would like to end by thanking those who helped me with this report , especially my researcher Nicky Smith , who waded through every single statistic .
We contacted every university and vice-chancellor in the UK and many across Europe to ask for their comments on this report .
I commend it to the House .
Mr President , Commissioner , I know it is very late and not a lot of people are here .
That should be no surprise to you , however .
It happens not only , thank heavens , where cultural and educational matters are concerned but also in many other areas .
I think , though , that , as you yourself have already said , quality speaks for itself .
You have briefly commented upon your report and your amendments yourself .
I am an Austrian and know from experience that , in Austria , there is very good access to all universities and courses of study .
I should also like to make it clear that we have no problem giving ethnic minorities access to these , either .
We certainly do not lag behind England , or Great Britain , in that area .
On the subject of the Erasmus programme , which is , after all , a part of the Socrates programme , I should like to say that - given the need not only to set up the programme but also to evaluate it - it is quite important to examine the efficiency of what is being offered and to carry out an assessment of the resources , if new knowledge is to be obtained and , above all , the defects in the programme removed .
It has already been said that new knowledge of this kind will unfortunately not have any impact upon the Socrates II programme .
I think we could have done to update things in this area , since 40 % of the Socrates budget is , after all , being allocated to the Erasmus programme and , in that way , to students at European universities .
It was , and remains , the goal to make it possible for 10 % of students to spend a part of their degree courses in other Member States .
Unfortunately , a figure of only 1 % was achieved in the first year .
The participation rate has risen and is now just under 50 % of the figure aimed at .
The report has shown that the reasons for this are both structural and cultural , as well as economic to quite a significant degree .
So far , there has been no success in complying with what is also laid down in the Socrates programme and giving a special boost to groups that are weak in socio-economic terms .
On the contrary , the programme is instead used by students whose parents have both a high level of education and a corresponding level of income .
Fifty-seven percent of Erasmus students had considerable difficulties financing their stay abroad .
I think there needs to be coordination between the Erasmus scholarships and the countries and the universities concerned . In that way , reform can be implemented and an information campaign launched in order to question , and shed some light upon , why so few people are able to participate in this programme .
Above all , it is a question of preserving equality of opportunity in all countries .
That is why it is worth showing some commitment .
I think that making equal opportunities available to young people is quite important for us all .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur on this , his first report , which succeeded straightaway in achieving unanimity .
I feel this is a very promising beginning , although undoubtedly the subject lends itself to unanimity ; indeed , I do not think that , amongst the impressive number of European programmes available to our citizens , there is a report that is as well-known and as much appreciated by the public , and not just by the students ; recently , a grandmother stopped me in the street to thank me for what I was doing for her grandchildren , who were travelling abroad thanks to an Erasmus grant .
So , you see , these programmes also achieve the unanimity of the whole population and naturally , they can always be improved .
This year , 110 000 students are receiving the special attention that we give to all aspects of their Erasmus trip and to the smooth running of this section of the Socrates programme , and we thank Parliament for supporting this measure .
Admittedly , there are problems .
It is often said that only the children of fairly comfortably off families can travel as the others cannot live on this modest grant .
If we consult our statistics , however , 4 out of 5 Erasmus students were the first members of their family to study abroad , which does illustrate the role that this programme plays in the opportunities for mobility available in Europe to students of new social backgrounds .
Therefore , it is untrue that only children from privileged backgrounds can benefit from Erasmus grants .
Furthermore , even if the latter have more to live on because they receive additional help from their parents on top of their grant , in other respects it seems that these financial difficulties are the only criticism made .
Ladies and gentlemen , like you , I would have liked the amount of the loans allocated in the negotiations with the Council over the budgetary appropriations for the Socrates programme to be set at a higher level than they were since I am limited in my ability to increase Erasmus grants as much as I would like .
What conclusions can we draw from this ?
Well , quite simply , the national bodies with decentralised responsibility for student mobility have to take the national situation into consideration and adapt the grant policy accordingly .
I have asked the Ministers for Education , each in their own country , to take the necessary steps to grant supplements and advantages for Erasmus students in order to offer those who are not fortunate enough to have a benevolent father or generous grandmother the chance to travel too .
I also urge each one of you to contact the Minister for Education in your country so that he will do all he can to remedy this financial problem .
I have asked the ministers to make sure that a larger grant is given to the poorest students .
I have asked the regional authorities to make an effort to assist their students and I have asked university rectors to provide for financial resources within their universities to enable students on lower incomes to still benefit from grants , if they want to and if they are eligible .
I think that in future , I will once again have to request the help of all the national and regional authorities in this area .
Furthermore , I shall consider this question in a moment as the French presidency wishes to develop a real action plan to foster mobility and together with the minister , Mr Jacques Lang , I have just set a specific meeting of the Ministers for Education on the theme of mobility .
On this occasion , we will not only talk about what we would like to do and what we should do in future , but we will cite examples taken from certain countries as models , but not necessarily at national level .
I will give you an example at random .
In one region of Germany , a regional Minister for Education has created a ' mobility ' savings scheme in conjunction with banks and building societies so that parents , friends and families , instead of buying vast numbers of toys for children , invest in this scheme which will be available to the child when he is old enough to study abroad .
As you can see , there are good ideas , all sorts of good ideas .
I hope that the discussion on ' mobility ' that the French presidency wanted will get this situation moving and that goodwill will be sought both at a private level and at regional , European and national levels so that the great success of Erasmus will encompass a growing number of students .
This is the price to pay for creating Europe , since students who have got to know another country within the framework of Erasmus , who have made friends in another country , at another university , are the true Europeans who will make European policy tomorrow .
A greater number of happy Erasmus students is in the interests of our society as a whole .
So let us all work together so that there will be a large number of them in future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Fisheries agreements
The next item is the joint discussion of the following reports :
by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna ( A5-0194 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation relating to the conclusion of the Protocol establishing the fishing possibilities and the financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Government of the Republic of Guinea on fishing off the Guinean coast for the period 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2001 . [ COM ( 2000 ) 304 - C5-0315 / 2000 - 2000 / 0154 ( CNS ) ]
by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna ( A5-0188 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation relating to the conclusion of the Protocol defining , for the period 3 December 1999 to 2 December 2002 , the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of Mauritius on fishing in the waters of Mauritius [ COM ( 2000 ) 229 - C5-0253 / 2000 - 2000 / 0094 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , today we are discussing two new international fishing protocols between the European Union and third countries : Guinea and Mauritius , the Atlantic Ocean and the Indian Ocean . These two agreements are different in terms of geographical location , dimension , fishing allowances and financial compensation .
However , at the end of the day , they are two important agreements which will add to the already significant network of international fisheries agreements between the European Union and third countries , the basic pillar of the common fisheries policy , since it is essential to cover our supply requirements , both for the European consumer and for our industry , and it is also essential to do so by means of our own fleet .
The fisheries agreements with third countries therefore fulfil a crucial objective of the common fisheries policy , and they also contribute to employment and , in most cases , in European regions which are very dependent on this activity .
They therefore create commercial balance , employment and preserve the competitiveness of Europe ' s own significant fishing fleet .
In its opinion on the 2001 budget , our committee has this afternoon approved the draft which our Vice-Chairman , Mrs Miguélez , had presented us , to increase budget line B7-8000 ( International fisheries agreements ) by EUR 7 million , thereby re-establishing the amounts in the preliminary draft budget presented at the time by the European Commission .
Morocco , Mauritania and Greenland are great negotiating challenges for the European Commission and we all hope that these negotiations will soon conclude successfully .
For the moment , we are happy today with the agreements with Guinea and Mauritius , which will cover important needs of different fleets , of different States of the European Union , in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans .
Notable in both cases is the constant and worrying increase in the payments by shipowners while , curiously , these are not included in other agreements , as is notoriously the case with the agreement with Greenland .
For example , in the case of Mauritius , there is an increase in the amount that shipowners are to pay for licences , of EUR 5 per tonne of fish , that is to say , they are increased from EUR 20 to EUR 25 , and there is also an equivalent increase in the case of catches by ship .
The European Union ' s contribution is reduced by 29 % , payable by shipowners which , in the case of complete exploitation of the fishing allowances , would mean a contribution of 23.5 % of the total cost .
In the previous protocol it was 7 % , that is to say , there would be an increase from 7 % to 23.5 % of the total cost payable by shipowners .
In this context we also wish to highlight the imbalances in the internal distribution of these fishing allowances by the European Commission amongst the Member States , as was the case with cephalopods in the agreement with Guinea .
Both agreements give significant support to the local authorities for the conservation of their own fishing resources and furthermore advocate agreements between states as opposed to private agreements - which is very important in agreements such as the one with Morocco , which we are trying to negotiate - as well as the contribution of the European Union to the establishment of modern control systems , which forms part of the conservationist position of the European Union in all of the world ' s seas , in accordance with its internal approach to its own Community waters .
On the other hand , there is an important direct relationship between the financial compensation and the objectives and cooperation actions that have been agreed .
In the case of the agreement with Mauritius , we are talking about 50 % , as opposed to 30 % in the previous agreement .
As is so often the case , there is a lack of documentation for comparing figures and data between the protocols , although in this case we should thank the European Commission for including the minutes of the negotiations , in the case of Guinea , which makes more data available and ultimately makes the process more transparent . This is welcome and the European Parliament is grateful for it .
The Committee on Fisheries has voted in favour of these agreements , and this has become the norm , since it considers that they are both highly beneficial to both parties , that is to say , the European Union and the third countries .
The Liberal Group has now presented Parliament with an amendment of similar content to each of the reports which would mean - in the view of the rapporteur - that the common fisheries policy would cease to be common and would mean a departure from an important pillar of external policy . It would mean that only the direct beneficiaries of the agreement negotiated by the European Commission would pay for it , on behalf of the fifteen Member States of the European Union .
The rapporteur is against this amendment , since , if only those who benefit directly from Community policies are to pay for them , that would quite simply be a way of breaking up the single market and dismantling the European Union itself .
We are therefore in favour of both fisheries agreements , which we hope may continue in the future , and we are anxious , Commissioner , to be able soon to hold a debate in our Fisheries Committee , and to repeat what we are saying now , in relation to the extremely important fisheries agreement with Morocco .
Keep up the hard work - I can see from the conversation we had this afternoon that you are working hard - and I encourage you also to move forward with that important negotiation .
Mr President , Commissioner , in principle I approve the new protocols to the fisheries agreements with Mauritius and Guinea .
The Commission and the rapporteur have done some good work .
However , the effects of fisheries agreements upon the EU budget are not something to be sneezed at .
If we are to draw the correct conclusions , no more time must now be lost in involving Parliament , because trouble is brewing .
Allow me to explain what I mean .
We are concerned here with mixed agreements .
It is not just a question of how many fish are to be obtained for how much money , but also about employing the precautionary principle to achieve the sustainable use of fisheries resources .
We want to help Mauritius and Guinea develop fisheries management , as well as offer financial support in the fields of education and research .
In Mauritius , for example , just under 50 % of the total volume of available finance is to be used for these measures .
I myself consider it a good thing for us also to be promoting development measures in connection with fisheries .
Fisheries is the ideal field for such a combination .
Yet , in the Committee on Fisheries , we are repeatedly confronted by the issue of whether the price paid by the European Union to third countries for its fishing rights is not too high .
There is a danger of the European Union ' s one day being ridiculed and taken advantage of internationally because of its generosity .
Moreover , to what extent are third countries now really all dependent upon EU funds ?
Bilateral agreements are increasingly coming into force because ship owners or others offer more money than the EU .
If the latter were to become a day-to-day occurrence regulated by the market itself , might not consideration have to be given to the question of whether the EU ought not progressively to withdraw from the current agreements and perhaps spend its subsidies in other ways ?
Obviously , that would have to be compatible with the common European fisheries policy .
I welcome the agreements that are before the House .
Only , we ought not to be blind and , above all , not issue any blank cheques .
Mr President , the Socialist Group supports the proposal for a Council Regulation on the European Community fisheries agreements with Mauritius and the Republic of Guinea .
Both agreements fall within a general European Community policy based on our presence in the rest of the world .
The fishing sector forms part of the Community ' s economy and , in order for the Community fleet to be able to fish and carry out its activity , the Community must reach agreements with third countries and international organisations , so that our fishermen can enjoy adequate fishing allowances .
Both agreements have been renewed regularly .
In the case of Guinea we have had an agreement since 1983 and in the case of Mauritius since 1989 .
There can be no doubt about the cost-effectiveness of these agreements for the European Union , as demonstrated in the study commissioned by the Commission on their cost-benefit relationships .
Nor can we doubt the beneficial effects for the other contracting parties , in this case Mauritius and the Republic of Guinea .
Both countries gain valuable resources for their development in exchange for the fishing allowances which they grant to our fleet .
These are agreements which benefit both parties and which have been amended over time , being adapted to the demands of the sustainable exploitation of resources and of actions supporting the efforts of the authorities in the third countries to develop their own fishing sector .
The protocols that periodically renew the agreements have been adapted to the true situation , to the quantities of fish actually caught and the state of resources in those fishing grounds .
Despite reducing the quantity of catches in the agreement with Guinea , the economic compensation to be received by the African country will be maintained , since the new protocol increases the amount of the tariffs and the licences which must be paid by Community shipowners .
Therefore , the contrast with other agreements - I would like to highlight , for example , the agreement with Greenland , in which the shipowners do not contribute to its cost - is the all the more drastic .
In the case of Mauritius , it also reduces the volume of authorised catches and specifies the number of vessels authorised to fish .
The approval by the European Parliament of these two fisheries agreements sends a political message demonstrating our support for the signing and renewal of other fisheries agreements which are of much greater importance for our sector because of the number of ships and fishermen which depend on them .
I am referring in particular to the agreement with Morocco .
Seven hundred ships out of action is excessive , and 8 000 fishermen not working for 10 months are far too many , given that the contacts so far between the Commission and the Moroccan Government have offered little hope of success .
Everybody must do their duty and fulfil their obligations .
This institution has done so , with its Committee on Fisheries approving today , in a special meeting , the amounts proposed by the European Commission in the B7-800 line on fisheries agreements with third countries .
It now falls to the European Commission to negotiate hard in order to reach a reasonable agreement with Morocco .
We are still waiting for that to happen .
Mr President , may I first of all thank the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , Mr Varela , for a particularly good piece of work on these reports .
In principle , those of us in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party support the EU ' s having fisheries agreements with third countries , but I should also like to point out that what we in the Liberal Group want - and this is why we have tabled a number of amendments - is for the fishermen or ship owners to make more of a contribution to financing the fisheries agreements .
It is , of course , only right that they should be involved in financing those agreements from which they themselves benefit more than anyone else .
The fisheries agreements are extremely important for certain regions in which , in addition to employment in the fisheries sector itself , there are a range of associated businesses wholly or partially dependent upon the fishing industry .
By means of the fisheries agreements , the EU is able to develop its activities in this sphere and exchange fishing rights with third countries .
The effect of the EU fleets upon fishing resources - in terms of structural policy and the financial situation - ought to be analysed much more than it is at present .
I want to conclude by asking the Commission to provide the Committee on Fisheries with a report on what for third countries are the positive and negative consequences of the EU ' s fisheries agreements .
Mr President , last October I spoke here against the EU-Angola fisheries agreement .
My reason for doing so was simple .
All the evidence shows that agreements between the EU and third world countries have been conservation disasters .
They also seriously damage the indigenous populations .
This time we have proposals for agreements with Guinea and Mauritius , which will have similar effects .
In a way , that much is recognised in the current proposals .
More stringent checks are being called for .
Inspection vessels are to be provided , and greater note taken of the needs of local fishermen .
But that is not enough .
There is no guarantee that these agreements will be properly policed .
Policing of fishing effort in European waters is woefully inadequate , and it is therefore hard to believe that things will be any different in foreign climes .
In addition , British fishermen from the south-west of England to the north of Scotland are continuing to suffer greatly because of the common fisheries policy .
Fishermen are discarding thousands of tonnes of saleable fish and going bankrupt in the process , yet while this economic and conservation disaster is in progress , the EU is proposing to spend over EUR 7 million to give Greek , Spanish and Italian fishermen access to the waters .
By any standards , this is preposterous .
Not only will I vote against these proposals , but I shall urge my government to oppose them .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission ' s two proposals on these two fisheries agreements , particularly the agreement with Guinea .
I should like to begin by highlighting and expressing my support for the innovations introduced by the current agreement , which dedicate 50 % of the European Union ' s total support to specific actions aimed at the sustainable development of the sector .
Amongst other new aspects of this agreement , I also wish to highlight the innovation of providing an additional premium of EUR 370 million in the event that the Republic of Guinea implements a range of actions designed to reduce its overall fishing effort .
As Guinea is a country with an annual available production of 250 000 tonnes of fish , and since its small-scale fishing fleet only has the capacity to catch 50 000 tonnes , this is clearly an agreement of mutual convenience , which avoids any conflict of interest and which also enables Guinea to obtain exceptional financing to develop its fisheries sector .
We see from this that , apart from the importance of fisheries agreements for the European Union , they can also be used as instruments for development in these countries .
As a Portuguese citizen , I am bound to regret the fact in this context that the Commission and the Council are so far behind in their negotiations on the agreement with Morocco .
I am also unhappy at the difficulties being raised over other Member States having access to fisheries belonging to Greenland , the agreement with whom has hardly been used , and which is shortly due for renewal .
It is nevertheless important that the requirements of supervision and control , as well as the programmes designed to control the reduction of the fishing effort are also imposed on the other countries that fish in the waters of these developing countries and not only on the Member States of the European Union .
I therefore ask the European Union , during its negotiations , to make an extra effort to ensure that this rule is applied to everyone and not just to us .
Mr President , sadly , all too often in the past , the reorganisation of the European fishing fleet has led to these ships being transferred to the African coast .
They was no limit on the extent to which they could be used there , which posed a serious threat , not just to the fish stocks but also to the livelihoods and the food supply of the people in the local area .
Accordingly , when we draw up these fisheries agreements , we should not just take account of the interests of the European fishermen , we must also bear in mind the interests of the local population .
The agreement with Mauritius concerns the tuna fish catch , but the situation is far more complex for Guinea .
European ships fish there for fish species that are used by the local fishermen .
It is encouraging to see that in both agreements 50 % of the financial contribution will be allocated to developing the local fishing industry .
Control over how this money is spent is certainly prerequisite to the future extension of the Protocol .
Private contracts between European shipowners and the Guinean Government are often concluded without this form of assistance from the local fishing industry , and contribute to over-fishing due to a lack of controls .
A very worrying recent development is that small French trawlers are concluding contracts outside the fisheries agreement .
These trawlers will fish in the coastal zone , where they are a direct threat to local fishermen .
All Member State ships should respect an economic twelve-mile exclusion zone .
In addition , I feel it goes without saying that shipowners should contribute more to the costs of the fisheries agreements and that the tax payer should not be the one to subsidise this exploitation of fishing grounds .
Mr President , first of all I would like to compliment the Commission , and also our rapporteur , on the agreement reached .
The agreement takes more account of the developing countries themselves , in this case Guinea and Mauritius , than was formerly the case .
That is something in its favour and what it in fact means is that these agreements should actually fall to be considered under the codecision procedure with Parliament . Perhaps this will take place next year though , after the IGC .
I am critical of a number of other points .
I believe it is a sound agreement .
Clearly this agreement is extremely important to the countries of the south ; after all , the southern fisheries agreements are directly responsible for 13 000 jobs in Spain and Portugal , among others .
The turnover is no mean feat either , amounting as it does to around EUR 485 million , in comparison with which , an agreement with Greenland , for example , pales into insignificance .
This means that the sums set aside for this purpose will also mainly be spent in these countries .
There is something to be said for this alone .
Historically , these countries had their agreements , but it would be a positive move if the business community itself were to make more of a contribution to this kind of agreement .
I mention this because a balance must be struck between developing countries and countries with a large fishing industry , but it is also necessary to strike a balance in the way funds are spent across the various fishing zones .
That being the case , I would point out that certain countries in the north , of which my own country is one , have great difficulty with the cutbacks they are experiencing in the multiannual orientation programme .
The honourable member from Great Britain has already described the problems the fishing sector is having to contend with there .
This simply means that when it comes to the fisheries policy , we must look with a critical eye at this agreement in order to ascertain where the interests lie and how the money is being spent .
It is quite clear that regional elements are going to play a more prominent role .
Let there be no mistake , I think this agreement is indispensable to Spanish and South European fishermen - that is the first point - but I think it is also essential for a regional policy to allow for restructuring of the fishing industry in the northern coastal areas , to offer scope for sound agreements with northern countries , and for it to be properly tailored to specific regional needs .
Mr President , it seems that the Commission is happy to ignore the requests of the Council and this Parliament - the former clearly expressed at the Council of Ministers of October 1997 - and delay the work on the guidelines for the negotiation of the fisheries agreements .
The protocol with Guinea-Conakry is a good example .
We expected the payment quota for shipowners to be increased , but it is intolerable that , in the Council working groups , the Commission is prepared to describe that increase as light , given that it means an ever-greater sacrifice for the fleet and that - I repeat - in the agreements with the northern countries , shipowners do not pay a penny .
Furthermore , the Commission has been prepared to ignore the principle of relative stability by casually removing from the Community fleet fishing rights that have been acquired in accordance with that principle .
The principle of relative stability is either sacred or it is not , and it cannot be untouchable in Community waters when the complete opposite is the case in the fisheries agreements with the southern countries .
The Commission says that it has taken away Spain ' s allowances for fishing cephalopods because it did not fully utilise them during the last protocol , and it grants them to countries which had never fished there . That is all very well .
I have always argued for the total exploitation of the fishing rights granted , but in all waters , not just in relation to the agreements with the southern countries .
In the agreements with the northern countries they are completely under-exploited and there is no way that the fleets with the greatest interest in fishing there can do so .
Why do these differences exist ?
Could you please explain this once and for all .
Furthermore , what makes the Commission think that , because it did not utilise the fishing allowances during the previous protocol , it will not do so during this one , given that its cephalopod-fishing fleet which was fishing in Morocco has been out of action for nine months and there is no solution in sight ?
Mr President , all of this illustrates the mental and physical chaos of our Community fishing authorities , and it will only be resolved when the guidelines which I referred to earlier are established in a clear and agreed way .
Can I first of all welcome the report and congratulate the rapporteur for his work in bringing forward this report ?
There is little doubt that fisheries agreements are coming under much closer scrutiny to determine what they achieve and what they deliver , not only for people in the European Union , but also for the countries with which they were concluded in the first place .
The rapporteur rightly mentioned the agreement with Morocco several times .
This agreement is causing tremendous concern to the people most directly affected and those who might benefit to some extent and has certainly prompted great disquiet in the Fisheries Committee .
I want to ask the Commissioner very straightforwardly and point-blank whether the Commission , and Parliament , and the European Union are being held to ransom by Morocco because of its unwillingness to agree .
Perhaps he could give an answer when he comments on the debate later on .
We cannot overlook the concern about fisheries agreements .
They are expensive and the amount of money involved is substantial .
The money has to be taken into account to a greater extent in the future , and we cannot pretend otherwise .
Yes , in the past the agreements have been acceptable , but we need a new approach and a new vision in the future .
In the longer term the Commission will have to cooperate with Parliament , because Parliament is concerned to determine how agreements can best be achieved .
Looking at what we have before us , I have to say to you , Commissioner , that the present situation cannot continue .
Yes , I support the proposal submitted and I will support the proposal that emerges , but I wish to stress that the principle cannot continue for ever and support in the future cannot be taken for granted as it has been in the past .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to say a warm thank you to the rapporteur , Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , for the two reports he has submitted today when the new protocol for a fisheries agreement between the European Community and the Republics of Mauritius and Guinea is up for discussion .
Where the first agreement with Mauritius is concerned , I am glad to hear that you support the new technical features , as well as the further amendments to this protocol as these relate , for example , to the distribution of costs , to the increased finance available for scientific programmes , to monitoring and control and to subsequent financing .
The agreement with Mauritius is a typical tuna fish agreement , involving a small number of fishing opportunities for line fishermen , and forms an important component of the EC network of tuna fish agreements in the Indian Ocean .
This new protocol is the fourth since the Framework Agreement came into force in 1990 .
The three-year extension to the protocol creates fishing opportunities for 83 tuna fishermen and , by means of this protocol , the October 1997 guidelines of the Fisheries Council are to be included in the agreement for the first time , namely an increase in specific measures for developing the fisheries sector and a new distribution of the costs between the Community and the ship owners .
Among the most important features of the protocol is the fact that , in view of the small quantities of fish caught during the three years that the last protocol was in force , the authorised tonnage has been reduced from 7 500 tonnes to 5 500 tonnes , which will also lead to a corresponding reduction - namely of 29 % - in compensation payments .
I can also inform you that 50 % , that is to say half , of compensation payments are intended for specific measures to develop the local fisheries sector .
Measures in the fields of science and technology , including plans for monitoring and control , are to be financed .
In this connection , I should like to emphasise that the conditions for monitoring such measures have been improved by the fact that the authorities on Mauritius now have to submit a detailed report each year and by the fact that the Commission is able to review payments in the light of whether the various measures have in practice been carried out .
Licence fees for ship owners have been considerably increased , from EUR 20 to EUR 25 per tonne .
All in all , the protocol has led to a comprehensive redistribution of the costs between the Community and the ship owners , since the latter now have to bear 23.5 % of the total costs compared with a previous figure of only 7 % .
That is in line with the Council ' s 1997 decision in connection with the third country agreements , whereby costs are to be distributed in a balanced way .
There are also technical improvements when it comes to catch notifications , the deduction of fees due and the procedures for taking catches on board .
If I understand you correctly , you also welcome the technical features we have introduced into the agreement with Guinea , especially the fact that , by means of a special premium , more attention is being given to the development of marine resources .
Since 1983 , we have also maintained a Framework Agreement with the Republic of Guinea .
This agreement too is important for the European Union because it specifies fishing opportunities for trawler and tuna fishermen .
Within the framework of the agreements with various neighbouring States , particularly Senegal , Mauritania and Morocco , it also offers a partial alternative for the fisheries industry during the close seasons . It also , to some degree , offers an alternative to Moroccan waters .
I am therefore pleased to be able to inform you that the protocol with the Republic of Guinea contains important innovations , aimed especially at promoting the precautionary principle and the sustainable use of resources .
I should like specifically to mention at this point that a premium is to be introduced for the purpose of supporting the Guinean authorities in improving fish stocks in Guinea ' s exclusive economic zone .
This premium will only be paid if Guinea can prove that its overall fishing activities have been reduced and that the agreed measures aimed at more stringent monitoring and control have been applied .
The idea is that we want to support Guinea in promoting bilateral fisheries agreements with other States and in reducing the number of private arrangements which frequently undermine sustained fisheries management .
What is more , 46 % of the total aid package is now to be spent on the financial counterpart for specific measures such as scientific and technical research and the monitoring and inspection of fishing activities , as well as on supporting technical training and further education in the sphere of fisheries and on supporting participation in the work of international organisations .
Finally , the protocol provides for close cooperation between both parties in administering the measures .
Monitoring is to be facilitated by means of a detailed financial report and by the Community ' s ability to review payments in the light of whether or not the measures have in practice been carried out .
Where your amendments are concerned , I should like to make it clear that the Commission can in principle accept the first two of these .
The Commission has to reject Amendment No 3 because it contradicts the current theory on protocols to fisheries agreements and affects the Commission ' s negotiating powers .
Since the protocol constitutes an annex to the Framework Agreement , it can be regularly renewed without the need for any new negotiating mandate .
It goes without saying however that , with its leading role in the negotiations , the Commission will see to it that the negotiating guidelines laid down by the Council are observed .
The Commission must also reject Amendment No 4 because it contravenes the spirit of the Council ' s 1997 decision calling for a distribution of costs between ship owners and the Community .
Many thanks for your attention .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
We have exhausted the agenda and ourselves , I think .
Ladies and gentlemen , I bid you goodnight .
( The sitting was closed at 11.25 p.m. )
Annex - formal sitting
It is my very great pleasure to welcome Mr Avraham Burg , Speaker of the Knesset , and Mr Ahmed Qurie , Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Assembly , to the European Parliament . I am thrilled to be able to do so , and to do so with great hopes for peace .
I would like to thank you both for the courage and open-mindedness with which you have both accepted the invitation I made to you during my official visit to the Middle East in February this year .
Your joint visit is unprecedented in the history of this institution .
It has been made possible because you are both men of peace , and it is as such that Parliament welcomes you here today .
I am mindful that your visit is also due in great part to the persuasive diplomatic efforts of our fellow Member , Luisa Morgantini , Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council , whom I must thank particularly for this .
( Applause )
It is highly significant that , in your capacities as the speakers of the two assemblies which will be required to ratify the agreements which are being drawn up , and in which negotiations you are yourselves taking part , you have opted to come together to address the European Parliament .
We appreciate the true worth of your approach : the value of your shared determination to reach a peace agreement , the determination to see Europe involved in the ongoing process to a greater extent , and let me welcome Ambassador Moratinos at this point , and the determination to step up your cooperation with the European Union at parliamentary level .
There is not one of us who is unaware of the complexity of the situation in the Middle East , in this land which is home to what a large part of the human race considers to be the most sacred historic sites , which are hence the most disputed sites .
We Europeans are in a good position to know just how difficult it is to make peace rather than war .
It has taken us , particularly in the twentieth century , devastating wars which have ravaged the entire world with the tragic loss of millions of lives before realising , at last , that war is a madness which wreaks universal ruin .
The European Parliament is not welcoming you here today in order to preach at you , but as a friend to the two nations you represent , which are both finally entitled to peace , security and development .
When the same process is under way in the Middle East as the one which has brought Europe not only from armed conflict to peace , but from peace to cooperation between neighbouring countries , perhaps we can envisage a parliamentary assembly uniting the peoples of your region as our counterpart !
What a wonderful dream this would be , and I am sure that our shared determination will one day make it a reality .
Mr Avraham Burg , Speaker of the Knesset , Mr Abu Ala , Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council , the debate which you have just heard has testified to the European Union ' s and , in particular , the European Parliament ' s interest in the progress of the current negotiations .
Your may rest assured that we shall be listening to your words with the utmost attention .
Allow me to hope , without denying the major obstacles , weighty as we know them to be , during this crucial phase of the negotiations , that you will be able to assure this House that the gateway to peace will remain open and that both your nations will go through it together .
Without further ado , I shall give the floor first to Mr Abu Ala and then to Mr Burg .

Thank you , Mr Ahmed Qurie , Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council ,
for your compelling speech . I shall now give the floor to Mr Avraham Burg , Speaker of the Israeli Knesset .
Mr Burg , you have the floor .
Madam President , Members of Parliament , Abu Ala , I am an optimist .
I am not the kind of an optimist who , when once asked by somebody " are you an optimist or a pessimist " , said " of course I am an optimist .
Today is better than tomorrow " .
No , this is not the kind of optimism that I would like to share with you this morning .
I would like to share with you a different kind of optimism , an optimism which says that tomorrow will be even better than today and today was a perfect morning .
On behalf of so many of us in the Middle East , especially so many of us in Israel , I should like to thank you for your efforts and the efforts of the entire distinguished gathering here this morning to push forward dialogue , understanding , and the process of listening to each other in the Middle East .
Today we are here together sharing both sides of your chair - and , by the way , responding to your proposal to have a joint parliament in the Middle East . I have no problem with that , but would ask only one thing , namely that you should chair it .
It would be a bit more complicated for us to run the show ourselves .
Nevertheless the day will come .
A meeting such as the one we are having here on the very day that the leaders of our peoples are meeting each other again in the United States of America , trying to promote another step , one more centimetre towards a better future for our children , is a crucial moment .
Not only do the leaders of our nations have the responsibility of making peace , but we , as elected representatives of our people , also bear the burden of responsibility for trying to enhance the people-to-people relationship in such a way that eventually , when peace is signed between the two sides , the people will be ready to accept the message .
Therefore I am very happy to be here with you this morning .
More than this , for many of us in Israel , Europe is not just a continent .
For many of us in Israel Europe is a value system .
For many of us in Israel Europe is something wider than its worldly presence .
Europe for us is democracy .
Europe for us is enlightenment .
Europe for us is parliamentarism .
Europe for us is culture .
Europe for us is social engineering , social responsibility and social sensitivities .
Europe for us is responsibility for the environment .
Europe for us is economy .
So when we are negotiating peace in the Middle East , we feel every day that we are not just doing what is good for our people , but we try harder and double our efforts because we have a sense of responsibility to the extent that the stability of our region is the key to the stability of the rest of the world .
What stands against this kind of dialogue is the worst sort of enemy we have ever witnessed .
Against this kind of dialogue , with all the frustration , the caveats , possibilities , corruptions , paragraphs , and verses , etc , stands the enemy of peace , which is religious fundamentalism .
The Middle East is the key to the stability of the world .
Will the stability of the world stem from the sovereign part of the former Soviet Union ?
Will it stem from Europe through the relationship between North Africa and southern Europe , eventually all Europe ?
Whatever happens in our little corner of the world - which is only 23 000 square kilometres , smaller than the Massif Central - will guarantee the future of the world .
Will the Middle East be a black coalition of Khomenei mullahs in Iran , Shiites in Iraq , Muslim brothers in Jordan , Hezbollah in Lebanon , Hammas in the Occupied Territories and Islamic fundamentalist organisations in North Africa or will it be a coalition of peace , oriented towards Europe and Western civilisation , consisting of Egypt as the linchpin of the peace , Jordan , Palestine as a state - I will come back to that in a minute - the state of Israel , Syria , Lebanon , Turkey and the rest of the world ?
These are the two options of the Middle East , a black-oriented Middle East or a peace-oriented Middle East .
Both of us , for all our disagreements , are fully committed to a peaceful Middle East for our own sake and the sake of our children and the rest of the world .
( Applause ) It is a very personal privilege for me to share this very important European podium this morning with Abu Ala .
Look at this man .
He was the architect of the Oslo Agreement .
He is the man to whom my children and the children of his people owe so much on account of his courage , creativity , devotion and commitment to change the strategy of the Middle East from a strategy of conflict to a strategy of dialogue , understanding and acceptance of the other .
I would like , Abu Ala , to tell you what I told you when you came as my guest to the Knesset , when I met you at my home - I hope that I shall not do you any political damage back home by mentioning these things - and in all other places where we have met , namely that the Middle East of our generation is privileged to have a great man like you leading your people .
( Applause ) I feel very pleased to be here with you this morning .
After so many years when we Israelis felt that Europe did not fully understand us - and the other way around - I have the feeling that this is a different environment in which we are carrying on a dialogue .
Coming to this House after you passed the resolution on the memory of the Holocaust , first mooted in Stockholm and eventually embraced by the majority in this House ; the kind of help you are giving openly and secretly , to Jews in need in distressed areas around the world ; and of course your unequivocal commitment to peace encompassing various interpretations and schools of thought : all these things make me feel happy to be here this morning .
When I am asked whether I am an optimist or a pessimist - well , of course I am an optimist because I prefer the frustrations of negotiation to the funerals of the wars .
( Applause ) Yes , we have frustration but it is a long way from the departure point .
Look at history , look at the writing on the wall .
In 1948 there were seven Arab parties engaged against the newly born state of Israel .
In 1967 only three out of the seven - Egypt , Jordan and Syria - fought against us .
In 1973 only two out of the three - Syria and Egypt - were against us .
Now some 25 years later , we have peace with Egypt and are very close to peace with Syria .
They say today the sun is rising in Syria .
The Palestinians did not fight against us as a nation in 1948 or join the struggle against us as a belligerent in 1963 , but all of a sudden - and unbelievably - we now find ourselves in the middle of negotiations .
Thank God we are there .
If I had told you ten years ago , before the Gulf War , that in the year 2000 the Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council would have a debate with the Speaker of the Israeli Knesset before the European Parliament , you would have said that it would never happen .
What if I had told you five years ago that the President of the United States would come to celebrate Christmas 2000 in Bethlehem , accompanied by the Chairman of the Palestinian Authority , Mr Yasser Arafat , who would fly there in a Palestinian helicopter , and both would be protected by thousands of armed Palestinians ?
What if I had said that all this would happen only 300 metres from the southern part of Jerusalem ?
You would have told me that I was fantasising and it will never happen .
But it will happen .
And when we meet here again in five or ten years ' time all the obstacles that today look like abysses that we cannot cross will be behind us .
And this will happen because of this kind of partnership and because our people and their people in the Middle East understand where the modern world is going .
It is moving towards acceptance , reconciliation and forgiveness for the past , whatever the past might have been .
The negotiations today , difficult as they are , are very good negotiations .
The situation is not easy and far from resolved , but nevertheless the world has changed .
All of us come from the political arena , and you know as well as I do that in politics there is no such thing as good timing .
When you raise an issue and nothing happens , people say why raise it now , when nobody cares about it .
At the height of a crisis they say why raise the issue at the height of a crisis , wait until it is over .
Then , once it is over , everyone says " It is over - who cares about it ? " .
The time is never right to do something .
The Middle East has been no exception .
There has always been an excuse not to raise an issue .
For a long time the circumstances and the political environment were almost impossible .
Now , all of a sudden , the world is not a bipolar world , and the Middle East is not being tugged apart by the Soviet bloc and the Western bloc .
We are more or less alone and talking to each other .
All of a sudden the rhetoric is getting down to pragmatic solutions .
A world of pragmatic solutions is not an easy one .
Because Abu Ala yes , international law is very important .
People who are living in the family of nations live by the law .
If they did not it would be a wilderness , a desert , chaos .
Many of us - and I do not know all of you , but I know some of you - have deeply-felt value systems which are at least as deep as our commitment to law and understanding and humanity .
Mine is my religious belief .
Yes , I know it is an oxymoron .
I am a rational individual who believes in God ; do not ask me how .
But this is what I have tried to do , in my commitment to this region of the world , to the monotheistic idea , to the dialogue between religions , all because sometime in history , the founding father of my nation , Abraham , after whom I am named , came up with the concept that there is one God .
Thank God , this one God is represented by five parties in our Knesset today , but that is a different story .
( Laughter ) Therefore , when we are seeking practical political solutions , we have to understand that these are solutions for historical problems and people 's faith and beliefs .
It is not enough to say politically that it works when we have not prepared the spiritual background for acceptance of the compromises .
What do I mean ?
Practically , we have never been so close to each other , but what do we know about the icons , the symbols , the things that have been there for so many years ?
Abu Ala must come home , Yassar Arafat must come back home and say " I solved the problem of the refugees , " and Ehud Barak must come back home and say " Yes , the problem of the refugees was solved , but not within the recognised international borders of the State of Israel " .
Yassar Arafat has to come home and say " I solved the problem of Jerusalem and we have a full presence and full sovereignty in Jerusalem " .
But on the other hand , no one can authorise Ehud Barak to compromise on King David 's capital .
How can he go home ?
Therefore the problems are not just political but psychological as well .
I would like to say something briefly about the way we see Jerusalem .
I was born there , I studied there , my kids are there , I almost live there .
I know and respect all the different beliefs and faiths of Jerusalem .
I would be the last person in the world to belittle or disregard the holiness of Jerusalem for people of other faiths .
It belongs to them with the same intensity that it belongs to me .
I will defend till my last breath their right to worship .
I will defend all the rights of all these people to worship equally in Jerusalem , but I also demand from others no less respect for the holiness of Jerusalem for the millions of Jews who died and prayed and waited throughout 3,000 years of Jewish history .
A peace formula has to be founded on the respect for the holy .
I accept your beliefs , please accept mine .
It is beyond politics or law , it is something deeper , something spiritual .
Only this mutual respect will enable all of us to live as ordinary , honorary citizens in God 's city on Earth .
I urge you Abu Ala , my friend , when you go back to your people tell them that Jerusalem is holy for the Muslims and Jerusalem is holy for the Christians , but it is no less holy for Jews .
We need to find a political compromise but also a religious compromise .
( Applause ) I have a feeling that the challenge of Jerusalem is the biggest political challenge ever witnessed .
Today I heard maybe the first ever official statement from a very high-ranking Palestinian delegate , saying that there is a possibility Jerusalem will not be the capital of the Palestinian State .
It was a very interesting observation , as a fallback position I understand , and it is something that has to be studied .
The late King Hussein , whose commitment to peace in the region no one would doubt , came up with a beautiful idea .
He said that the problem of Jerusalem 's sovereignty is almost insoluble ; why not give the sovereignty of the city of God back to God ?
Between us we shall find enough practical solutions .
King Hussein 's idea was presented to all our leaders and I am pleased to say that the sides have not rejected the idea . Let us explore it .
We have a goal .
We are going somewhere .
I do not want peace in the Middle East to be a win-lose situation .
Nor do I want me to win and him to lose . I do not want him to win and me to lose .
I want it to be a win-win situation for both of us . I would like to see a Palestinian state declared on a basis of understanding and mutual acceptance and consent between the two sides , with Israel the first to recognise it in the international community .
That is what I wanted for many years before it became the official policy , not policy , the official mood in my country .
I have no problem with the Palestinian state or Abu Ala .
On the contrary , as soon as we have a Palestinian state , the dialogue between us will be a dialogue between equals .
Any issues that are not resolved now , we can deal with later on and continue the dialogue between us .
I know that many of the issues were resolved at Camp David but there are other issues that I hope we can solve .
You raise the issue of refugees .
It is not a unilateral issue .
My mother was a refugee from Hebron .
She was born some 80 years ago in Hebron and I am a Hebronite ( that is not a compliment in the Middle East , it means a very stubborn , simple individual ) .
Millions of Jews came from the Muslim countries in 1948 , 1949 , 1950 and up to the 1960s and there are problems .
But I will make a compromise with my dream because my land comes to me from the biblical promise and your land comes to you from a religious commitment and a national presence in the Holy Land of Israel .
Your first territorial compromise is with your dreams , and my first territorial compromise is with my dreams on the understanding that anyone who claims that the greater Israel is his , cannot be the partner of Abu Ala and anyone who claims that the greater Palestine is his , cannot be a partner to Avraham Burg .
Only if you and I compromise our dreams can we seek a compromise between the two nations and if we make this emotional compromise all the rest will follow in due course .
I would like to conclude by talking about the future .
Yesterday we were enemies , today we are ( almost ) friends and tomorrow we will be partners .
Personally , of course , I admire him , although he does not admire me and rightly so , but the two of us can play a role in the regions .
However , we need help and mediation from the rest of the world .
Today Europe and the rest of the world are dealing with the local impact of the global economy , narrowing the gap between the haves and the have-nots , creating opportunities for the have-nots .
Israel has a relatively good economy .
The Palestinians have not yet had the chance to develop their own independent economy .
We would like to see Europe and the rest of the world helping both of us to improve the economic level of the region so that there is a balance between the two economies .
This will prevent frustration in the relationship between the two states and the individuals within those societies will not despair and take refuge in religious fundamentalism .
I believe that is a crucial strategic need in the region today .
One last word as to why I am an optimist .
Coming from here , from Strasbourg , I have to tell my people how it was , I will tell you how it was .
Eleven years ago I and my eldest son , who was then very young , were stuck in the middle of a traffic jam in Jerusalem because there was a bomb somewhere .
They were talking about it on the news and my son who was very young then and so had no respect for his father , turned to me and said ' Daddy , are these the people you want to make peace with ? ' , because at that time I was one of the leaders of the ' Peace Now ' movement in Israel .
I was lost for words , because how do you explain the complexities of these things to a seven or eight-year old boy ?
My father , who at the time was 80 years old , was in the back seat .
In his 40 years as a member of the Knesset he served in every cabinet in Israel and he was the head of the Israeli-Egyptian team that negotiated autonomy for the Palestinians .
My father was born in Dresden and lost his entire family in the Holocaust .
He said to my son ' Listen , grandson , when I ran away from Germany forty years ago , I hated them .
I could not believe that I would ever go back there .
I could not believe that I would ever forgive them , but now I have forgiven them .
Now Germany is different , the people are different , there is a powerful message of soul-searching , correcting the past and doing better for the future coming out of Germany ' .
Then he said to him ' If this can happen between us and our worst ever enemy , there is no reason in the world why it should not happen between you and the Palestinians in your generation because the rivalry is not that deep . '
My father passed away last year , but his wisdom is almost prophetic .
It is with me day in and day out and I believe there will be peace , not in my son 's generation but in the generation of Abu Ala and myself : a permanent , solid , good peace for the betterment of the world .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Mr President , I would like to make what I consider to be a very important point .
Yesterday , I came to Strasbourg on Olympic Airways flight 165 from Athens to Frankfurt .
When the plane arrived at Frankfurt airport , it was immediately surrounded by German police .
Nobody spoke anything but German , and we were not allowed to leave the plane without showing our passports to the German police .
I remind you that Greece , as well as Germany and France , are countries that belong to the Schengen area .
The worst thing is that this was not an exception ; this , I was told , is something that happens systematically at Frankfurt airport when planes arrive from Greece .
As a Member of the European Parliament , where we have so often voted on Schengen , I believe that , although there is legislation for the free movement of people , the fact that , in reality , this legislation is being systematically violated by the German authorities is an insult to , and undermines , our work .
As this concerns the free movement of Members of the European Union , I would like the President of the European Parliament to take the appropriate measures to ensure that we come to Strasbourg in a way that befits people who belong to the European Union and to Schengen .
Mr Alavanos , I consider that our President shall forward the text of your speech to the authorities of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Frankfurt airport authorities so that - and I do not know what the grounds might be for the current practice - we receive at least some sort of explanation or , alternatively , this procedure , which , I agree with you , has very little to do with the Schengen provisions , ceases to be used .
Mr President , on Monday , in my absence and without any prior notification , Mr Murphy , the leader of the British Socialist Group , raised a question about my involvement in supporting the Danish anti-euro campaign .
He was very careful not to accuse me of anything but has none the less contrived to give the impression that I am somehow under suspicion .
I should like to put on record that my involvement with the Danish referendum has been entirely separate from my work in this House and that I have never infringed any parliamentary rules .
Unlike the Danish " yes " campaign , the " no " campaign cannot rely on taxpayers ' money or subsidies from the European Union .
It is outrageous that Mr Murphy should have sought to give the impression that I am under investigation when he has failed to produce evidence or even make any allegations against me .
It cannot be right for Members to be subjected to this kind of baseless innuendo .
I would ask you to insist that Mr Murphy either accuse me outright or apologise .
Mr Hannan , Mr Murphy is , of course , free to decide whether and how to respond to your speech .
Mr President , we very frequently complain about the Council 's attitude towards Parliament .
I would like to highlight an incident of a completely opposite nature which took place yesterday during the debate on EU external action priorities .
We had the reports from the President of the Council and the Commissioner followed by a debate took place .
At the end of the debate , due to the presidency 's total lack of flexibility , the President of the Council and Commissioner Patten were not able to respond to the numerous questions which had arisen from quite an intense debate .
Now then , I cannot understand this Parliament for complaining about the Council 's behaviour .
Yesterday , the President of the Council was in the Chamber from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. while the number of Members of Parliament present was not great - and , in actual fact , we prevented both the Council or the Commission from replying to extremely important questions posed by Members .
This does not seem to me to be very polite , and I would go so far as to describe it as verging on the downright rude .
Mr Dupuis , I doubt that this situation was due to lack of flexibility on the part of the presidency on duty . It is more likely to have been a mistake , a misunderstanding between the Chair at the time and the Council and Commission representatives .
Mr President , I am very surprised at what I heard from our British fellow MEP , Mr Hannan , for he presented himself in the Danish media as a Member of the European Parliament .
If he were there as a private individual , he should have let this be known in the Danish campaign .
All things considered , I think Mr Hannan should stay at home in Britain and mind his own business , and leave us to get on with it in Denmark .
We have no use for people like that acting the fool in Denmark .
Mr President , I do not want to detain the House too long but I think that Mr Hannan protests too much !
I made a very simple request to the President on Monday .
The President agreed to my request and referred the matter to the Quaestors .
But while Mr Hannan is here in the Chamber this morning , perhaps he could give us a guarantee that he will be making a new entry in his declaration of financial interests to say where the money has come from .
The Danish people have a right to know in advance of the referendum on 28 September where the " no " campaign funds have come from .
Now then , we cannot continue with the debate and we cannot turn this Chamber into an annex to the discussion leading up to the Danish referendum either .
We now know the essence of the issue .
Everyone will do what they think best .
Right to family reunification
The next item is the report ( A5-0201 / 2000 ) by Mr Watson , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive on the right to family reunification [ COM ( 1999 ) 638 - C50077 / 2000 - 1999 / 0258 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Klamt , who was the original rapporteur designated by the committee which I have the honour to chair to look at this issue .
Mrs Klamt did a very considerable amount of work on the proposal for a Council directive on the right to family reunification .
She deserves the credit for the work that has been done . I wish to congratulate her on that .
I have inherited this particular cornucopia as chairman of the committee because Mrs Klamt felt at the end of the votes at committee stage that she could no longer support the text as it stood and therefore I am presenting it to the House today .
I would like to commend the European Commission on what is an extremely well argued and well presented report , drawn up in record time considering the relative lack of resources of the departments concerned and the demands laid down at the European Council in Tampere last year .
The Commission has come forward with an excellent draft directive which will permit third-country nationals legally resident in a Member State of the Union to reside in another Member State as is required if a true area of freedom , security and justice is to be established .
The Commission has said , quite rightly in my view , that the goal of zero immigration mentioned in past Community discussion was never realistic and sought instead to put forward realistic proposals for the protection of the rights of third-country nationals in accordance with the many international treaties that have been signed by Member States , such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international covenants of 1966 on civil and political rights and on economic and social rights .
Very clearly , the importance of legal immigration is recognised .
The importance of the family as a unit is also recognised and the importance of making a success of the integration of third-country nationals residing lawfully in EU Member States is the whole basis of these proposals .
We have in my committee considered a number of contentious areas , not least the question of the right to bring in ascending relatives .
The Commission proposal quite clearly recognises the difference of legal treatment between descending and ascending relatives .
It is evident that , in the context of the international legal framework , mention must be made of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child .
This convention requires states to ensure that the child is not separated from the parents .
There is no similar convention dealing with ascending relatives , but it is clearly the case that if we wish to live up to our humanitarian ideals we must provide the opportunity for third-country nationals to bring dependent relatives in the ascending line into their family units .
This has been a matter of some debate within the committee .
I am pleased to see that a number of amendments to the final report have been put forward ; in particular Amendments Nos 18 to 23 , which propose a compromise on this matter .
May I briefly introduce some of the amendments that the committee 's report puts forward .
Amendment No 3 looks at the need for data and recognises that in order to have an effective evaluation of the situation in the Member States , the Commission will need more information from the Member States .
Amendment No 5 deals with relatives from the ascending line .
This has now been overtaken in a sense by the compromise Amendments Nos 18 to 23 .
Amendment No 6 recognises the very real problems that the administrations of the Member States currently have with the workload created by the demands of family reunification .
Amendment No 9 allows each Member State to introduce more favourable provisions than those set down in the directives , and insists that these new rules will not lower current standards of protection .
Amendment No 11 deals with the grounds on which a Member State may deny the right of entry to a relative , namely on grounds of public policy , domestic security and public health .
Our amendment seeks to insist that any Member State wishing to refuse entry on those grounds provides very clear justification .
I do not wish to comment on all of the 66 amendments put forward to my report , but I would say that this is a very complicated area .
Parliament had relatively little time to look at it and inevitably not all of the compromises which were necessary to reach a favourable outcome were achieved in committee .
I would therefore urge Members to look carefully at the amendments that have been tabled in plenary to reach the compromises which will allow us to go forward in an effective and humanitarian way .
Mr President , my task as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was a relatively easy one compared with that of the honourable members in the committee responsible , and I would like to congratulate them all on the outcome , even if we do have to discuss a few compromise amendments in plenary today .
The reason I said that my committee ' s task was an easy one , is because the proposed draft directive raises few difficulties from a legal viewpoint , and nor is there a great deal of room for manoeuvre when it comes to framing policy .
I would also like to say how impressed I am with the logistical quality of the draft directive , which certainly cannot be said of all the Commission ' s draft directives .
Pursuant to the new Article 63 of the EU Treaty , it is now the Community ' s task to settle the matter of family reunification , and the Community must take these measures in accordance with the provisions of international law , in particular the European Convention of Human Rights and the other instruments of international law already mentioned by our committee chairman .
The right to respect for family life is a universal human right .
It is not divisible and cannot be reserved for EU citizens alone .
This would be a dubious line to take , particularly as we are concurrently working on a European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
If Community provisions are now to be put in place for family reunification , we also need to close incomprehensible and , in some cases , absurd gaps in the existing legislation .
This particularly applies to the right of EU citizens themselves to live together in their home land with family members originating from a third country and not to be in the position where the only way they can live with them as a family is to avail themselves of freedom of movement and settle in another Member States .
Therefore this directive is only too welcome from a legal viewpoint , and it is to be hoped that neither Parliament , nor , more importantly , the Council , will make any changes to the substance of the Commission ' s original draft .
Mr President , in principle , everyone agrees that open internal borders make a compelling case for a pan-European , harmonised immigration and asylum policy .
The Commission has put forward the first draft of a legislative initiative in this field , which concerns the right to family reunification .
Unfortunately , it failed to place this draft directive in an overall frame of reference .
What point is there in knowing which family members have the right to enter and reside in the EU , when it is not known what provisions are to be made for which immigrant groups and for which reasons for immigration ?
In addition , Parliament is expected to vote on a legislative initiative which lacks absolute fundamental principles .
We have neither a joint evaluation of demographic trends , nor do we know what impact this legislative initiative will have on the individual Member States .
Unfortunately , the lack of overall strategy and statistical basis are not the only weak points .
The Commission lumps economically motivated immigration and asylum together .
I take the view that as far as family reunification is concerned , there should be one set of arrangements for asylum seekers and refugees , and one for immigrants .
Different rules must apply to those who have been driven out of their native land than apply to those who emigrate for economic reasons .
We need to clearly distinguish between asylum seekers and refugees on the one hand , and immigration , i.e. economic migration , on the other .
This will allow for provisions that do justice to the people concerned and the situations they are in .
Many of my proposed amendments have this distinction in view .
Another problem with the present draft directive concerns the widening of the definition of family .
Grandparents , children over the age of majority and non-married partners should also be entitled to family reunification .
That is where the dilemma lies : there is no overall frame of reference for immigration .
As such , family reunification is currently the only legal channel of immigration .
The proposed sweeping provisions on family reunification are open to uncontrollable abuse .
Just ask yourselves this question : who will decide , according to which criteria , whether a relationship is bogus , contrived purely for the purposes of immigration ?
That is why quite a few of my proposed amendments call for priority to be given to the core family .
Another cardinal sin committed by the Commission is that its proposal contains no measures whatsoever for integration .
It is not right to bring people to a foreign country without making the necessary provisions for foreign nationals and local people to live together in peace and friendship .
A final point to be made is that a directive of this kind is paving the way for us to have an objective and constructive discussion on the whole area of immigration .
If people feel they are being overrun by waves of immigrants , then their reaction is one of rejection .
If we put transparent , enforceable provisions in place , then people will be more inclined to allow foreign nationals to integrate .
By producing moderate and well-considered solutions , not only will we be able to overcome problems such as xenophobia ; we will also be able to tackle the problems associated with having a disproportionate number of elderly people in the European Union .
However , this draft directive seems to be a poor first attempt at this .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , I am sorry to hear Mrs Klamt ' s words .
I wanted to begin by congratulating the Commission and Commissioner Vitorino on this proposal which seems to me to be very complete , well constructed and timely , coming almost a year after the Tampere Summit .
We must clarify today in this Parliament whether we want the immigrants and refugees who live amongst us to do so legally with their families , giving them the opportunity to live a normal life and to integrate fully into our society , or whether we are going to continue to feed the myth that they are provisional co-citizens whose final destiny is to return to the hypothetical homes they came from .
This issue is so important that we must make an effort to reach a consensus .
All of our groups were in agreement in committee , apart from the PPE Group .
I would like us today to send a message to the people who live amongst us that they can do so with their right to live as a family recognised .
Mr President , this is the intention of my group , although I would also like to ask the Commission , on behalf of my group , to think twice about one aspect included in the current directive .
We have also applied these rules we are debating to people who are under alternative protection .
Unfortunately , the European Union does not have homogenous criteria . There is no harmonised asylum policy .
Therefore , there are very different situations in many countries , and on this minor point I would agree with Mrs Klamt .
It is not a question of rejecting these people - they have the right to live as families - but of the Commission thinking twice about it and of their being subject to a future directive which would include persons under temporary and alternative protection , while we await the future harmonisation of the Union ' s asylum policy .
Otherwise , I congratulate the Commission and I hope that it receives the full support of this House .
Mr President , the ELDR Group is backing this report as one of the essential building blocks in constructing the area of freedom , security and justice and in following up the Tampere Summit , which rightly made it a priority to establish rights of free movement for legally resident third-country nationals .
This is an injustice which needs remedying .
Like Mrs Terrón i Cusí , I am surprised at the stance of the EPP Group , which normally puts a lot of emphasis on family values and yet today is undermining the family by opposing reunification , which will assist the social integration of these legally resident migrants .
This seems to us perverse .
To take up some specific points in the report , first of all on the inclusion of beneficiaries of subsidiary protection .
We will wait to hear Mr Vitorino , but it is rumoured that the Commission will accept amendments to take these beneficiaries out .
The ELDR Group would regret that because we think that , like refugees , beneficiaries of subsidiary protection should be in .
They are long-term residents , they are not analogous to beneficiaries of temporary protection .
We will listen to the debate because our overwhelming desire is to get the bones of this proposal through .
On ascending relatives , we consider that Amendment No 20 is superfluous because there is a general right in Article 9 of the proposal to apply a non-discriminatory means test to all entrants .
However we are willing to look at that if it assists in saving the report .
It is important to be absolutely clear on unmarried partners .
The proposal will not force Member States to give legal recognition to unmarried partnerships , but if they do they must treat unmarried partners like spouses .
There has been a lot of misinformation on this , not least stirred up by the Conservatives in the United Kingdom - tabloid headlines about outrageous plots by the EU to force the UK to accept refugees ' gay lovers .
That is stirring up homophobic prejudice and I deplore it .
Mr President , we are going to vote on a report today that has caused a political stir in certain EU States .
The Commission and Commissioner Vitorino have done some sterling work here , and I would like , on behalf of my group , to take the opportunity to thank them for it .
The European Council confirmed , at its special summit in Tampere , that the European Union must ensure that third-country nationals are treated fairly .
The Commission has taken this resolution forward .
This directive is conclusive as it stands , and should be transposed with all haste .
Sadly there were , and still are , reservations against including refugees benefiting from temporary protection in this directive , and against recognising same-sex relationships as the basis for family reunification .
This debate demonstrates once again that , unfortunately , integration and migration policy is still a controversial issue in the European Union .
There is , after all , a great deal to be considered .
Nevertheless , we must make it possible for people who live apart from relatives who are third-country nationals , to be brought together .
Therefore , in principle , this is an initiative that deserves everyone ' s support , particularly where it concerns children , and these self-same children - irrespective of whether they are the offspring of refugees or immigrants - should have a future in the European Union .
However , opinion is being stirred up against this directive in the political arena .
It is to be hoped that the majority of honourable members will support the directive put forward by the Commission as it stands .
I know that my fellow socialist members are awaiting a statement from Mr Vitorino , in the hope that refugees ' interests will be sacrificed for the sake of this directive , under pressure from quite a number of EU Ministers for Home Affairs .
I regret this decision , and the fact that Ministers for Home Affairs appear to carry more weight in this Parliament than the honourable members , who are expected to act according to their consciences .
For this reason , I reiterate my call for us to support the Commission ' s directive and at last set down a marker for an up-to-date , modern and humane policy of integration .
I hope the Socialists will refrain from making this deal with the Conservatives .
Mr President , I would like to commend the Commission on its serious and balanced work .
Too often , when we broach the subject of immigration , passions , excesses and political ulterior motives prevent us from reflecting objectively and making progress .
In dealing in depth with the issue of the right to live as a family , and in defining the precise conditions for its application , the text enables us to hold a real debate .
Far from casting suspicion a priori , as is often the case , on those who wish to live with their spouses and children , the text recognises the legitimacy of such a right even if , in fact , this right must now apply equally to homosexual couples and to all other categories , as the honourable Member has just said , especially in the case of asylum seekers .
The text also takes into account that nowadays there are several types of families in our society , especially certain forms of cohabitation , and that we cannot therefore discriminate against immigrants who live in the same way .
In recognising this , the text helps to give real meaning to the term ' integration ' .
Through harmonising legislation in Member States , this draft directive will provide protection and legal stability for immigrants and will above all prevent them from being subjected to national political fluctuations .
I therefore hope that subsequent work by the Commission and Parliament will take its inspiration from this example .
Perhaps we will then be able to talk further on the equality of rights and the often positive contribution made by immigration , in dealing with issues that are vital for integration and the fight against the unemployment , insecure employment , violence and discrimination , of which immigrants are often victim .
Immigration is not a problem .
Yet we must resolve to talk about the real problems such as the imbalances between the North and the South that often force men and women to flee from poverty .
We must also recognise that the waves of immigrants towards the countries of the European Union have been more or less constant for a couple of decades .
In other words , by implementing restrictive laws , Member States have not succeeded in reducing the overall number of entrants ; they have simply reduced the number of legal immigrants while increasing the numbers of illegal immigrants by declaring them illegal .
By underpinning these values , this draft directive will not only have positive consequences for immigrants and their families , but it will also be a symbol for refuge and integration .
I sincerely hope that we will be able to follow the same line of conduct in subsequent work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the text that has been presented to us , and in fact the entire immigration policy that is being pursued by European institutions , exhibits a worrying trend .
Indeed , there would be cause to worry about a certain form of capitalism that imports workers and cuts them off from their families , with all the risks of rootlessness that could give rise to .
But today we have gone well beyond that .
What were initially nothing more than a temporary work contracts are tending to turn into permanent residence .
What has become permanent for one person is tending to become permanent for that person ' s family and friends .
Initially it was just the close family , but now it is the extended family as well .
And we are very well aware that the extended family is extensive , given the social structures of the countries of origin , in which the registration of births , marriages and deaths is sometimes only rather ad hoc .
And then , from the extended family - brothers , cousins , nephews , parents , grand parents - we move on to the polygamous family .
And why favour just family ties ?
From the polygamous family , we move on to cohabitation and soon , as the preceding speaker , Mr Sylla , has just proposed , we will move on to mere homosexual association .
These are the considerable risks resulting from this policy trend .
We are going to end up with what we are already starting to witness ; a veritable , suicidal immigration of entire populations , organised by Member States and European institutions alike .
This is , quite manifestly , the suicide of Europe .
The only solution worthy of the name is to organise family reunification but to organise it in the country of origin with the support of the policy of cooperation to which end these methods should be employed .

Mr President , whilst expressing my continued dismay at the ongoing prejudice shown towards Austria by the 14 other Member States , I have this to say about the report currently under discussion .
I regret the way in which it was handled in the committee responsible , as this has led to the rapporteur being unable , in the final analysis , to identify with the outcome , causing her to withdraw her name . A rather singular occurrence .
As I see it , constructive and well-founded amendments proposed by the rapporteur - which she has expounded and justified again today , and which I am therefore in a position to refer to - as well as by other members of the committee , were simply swept aside and not handled properly , for reasons of political ideology .
In assessing this improper conduct , I would refer - on behalf of Austria , among others - to the decision taken by the conference of the heads of provincial governments on 17 May 2000 , whereby all the new Austrian heads of the provincial governments rejected the draft directive in this form , unanimously and in fact right across the political divide .
I am sorry that the committee has behaved in this way , because I believe a sledgehammer approach does the cause more harm than good , particularly in an area as sensitive as this .
Mr President , Commissioner , the present document , like the report , is a labelling con .
The wording on the outside belies the actual contents of these documents .
We would be delighted to endorse family reunification measures , for this would be deeply humane and would also be key to an integration component , but what we have is something entirely different .
This is about initiating sociopolitical debate on how far the circle of those entitled to family reunification can be extended beyond the core family .
You include a proposal relating to unmarried partners , whose parents and children would be allowed to join them , according to which , testimonies from the country of origin would be enough to satisfy you as to the authenticity of a relationship , regardless as to how it appears .
This would mean that children or parents joining members here would have the same rights as EU citizens in the educational , employment and social spheres .
The traffickers in human beings and the document forgers will thank those of you who support this proposal , and you can rest assured that the general public ' s response will be one of indignation .
You also include a proposal relating to multiple marriages , i.e. the first wife is to be accepted along with the children and relatives in the ascending line . However , you also make the point in this document that naturally it would be possible to bring another wife and her dependants in , if this were necessary for the sake of the child ' s welfare .
This begs the question as to how much wider the door is to be opened to uncontrollable immigration ?
As far as we are concerned , the proposal under discussion is unacceptable .
It lacks an overall frame of reference , a statistical basis and there is no differentiation . You are also overstepping the mark in respect of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which requires the integration capacity of each of the Member States to be taken into account .
We have no intention of voting for this document unless it includes our amendments and follows our political line .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , after the recent events in Dover , when 29 illegal Chinese immigrants suffocated to death , the tragedy of illegal immigration and the methods of responding to it have become a considerable problem , which the European Union must definitely tackle .
This problem requires us to work on a particularly sensitive issue , that of shaping and harmonising a European immigration policy . This will be one of the major issues of the twenty-first century .
The European Commission ' s draft directive establishing the right to family reunification is perfectly timed , and I would like to congratulate the Commission particularly on this text , which was drawn up under the auspices of Commissioner Vitorino .
The right to family reunification is crucial to normal family life .
What is more , this right has long existed in the form of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights , according to which all persons have the right to family life .
But this is a particularly sensitive issue in view of the different laws existing in the various Member States , as it can come into conflict with notions of sovereignty .
But that is the gauntlet that has been thrown down to the European Parliament , which must succeed in transcending these differences .
The draft directive we are being asked to give our opinion on today is , in my view , a text of major importance , and it must receive the firm backing of the European Parliament .
This text holds out real prospects for legal immigration , most of which is family immigration .
As has already been said , this directive is the first example of this type of structure resulting from the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere European Council , which is why it is so important .
I would also like to point out that the modern world has many advantages , but for certain categories of people , including foreigners , there is a significant risk of exclusion .
It is our duty as European democrats to be particularly diligent in this matter .
The directive proposed by the Commission enables us to take a major step forward , under conditions that are entirely satisfactory , but with all the necessary guarantees .
There has never been any question of authorising polygamous family groupings , contrary to what I have just heard .
This is utterly false .
Let us remember that this is the first text in the process of integrating the ' justice and internal affairs ' pillar into community policy in the wake of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere European Council last November .
Let us also remember that this is no more and no less than a matter of establishing the right to family reunification and that we must stop seeing family reunification as a privilege .
As far as we are concerned , what is at stake is the construction of a Citizens ' Europe , something we are hoping and praying for in order to be able to continue to build Europe .
It is up to us to seize this opportunity . Otherwise we will not succeed .
Mr President , I am of the firm opinion that this draft directive is a major step forward .
That said , restrictive conditions are still being placed on the process of family reunification .
I believe we should be highlighting the fact that , in the final analysis , it is unemployment and insecure employment that should be banned and not the right of immigrants to live with their families only if they can provide evidence of adequate means and a roof over their head .
For the nationals of a country , society makes progress slowly , but it does make progress , witness the PACS vote in France , but the notion of the family in the case of immigrants is inflexible .
The laws in force provide for the right of residence to be revoked if there is a break-up in the matrimonial household , effectively outlawing divorce , and , as has just been said , homosexual couples are still not recognised .
Under the pretext of combating polygamy , second spouses and their children are condemned to illegality and to even greater dependence .
Family reunification must be liberated from the archaic conditions that still exist as a result of fanatical immigration control .
In conclusion , Mr Watson ' s report has fortunately made real progress following the work in committee on the initial report by Mrs Klamt .
I am bound to say that , when I hear Mr Gollnisch ' s racist , reactionary and unacceptable comments , I want to vote for this report .
It is a question of dignity .
Mr President , contrary to popular belief and notwithstanding the debate that has taken place here this morning , this directive is not about defining the concept of family , which is generally binding throughout the European Union .
It has far more to do with establishing in precise terms , which third-country family members should be entitled to join relations who are immigrants to the European Union .
No one would dispute the fact that families have the right to live together .
But what really matters here is where we draw the line as regards family members .
For example , I have a wife and two children , and they have children too . I also have siblings and aunts and uncles .
If I were to count the number of relatives I live in close contact with , that makes 25 all told .
Commissioner Vitorino , if I were to apply for asylum in Portugal , for example , then clearly I would be unable to assert a claim to live there with 25 relatives .
In other words , we must be sensible and draw the line somewhere .
That is the crucial problem we face with this directive .
We must also distinguish between those whose stay in the European Union subject to a time limit , and those who reside here permanently .
I should point out that this draft directive extends family reunification provisions beyond those that have been in force in the Member States to date .
This sends out another signal to would-be immigrants , which will , of course , have major consequences .
This directive would have very different implications for States with a high proportion of immigrants , such as Austria , Germany and the Benelux States , than it would for States such as Portugal , Finland and others , which do not see very much in the way of immigration .
We cannot endorse this directive as matters stand , because it would lead to a dramatic increase in family reunification , which is one of the main grounds for reunification .
Therefore , Commissioner , with all due respect for your work , I cherish the hope that the Council will decline to give it the unanimous assent it requires .
Mr President , I would like to begin by warmly congratulating the European Commission and especially Commissioner Vitorino , on its extremely constructive legislative proposal on the issue of family reunification .
At last , Europe is on the move , after decades of zero immigration and , more especially , after so many years of refusal by Europeans to grant third-country nationals residing lawfully in the European Union their fundamental human rights .
Recognising the right to family life is one of the basic conditions for the integration of refugees and migrants in the social life of the country in which they reside .
Unfortunately , those in this Parliament who extol the virtues of the family and hold it up as the highest ideal happen to be the very people who undermine it . This is exactly what is happening with this draft directive on the reunification of the families of refugees and migrants .
Self-righteous hypocrisy is the main feature of this wing of the European Parliament , and we have experienced it again and again .
Yet I would like to say that I understand the qualms of many governments , including my own , concerning this draft directive .
Indeed , countries such as Germany , where millions of refugees and migrants have sought refuge , are shouldering an enormous burden .
But at the same time I would like to point out and to highlight the enormous contribution that refugees and migrants make to the economic development of our countries , through their work and through taxation .
The social burden that is referred to by the critics of the proposal may be reduced if refugees and their family members have the right to work , as provided for by the Commission proposal
Finally , I would like to point out that this directive sets out the minimum requirements , and governments retain the right to put in place better conditions for the reunification of families .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is the first time since the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force that the European Parliament has been consulted on a Commission proposal for a Council directive on the matter of the lawful immigration of persons originating from third countries .
It is therefore a sign of the profound institutional changes introduced by the Treaty and given top priority on the European political agenda by the Heads of State and Government at the Tampere European Council .
The Commission has decided that a proposal on family reunification should start us off on this journey , this considerable effort to construct a common European immigration policy .
I should also like to begin by explaining why we have chosen this subject - in answer to a critical observation from Mrs Klamt , whom , regardless of our differences of opinion , I should like to congratulate on the work she has carried out as the first rapporteur for this matter .
I believe family reunification is a concept that is thoroughly coherent with the commitments that all the Member States undertook several decades ago in the sphere of international law .
From the reference to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to the international convenants made under the United Nations in 1966 , to the European Convention on Human Rights itself - in all these instruments of international law family protection is upheld as an essential factor for ensuring social peace .
I do not believe anybody can deny that family reunification is also an important instrument for the integration of immigrants from third countries into their host societies .
This has indeed been repeatedly recognised by the bodies of the European Union . That is , since 1993 the Council has been devoting constant attention to the subject of family reunification .
It must also be recognised that family reunification is significant in numerical terms because it is today one of the main causes of immigration into the countries of Europe .
The directive is not creating this flow of migrants ; what the directive intends is to regulate a situation that already exists on the ground .
Those who refuse to see that this directive aims at setting up legal rules to respond to a situation that already exists on the ground and try to blame the Commission for inventing a new flow of migrants are therefore being unfair in their analysis of the actual situation that we are addressing .
That is why the Commission decided that family reunification should be given priority treatment over other forms of lawful immigration .
It is not a matter of deciding on entry and residence for economic purposes , or the immigration of workers , or the immigration of students .
As we see it , it is a matter of regulating a different form of admittance in response to values - that is , family protection - and a strategic political objective : the promotion of the integration of third-country nationals who are already living lawfully in the Union into their host societies .
We are basing our approach on a principle which is debatable , but without any evidence to the contrary I believe it can be demonstrated . This is that family reunification is a factor which promotes the personal stability of the immigrant , since family life is always an important instrument for integration into the host country .
The Heads of State and Government at Tampere in fact unanimously stressed the need to ensure equitable treatment for third-country nationals who are lawfully resident in the Member States of the Union . They also stressed that a more dynamic integration policy needs to be developed in parallel , and that this policy should aim at offering third-country nationals rights and duties comparable to those held by the citizens of the Union .
These , then , ladies and gentlemen , are the values and political commitments upon which the Commission has based its proposal . I should also like to point out that the Commission has proposed an initiative in which family reunification is seen as a right .
This is not , however , an absolute right of the third-country citizens who reside in the Union ' s Member States , and reside there lawfully .
Instead it is a right subject to conditions , whether procedural in nature or material conditions regarding the definition of the status of the family members in the country to which they have been admitted and regarding the rights that they enjoy .
I am willing to discuss all the implications of this proposal , also because the French Presidency considers this subject to be central during the six-month term for which it is responsible .
For our part , we are also willing to introduce an amended proposal as quickly as possible so that we can achieve a positive outcome during the French Presidency .
I should like to thank all the Members who have taken part in the debate .
Here as in the Commission it has been a lively , at times even passionate debate , because it deals with a sensitive issue on which , naturally , each country puts forward a very strong case for its own situation .
It is difficult to find common ground at European level . Above all , however , this debate has one fundamental feature .
It is no longer a debate on statements of intention : it is a debate on rules , binding legal provisions , which will have to be implemented .
It is therefore natural that it should be a lively , even passionate debate , and one in which there are divergent views .
The Commission considers your opinion to be of the utmost importance .
And I should like to congratulate Mr Wilson on the job he has done in presenting a report under the difficult circumstances in which this debate has taken place .
I should like to explain to you all what the Commission ' s position is on the more difficult political issues in this directive .
First , the scope of the proposal : the Commission believes that refugees should be included within its scope , because from a political viewpoint it would be incomprehensible if economic migrants were granted a right to family reunification that we did not grant to refugees recognised under the Geneva Convention .
I accept , however , that it is necessary to exclude the beneficiaries of temporary protection or subsidiary protection .
This is not a matter of going back on a question of principle . I am convinced that a certain kind of beneficiary of temporary or subsidiary protection should also have the right to family reunification .
I do recognise , however , that the lack of harmonisation of this concept at European level and especially the Commission ' s intention to submit a directive on temporary and subsidiary protection to Parliament and the Council next year will allow us to deal with the right to family reunification in that directive very soon .
We therefore accept an amendment to the proposal excluding beneficiaries of temporary or subsidiary protection .
Where issues relating to the concept of the family are concerned , I should like to make it very clear that in this proposal the Commission is not interfering in the matter of defining the concept of the family .
This proposal fully accepts that each Member State has the competence to define what a family is , as well as the issue , for instance , of unmarried partnerships .
This proposal does not say that all the Member States will be obliged to recognise unmarried partnerships and accept unmarried partners under all circumstances .
We are simply saying that in those countries where unmarried partnerships are placed on an equal footing with marriage in domestic law for their own nationals , these unmarried partnerships must also be recognised for the purpose of family reunification for third-country nationals .
I should therefore like to state clearly that there is nothing in this proposal favouring family reunification for polygamous marriages .
I am sorry , but the text is quite clear !
It is not possible to apply for a second wife to come !
Only one exception is made : for the children of the second marriage if the interests of the child so justify .
But how could you explain treating the children of a second polygamous marriage differently from the children of a first marriage or the children of an unmarried partnership ?
I am not a subverter of moral values , but I think we have to keep the interests of the children in the forefront .
Finally , Mr President , the Commission is willing to accept a number of other amendments and other modifications regarding the rights of family members , the conditions and clarification of the conditions for family reunification , the situation in which the person being reunited may acquire independent status , and concerning procedural rules .
Full details will be given before the vote is taken .
I should like to conclude by saying that this is , of course , an exercise that will give rise to debate .
The debate with the Council will not be easy , just as the debate with Parliament has not been easy . I respect the opinions of all Members .
I should like the final opinion of Parliament to have as broad a support-base as possible .
And I hope - regardless of our differences of opinion , which are to be expected and , may I say , useful and essential for democracy - that once this directive has been adopted , we may all be able to pool our efforts to solve the essential question that we have before us . This question is how we can create a clear and transparent legal framework that will ensure the integration of lawful immigrants into their host countries and we must do so because this integration is the key to the success of a common European immigration policy .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Movement and residence of EU citizens
The next item is the report ( A5-207 / 200 ) by Mrs Boumediene-Thiery , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Internal Affairs , on the Commission report on the implementation of directives 90 / 364 , 90 / 365 and 93 / 96 ( right of residence ) and on the Communication from the Commission on the special measures concerning the movement and residence of citizens of the Union which are justified on grounds of public policy , public security or public health [ COM ( 1999 ) 127 COM ( 1999 ) 372 - C5-0177 / 1999 , C5-0178 / 1999 - 1999 / 257 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank all of you who have , through your comments , contributed to fuelling this debate .
Before embarking on an explanation of my report , I would like to start by asking you a question that I cannot get out of my head . This is in my view the crux of the problem described in my report and will determine the way we vote .
This question is : what in fact does European citizenship really mean ?
Is it just a simple expression aimed at selling Europe , or do we really want to add content to this term ?
Today , for the majority of us who live in Europe , European citizenship is still a concept that is devoid of meaning .
If we want Europe to be more than a vast free trade area , we must take action to ensure that European citizenship goes beyond the status of a concept and takes root in the everyday life of the citizens of Europe .
This is the context in which I wish to place this debate .
The directives that have been examined concern Community nationals , but they must be modified in favour of third-county nationals .
The report aims to sum up the reality of the freedom to move and reside in the European Union .
With reference to the EC Treaty , my report was written with due regard to Article 14 , concerning free movement of persons , and Articles 17 and 18 concerning European citizenship , which entails the right to move and to reside freely throughout the territory of the European Union .
Although Member States have made great progress in ensuring the free movement of goods , services and capital , it is clear that we are no nearer to achieving the same for people .
I will start by filling in some of the background and the content of the directives .
Initially , freedom of movement was reserved for people who were economically active .
In June 1990 , the Council adopted three Commission draft directives to extend this right to all Member State nationals , even if they were not economically active .
I will just give the broad guidelines of these directives .
For retired people and other non-economically active people , the right of residence is open to those who have health insurance cover and adequate means .
For students , the right of residence is subject to the condition that the student is enrolled at a recognised educational establishment and that he is covered by sickness insurance .
In both cases , spouses and dependent children may accompany the holder of the right of residence and may work .
The transposition of these directives was doubly problematic .
On the one hand , the directives were transposed extremely slowly throughout the Union .
What is more , the Commission had to initiate fourteen infringement procedures .
The Commission concludes that ' for too long , EU citizens have been denied some of their rights or been faced with unjustified administrative difficulties due to the incorrect transposition of the Directives ' .
Let us now proceed to a concrete assessment of the situation . This right to free movement and residence , which is confirmed in the Maastricht Treaty , is violated by economic considerations .
The notion of adequate means is incorrectly interpreted by governments .
What income is to be taken into account when evaluating means ?
What evidence must be provided ?
How does one take into consideration a progressive financial situation which sometimes depends on the help provided by the spouse ?
Because the acceptance procedures are long and difficult , it is often necessary to take out a second health insurance in the host country .
When you are not in salaried work , it is difficult to obtain a residence permit and the instability of the professional situation is added to by the short-term nature of the residence permit once it has been obtained .
With regard to special measures justified in the name of public order , the Commission gives examples of many cases of incorrect interpretations , such as criminal convictions that justify systematic deportation and expulsion .
Finally , administrative procedures are too long - more than six months - and become very costly when frequent renewal is necessary , as the period of validity is normally two years rather than five .
I will now present the main measures advocated with a view to overcoming these problems .
Our first proposal is to ask the Commission to prepare a framework directive , which would adopt a position based on the fundamental right of free movement and residence rather than on a sector-specific approach which necessarily leaves room for ambiguities .
It will still be possible at a later date to implement a whole raft of specific measures to help citizens depending on their particular situation .
This reworking of the existing directives must dissociate the fundamental right of movement and residence from any economic considerations .
These measures must be concomitant with simplifying administrative procedures and providing documents free of charge .
Until these mechanisms can be put in place , a transitional measure may be to introduce a one-year residence permit for all applicants .
Harmonising social protection systems and pension systems is vital .
Finally , in the case of special measures justified by the notion of public order , we can only call on Member States to narrow down their interpretation , to put an end to the double penalty and to protect certain categories of people from expulsion .
I would like to finish by clarifying a number of points .
Rights must be attached to the individual and the individual must take the rights with him wherever he goes .
Third-country citizens living and working legally in a Member State must benefit from the same rights as European citizens .
Furthermore , it is a pity that the Council has not followed up this proposal of citizenship and residence .
In conclusion , I hope that I have persuaded you to support this resolutely citizen-centred approach of freedom of movement and residence , which is a fundamental issue for awareness of a European identity .
At a time when discussions about the future of Europe are hitting the headlines , and when we are examining a future charter of fundamental rights , we must support any project aimed at providing an area of freedom , justice and equality , where all the residents and citizens who contribute to the construction of Europe must have the same rights .
Perhaps it is time that people acquired the same rights as the products they consume .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur .
We are dealing here with a long-overdue overhaul of a number of directives relating to rights of residents of the non-economically active .
My starting-point , as was the rapporteur 's , is that we should give European Union citizenship real meaning .
The Treaty statement that every citizen should have the right to move and reside freely within the territory of Member States and the reality are still far apart .
I draw on the experience of a number of language students from other Member States in my own constituency .
They received a standard letter from our local social security office asking them to attend for a two-hour interview and to bring with them as many items as possible on a non-exhaustive list of about twenty documents such as a passport , bank statements , or household bills to " establish their identity " .
When I enquired further about this I was told that it was not an EU matter , because the same letter would be sent to UK residents .
In what circumstances I cannot imagine .
And , the two hour time-scale , even more ludicrously , was supposed to save them from a car parking fine in the local car-park !
I would not want to see any citizens treated in the same way as these students .
The history of the directives that deal with the rights of residence of the non-economically active is an unhappy one : non-implementation , infringement proceedings , a patchwork of different and burdensome requirements .
You can move a sack of potatoes around Europe more easily than a citizen can move .
If we are to appeal to our citizens and the basic right of free movement is to be real , then simple , fast codification of this area of Community law is long overdue .
Then , and only then , will the Treaty statement on European Union citizenship become a reality instead of mere words .
Mr President , we are great talkers about human rights in the EU , but in practice it is often the case that citizens ' rights are synonymous with money .
Those who have work and can support themselves are protected by legislation , but there are large groups of people who do not have work of their own and who therefore do not have rights .
This may apply to students who have to prove that they have a proper place at university or to pensioners who have to prove that they will be taking their pensions or own capital with them if they move .
It may also apply to third-country nationals and especially to relatives who are third-country nationals and who are not allowed to accompany the breadwinner when he or she obtains work on the other side of the border .
This means that those who are weakest economically are still discriminated against .
The report proposes significant improvements for these groups , which in practice are larger than one might think .
They are to be given better opportunities to move and an extended right to take up residence in other countries .
In this connection , I would also point out that the right to move within the labour market and the right of residence are not the same thing .
Nowadays , there are many workers who are sent on short-term contracts to work in other Member States and who do not receive any right of residence at all .
For those who do not have a secure income or other means of support , the right of residence is almost nil .
Freedom of movement for labour is protected by the legislation of the internal market .
For the majority of people , it is more important , however , for their right of residence , including their right to stay on , to be protected .
This means that people are not compelled to move even if they cannot support themselves .
Radical improvement is needed in this area , and it would be as well to tackle this problem now , at a time when the Member States ' economies are looking better than they once did .
.- ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Boumediene-Thiery ' s report addresses the problems that the Commission mentions in its report on how matters stand with regard to the application of provisions on residence rights .
Yet , Mrs Boumediene-Thiery would like to see the scope of application of these residence rights extended to third-country nationals .
The Committee on Petitions was asked to submit an opinion because it is a special committee that is directly concerned with the problems facing the general public .
Unfortunately , there are still far too many infringements of the rights of EU citizens ; I wholeheartedly agree on that score .
Firstly , Member States are wavering when it comes to implementing Community law provisions on residence rights .
In particular , subordinate authorities in the Member States are unfamiliar for the most part with the relevant provisions .
Secondly , the problems associated with the recognition of diplomas are hugely restrictive .
What use is the right of residence to me , if I do not have the right to exercise the profession I am trained in , in the host country ?
Thirdly , a failure to adapt the provisions on freedom of movement , and the social security rules , to the changing labour market , is causing problems .
It is simply not acceptable that I could fail to be reimbursed for medical treatment abroad merely because I do not have the correct form .
Mr President , we have provisions governing EU citizens ' right of residence in other Member States , but even now , they are not being fully applied .
We are constantly hearing of cases where EU citizens are unable to reside in another Member State .
Therefore , let us urge the EU Member States to implement the existing Community law provisions without delay , before we consider extending these rights to third-country nationals at any rate .
Mr President , in the event that the amendments we are presenting to Mrs Boumediene-Thiery ' s report are not accepted , my group will vote against it for reasons which I believe to be fundamental .
The directives under debate today refer to the free movement and residence of students as well as people who have ceased professional activity or who are economically inactive and who , furthermore , receive disability or old-age pensions or subsidies - all of them Community citizens - as well as the exceptions laid down in another directive on expulsion for reasons of public order , security or public health .
The problem is that Mrs Boumediene-Thiery widens the scope of these directives to include citizens of third countries .
For example , section 20 of the resolution extends family reunification to non-Community families and their relatives in ascending and descending lines , who are not dependent on the resident , which would increase admission without restrictions .
Furthermore , to treat unmarried couples on the same terms as married couples , which does not raise many problems in the case of Community citizens , given the diversity of the legislation , does raise problems in the case of third country citizens because there would be very real problems recognising stable cohabitation .
It would give rise to so-called marriages of convenience or false marriages , and that amounts to fraud ..
Furthermore , I believe that all the false logic which is used when referring to migrant workers has no place in this debate , not so much because of the subject matter but rather because it is not appropriate for the study of these directives .
As the Commission says , the level of information needs to be improved so that European citizens are crystal clear as to what their rights are with regard to moving freely within the internal market , with clear , concise and specific rules and using communication technologies such as the Internet , the television , or local and regional media .
Commissioner , the suggestion that replies to parliamentary questions should reach our various citizens by means of the methods of communication considered appropriate , does not seem to me to be a good procedure .
I think that it is impractical , apart from anything else because not even MEPs always read those replies .
It is also necessary to eliminate the absurd amount of paperwork needed to justify the nature and size of the pension .
I believe that an identity card for pensioners and the use of computers should replace these cumbersome forms of authorising payments .
The same would apply to students .
In order to facilitate their mobility , we should free them of unnecessary costs and make their residence compatible with their periods of study or apprenticeship .
Finally , I would also like to point out that it makes no sense to link public order , as section 6 of the resolution does , with the Schengen area in a proposal aimed at the citizens of the European Union , who are not governed by the Schengen legislation but by Community directives , in particular those relating to public order .
In order to update the legislation , I believe it is necessary to revise the texts by means of a new regulation and simplify the obstacles to free movement and to the residence of Community citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to begin by thanking the European Commission for its sustained efforts in keeping the right of residence - within the context of the free movement of persons in Europe - high on the agenda ; this is once again borne out by these two communications on the right of residence .
Secondly , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her report .
She has opted for a broad approach , Mr Hernandez Mollar , and her report covers right of residence for all citizens , including the economically active and those from third countries , topics which are , in fact , covered by proposals already submitted .
My group supports this approach because , despite all initiatives from the Commission , despite the Veil report , despite the action programme and despite the legislative initiatives , the proposals remain on the Council table with very little happening to them .
Within the framework of this debate , I should like to home in on four specific points .
Firstly , it has become apparent recently that the European labour market is relying increasingly on mobility ; an ever dwindling number of companies manage to fill their vacancies .
It is therefore quite astounding that there are still that many obstacles with regard to the free movement of persons and right of residence , especially where temporary contracts , part-time jobs and the unemployed who look for jobs abroad are concerned .
Secondly , my group keeps an open mind on European citizenship . To us , this means that the non-economically active , the retired and students should also be entitled to a right of residence , subject to certain conditions , of course .
The obstructions which some Member States are creating at the moment do give us the strong impression that some Member States do not want to embrace the European citizenship idea at all .
Thirdly , we aspire to create a citizenship which does not discriminate according to the type of relationship citizens choose for themselves .
Whether they choose to live together , and whether they are single , gay or lesbian , they should also be able to claim right of residence in those countries where these types of relationship are recognised ; if not , we would be denying thousands of people the right to live in families .
And finally , we embrace a vision of citizenship which is also open to people from third countries , residents of the European Union , legal immigrants and permanent residents , without discrimination .
We therefore give this report by Mrs Boumediene-Thiery our unconditional support .
We hope that the Commission will continue to adopt a hard line against infringements and the pitiful transposition of EU legislation in the Member States , but above all I hope from the bottom of my heart that the Council will finally pluck up the courage to tackle the free movement of persons full-on .
Mr President , there has thankfully been a change in European Community law over the last 30 years from freedom of movement of persons being seen as purely an economic issue - functional mobility - to it being seen as a personal right .
This has meant a lot of rhetoric about a citizen 's Europe but not much change in the mentality or administrations of the Member States , as Mrs Wallis has pointed out .
In saying that , I am not overlooking the economic benefits of free movement .
Mrs Boumediene-Thiery 's report points out - and I congratulate her for its quality - that facilitating mobility promotes dynamism and economic competitiveness .
So why does the Right ignore this ?
But the real bottom line for Liberals is whether the Member States believe in and respect the notion of European citizenship , not only allowing the citizens of a Member State and their families to move around but also conferring such rights , to the greatest extent possible , on legally resident third-country nationals and their families - which unfortunately were not covered by the Commission report .
It is very aggravating when the Council of Ministers and individual governments wring their hands about the low turnout in European elections , launch campaigns with balloons and plastic bags about people 's Europe and seek to win citizens ' votes in referendum campaigns , but still maintain obstructive red tape when those citizens have the cheek to assert their European legal right to move freely .
Those rules are far too complicated anyway .
We need a complete overhaul to streamline and make crystal clear the unimpeded exercise of free movement .
It is not too much to ask .
As Mrs Wallis said , it should be as easy for people to cross borders as it is for widgets or potatoes .
We support Mrs Boumediene-Thiery ' s report .
It is indeed time that we respected equal rights and abandoned the rationale of suspicion towards immigration .
Member States take it upon themselves to refuse the right of residence to foreign students , even if they are enrolled at a recognised educational establishment , if they believe that they have changed direction or are not progressing quickly enough , which should be a decision left to the university authorities .
This rationale of suspicion gives rise to obsessive references to the need for public order and the scandalous practice of double penalties .
For the same crime , in addition to prison , foreigners are systematically and automatically expelled from a Member State .
This banishment violates the principle of equality before the law that is enshrined in Article 7 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Finally , it is important to facilitate the granting and renewal of permanent residence permits , as a residence permit of very brief duration leads to employment of very brief duration , discrimination and exploitation .
Finally , the time has come to promote a European citizenship that is based on residence .
The right to vote must be extended to non-Community nationals if we want to get rid of xenophobia and racism in Europe .
Mr President , as the rapporteurs who have just spoken said , although the right to free movement is deemed to be one of the most important aspects of the fundamental right of European citizenship , it is a right which is all too often subject to restrictions , and the large number of petitions to the European Parliament on precisely this subject are testimony to this .
I would first of all like to focus on a point strongly emphasised in the report : the need to fight against all abusive and excessively restrictive interpretations of the concept of public policy by some Member States .
For example , someone who has lived in a country since childhood or , at any rate , for a large number of years , and therefore has cultural , social and family ties in that country , should not be deported unless he or she is convicted of a crime which is deemed to be , in effect , a serious offence , under the criminal law of the country of residence .
Sadly , this is very often not the case .
Another point which I would like to focus on concerns the members of certain royal families , such as the Italian royal family , for example , which , despite the fact that it does not pose a threat to national security , cannot fully exercise its legitimate right of free movement .
I feel that the time has truly come to make a genuine attempt to tackle these issues and remove the barriers to free movement once and for all , for the very reason that - as has already been said - potatoes and goods appear to have greater freedom of movement in Europe than the citizens .
Freedom of movement and residence is a right enshrined in European treaties and granted to all citizens and should only be denied in exceptional cases when there is a real threat to public safety .
It is therefore all the more extraordinary that 50 years after the signing of the Convention of Human Rights , which ironically was signed in Rome , and one year after the Treaty of Amsterdam upholding such rights , that one European family , which for a thousand years has been involved with the continent 's history , is being denied the fundamental rights my colleague has mentioned .
The Watson report demands such rights for family reunion and the Boumediene-Thiery report for freedom of movement and residence , even for third-country nationals and even for convicted criminals .
This family , as mentioned , is the former royal house of Savoy in Italy and lesser violations are also being committed against the royal houses of Austria and Greece by their governments .
The thirteenth transitional article of the Italian Constitution , absurdly labelled " transitional " but still in force after 53 years , is not only a violation of European treaties , but also sexually discriminatory in that it applies only to male royal descendants , no matter how far removed , of the constitutional monarch King Victor Emanuel , deemed guilty of signing unacceptable wartime fascist laws .
Ironically , descendants of Mussolini are not only allowed to live in Italy but one actually sits in the Italian Parliament .
This article is shameful and obsolete and all Members of Parliament , even those with anti-monarchist feelings , should join me in calling upon the Italian government to allow an innocent European family to return to their native land , where it poses no conceivable threat to public safety or the stability of the Italian Republic .
We can only call for European citizens to have more rights if all their rights are upheld irrespective of origin and without discrimination .
This issue goes far beyond individual families and goes right to the heart of the Union 's respect for its own laws and treaties .
Either we have a European Union based on law or we do not .
I therefore commend my Amendment No 14 to this House .
Can I congratulate Mrs Boumediene-Thiery on her report on special measures concerning the movement and residence of citizens of the Union which are justified on grounds of public policy , public security , or public health .
It is a very good report .
Unfortunately , in two minutes all I can do is talk about some of its failings .
Firstly the Commission has failed to deal with the issue of the 12 to 14 million third-country nationals living legally in the Union who currently suffer discrimination and , outside the Union 's island States can move freely de facto but cannot do so legally , which of course creates situations in which they are exploited and used in illegal ways .
With all due respect for the rapporteur , I have to say that we also have a problem with a number of areas that she has not dealt with , one of which is the issue of football hooliganism .
I am generally in favour of free movement but I think it needs to be limited .
I do not normally believe that persons who have not been convicted of crimes should be prevented from moving freely , but there is a European problem that is being ignored at European level .
Europol should be used to prevent the free movement of people who have been convicted of football-related crimes to ensure that they do not cause the same kind of trouble as at previous World Cup and European championship tournaments .
I also believe that the provisions should be invoked on the grounds of public security to prevent the free movement of German neo-Nazis who produce Holocaust denial material in Denmark with the clear intention of reimporting it into Germany , where it is illegal .
I hope that the Danish Government will use the provisions in this instance .
Equally , we need to make sure that the system is not abused .
I naturally hope that the free movement of people who have the misfortune to be HIV-positive is not restricted in any way on grounds of public health .
I agree with Mr Tannock in principle .
Of course the royal families of Europe should be allowed to move about freely .
However , I disagree with his priorities .
When we ignore the rights of 12 to 14 million legal residents , then the rights of two families are comparatively insignificant .
Mr President , I should like to begin by agreeing with all those who have pointed out that the matter we are discussing concerns the very essence of European citizenship .
We might say that this right contributes towards a practical and concrete expression of the concept of European citizenship , in that the great challenge facing us at the moment is to turn this legally recognised right into a practical reality that is implemented in citizens ' everyday lives .
I also agree with those who have pointed out that the transposition of these directives has taken place too slowly , or even incorrectly in some cases .
In addition , we must also face up to the difficulties arising out of implementation of the directive on special measures concerning the movement and residence of citizens of the Union which are justified on grounds of public policy , public security or public health , in that there should be guidelines not only for the Member States , which have so far interpreted the provisions of the directive in quite a variety of ways , but also for the citizens regarding the rights conferred on them .
The Member States may impose restrictions on the right to free movement of Community citizens , particularly in matters of entry to and expulsion from their territory as well as the issuing or renewal of residence permits , where this is justified on grounds of public policy , public security or public health .
Member States cannot , however , abuse such prerogatives in a European Union based on the rule of law , respect for human rights and particularly respect for the European Convention on Human Rights as well as , soon , a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is for this reason , then , that these measures of exception to free movement have been subject to restrictive interpretation .

Finally , Mr President , I should like to express my agreement with my colleague Hernández Mollar when he gave his support to the proposal from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market to try to integrate the various texts into a single regulation . This could be implemented directly and would be a primary document on European citizenship , which would offer all the necessary information not only to citizens regarding their rights of citizenship but also to the government departments in each Member State that have the task of implementing existing legislation .
Mr President , Commissioner , in company with Mr Hernández Mollar - whom I would like to thank for his enthusiastic support for Amendment No 15 , tabled by myself - I feel that this document must be rejected if the European People 's Party 's amendments are not incorporated .
I support Amendment No 14 , tabled by Mr Tannock , which upholds the free movement of the heirs to the Italian and Greek thrones and supports the monarchy .
Personally , in tabling Amendment No 15 , I support the pensioners , for although the measure facilitates the movement of non-EU citizens , it does not remove the difficulties facing its own citizens , particularly its disabled citizens , who wish to travel within Europe .
At Bergamo Orio al Serio airport , as I was leaving to come to Strasbourg , I met a pensioner - a very old lady who is 80 years old - who told me that she wanted to go to Paris to visit her daughter but that she could not do so because she would lose her Italian State pension which is her only means of support .
Another person , who is totally handicapped , said that they wanted to go to London but that they could not do so because they would have lost their pension .
Yet another person , who is disabled - in a wheelchair , no less - told me that he would have liked to go and visit his brother but that in doing so he would have lost his incapacity allowance .
Therefore , our goal must be to bring about the free movement of pensioners and disabled citizens in Europe .
Mr Fatuzzo , you have made me think very carefully about where I shall travel to in old age .
Commissioner Vitorino has the floor .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission , I would like first of all to congratulate Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and all those who have taken part in this debate .
Indeed , I think that , for the Commission , the establishment of European citizenship has created a new legal and political environment and , for our part , we intend to draw all the practical lessons we can both in the legislative field and in the field of day-to-day public administration .
The Commission is counting a great deal on the support of the European Parliament when the time comes .
With regard to the motion for a resolution that you have just presented , I would simply like to address two or three comments directed at the Commission .
The three directives on the right of residence of the non-economically active have , I am sure , enabled thousands of European Union citizens to benefit from this right without encountering any particular problems .
However , there are still cases where these directives are incorrectly applied .
I can assure you that the Commission always intervenes - and tries to do so strictly under all circumstances - even if its intervention is not always obvious .
If agreement is not reached , the Commission does not hesitate to notify Reasoned Opinions to the Member States concerned .
Citizens ' complaints that meet with a satisfactory administrative response through extra-judicial procedures can be counted in their hundreds .
The action of the Commission also applies to the laws of Member States . One could , in my view , cite several cases where this intervention has brought about modification of the legislation of Member States and sometimes even the examination , by the Court of Justice , of issues to which it has provided positive solutions .
There is no shortage of examples either concerning the Member States ' improper use of the notion of public order , especially that leading to the expulsion from their territory of nationals from other Member States . I can assure you , however , that the number of these cases is now very low and that , with regard to such cases , the European Commission never fails to take the necessary measures pursuant to Community law .
Nevertheless , it cannot be claimed that the strict application of Community law is sufficient to eliminate obstacles to the free movement of European Union citizens , bearing in mind the huge number of obstacles that persist due to the shortcomings in Community law .
These shortcomings have already been identified in the second report by the Commission on European citizenship and in the report by the High Level Group headed by Simone Veil , which was presented to the Commission in 1997 .
Moreover , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that this morning we debated the directive on family reunification and that the Tampere Conclusions require the Commission to present a proposal on the recognition of entry , admission and residence conditions and on the legal status of third-country nationals within the European Union legally .
We are currently working on this .
For all these reasons , the Commission shares the opinion expressed by several Members of this House on the need for a global reworking of existing texts within the context of a single legal instrument , which will organise and guarantee the unimpeded exercise of the freedom of movement and residence .
This reworking , which moreover is included in the Commission action programme for 2000 , is already in preparation .
It is based on the idea that entitlement to the right of free movement and residence must be dissociated from any prior reference to the economic situation of the beneficiaries in order to be attached henceforth to a concept and a status resulting directly from the importance of European citizenship .
The unique status of a European Union citizen necessarily creates the need for a unique general system of movement and residence in response to the demand to enrich the content of European citizenship in accordance with the political aspirations of the Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Environmental effects of certain programmes
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0196 / 2000 ) by Mrs Schörling , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position ( C5-0180 / 2000 - 1996 / 0304 ( COD ) ) for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment .
Mr President , I am very pleased that I have been entrusted with being rapporteur for the second reading of the SEA Directive which I believe is an important step towards a new form of behaviour in environmental policy .
I want to thank all my fellow MEPs in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , together with the Commission and , in particular , the Portuguese Presidency for the excellent way in which they have cooperated .
This draft directive concerns strategic environmental assessments which , in brief , involve a systematic process for identifying , analysing and assessing the influence and likely effects of plans and programmes upon the environment .
The assessments are to be carried out at as early a stage as possible in the planning process , partly so that alternative solutions might be found before the decision-making process is taken any further .
Environmental reports are to be written and made available to the environmental authorities , the public and environmental organisations , which are also to be given sufficient time within which to respond to the reports .
This is a very important directive for the whole of the Community ' s environmental policy if a tool is to be obtained which makes it easier to comply with the commitments to sustainable development and compliance with the precautionary principle which have been made in the Treaty and in other agreements .
A modern environmental policy worthy of the name must do everything to ensure that damage to the environment does not occur and that effects upon the environment are minimised .
What often happens nowadays is that attempts are made to identify and repair damage once it has occurred .
As early as at the planning stage , we must learn to use policy areas , plans and programmes to avoid and reduce the negative effects and influence upon the environment .
The SEA Directive constitutes a very important step towards an approach of this kind .
Unfortunately , this draft directive makes no mention of policy areas , in spite of the fact that they figure in the Commission ' s original draft from 1991 and in spite of the fact that all researchers in this area actually take it for granted that policy areas too must be included in a strategic environmental assessment .
It was not possible to achieve this in the Council , but the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy considered that policy areas too must be included in the review to be carried out in five years ' time .
This has been discussed in Amendments 2 and 21 .
A crucial argument when the Commission finally tabled this proposal in 1996 was that the assessment at project level enters the decision-making process much too late .
In actual fact , this is one of the main points in the directive - that an environmental assessment should be made early on in the decision-making process .
At first reading , the European Parliament had quite a lot of points of view .
The proposal was thought to be heading in the right direction but in many areas , it did not go far enough .
Parliament tabled 29 amendments , of which 15 are more or less to be found in the common position .
If the SEA is to be a genuinely useful tool , the directive must be sufficiently broad in scope and the environmental report and the assessments must naturally be of very high quality .
In the common position , the Council has now made the text worse in a number of areas , specifically when it comes , for example , to the scope of the directive and the definition of what it is to cover .
The Commission too was very , very critical of the common position because it was far too limited in relation to the original text .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has tried to restore something of the balance , for example by means of Amendments 6 and 7 which broaden the scope of the directive by not limiting it only to plans and programmes linked to EIA projects .
We do not permit whole categories of plans and programmes to be exempt .
Nor can we accept that financial plans and the whole of the defence sector are exempt from strategic environmental assessments .
This is discussed in Amendment 10 , which also proposes that structural funds must also of course be covered by strategic environmental assessments next time around .
Other amendments which improve the directive concern greater transparency and openness to inspection and the need also to cooperate and consult with countries outside the Community .
I personally am very surprised at Amendment 26 from Mr Nassauer and 29 other MEPs who want to reject the common position .
This possibility was not mentioned at all in the Committee ' s discussion .
Clearly , they are fully entitled to make this proposal , but do they really think that the EU ' s environmental policy is something extraneous which is not in any way binding ?
Should the European Parliament just not bother about the text of the Treaty , the Cardiff Agreement , the Fifth Environmental Programme and so on ?
I really do not think that the proposal is a genuinely serious one .
Amendments 11 and 31 also worry me a little .
Amendment 11 , in particular , says that the Member States should define at what level SEAs are to be carried out if plans and programmes are part of a hierarchical system .
In this way , the whole idea of arranging an SEA is called into question , so I hope these amendments do not go through .
Mr President , this is a small but significant measure to extend the duties of Member States to carry out strategic environmental assessments on the planning framework as well as on the actual plans where the implementation would or could have a significant impact on the environment .
All Member States voted for the common position , but some made it clear that they would go very little further than that .
Our task is to clarify and to amend responsibly and on behalf of the PPE-DE Group I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Schörling , on the work she has done and the consultation she has had with us .
We will however be rejecting some of her amendments , notably those that seek to extend the system to all financial plans , to defence and civil defence , to consultation beyond what is reasonable and to the general policies she has just mentioned , which become more of a wish-list than firm proposals .
However , we agree that it makes no sense to exclude projects financed wholly or partially by the European Union , especially structural funds , and we certainly agree that it makes sense to talk to neighbouring states outside the European Union .
We agree that there should be adequate reporting back , not only on the environmental risks identified by the assessment , but on the action it is proposed to take to mitigate or remove them .
We also of course have to consider Amendment No 26 , in the name of some of our German colleagues , which rejects the common position .
I understand the concerns of colleagues from Germany and some parts of Italy .
These result from the way in which some governments and regional governments have chosen to implement the assessments .
These governments are giving environmental assessment and Europe a bad name for what are entirely excesses of their own making and they need to look carefully at their domestic policies .
But this is a subsidiarity measure which leaves the details to Member States .
It is not the big hand of Europe extending control to local planning matters .
It does , however , ensure that particularly at our respective borders our planning takes account of the environment quality within and across our borders when planning frameworks are being agreed .
We believe that to be a good thing and my PPE-DE Group will therefore not be supporting Amendment No 26 and will vote for the common position .
We shall then vote for the amendments we supported in committee and for one further clarifying amendment which has been submitted since , but we shall oppose the amendments which we believe are a step too far in terms of what is desirable , practical and acceptable .
Mr President , the directive we are about to vote on represents a major step forwards .
The obligation to carry out an environmental impact assessment at an extremely early stage of town and country planning activities does , in fact , make it possible to incorporate environmental concerns fully right from the conception of town and country planning plans and programmes .
The Union has at last realised that we can no longer restrict ourselves to merely picking up the pieces following damage caused by short-sighted planning , but that the damage must be averted as early on as possible .
The amendments approved by the Committee on the Environment substantially improve the Council 's common position .
Firstly , it was upheld that , in order to exert any real influence over national customs , the scope of the directive must be as wide as possible .
In this context , I feel that plans and projects financed from the Structural Funds must without exception be governed by the directive , seeing that , in practice , they represent all the programmes implemented , particularly in regions whose development is lagging behind .
Secondly , the principle of consultation and provision of information to the public and the organisations concerned throughout the assessment process , in compliance with the Aarhus Convention , has been reestablished .
I therefore feel that this is a sound text overall .
I understand the concerns of the Members coming from countries organised according to a Federal State model , who fear that the local authorities will be overloaded with work , but I feel that the amendments , particularly Amendments Nos 19 , 29 and 31 , are sufficient to avoid an overlap between the two directives and still ensure respect for the environment .
Mr President , every day it is drawn to our attention that the environment is changing .
Last Sunday , I was listening to a Swedish radio programme which said that , in central Sweden , people would have to adjust to the fact that rainfall would increase by 50 per cent over the next few years .
In one way or another , environmental questions are always the subject of public opinion nowadays .
They must therefore feature in a better way in political work , too .
I therefore want to congratulate Mrs Schörling on a very good report which proposes that environmental aspects must be taken into consideration at an early stage .
In principle , environmental issues must permeate all activities , economic activity above all perhaps .
When it comes to plans , building projects etc , it is of course important , as proposed in this report , to take account of environmental aspects as early as possible so that mistakes and increased costs can be avoided and the right solution found as soon as possible .
I think it is extremely important and commendable that Mrs Schörling should propose that the scope of the directive should be broadened .
It is a matter of urgency that economic activity should be included in the environmental assessment .
It is transparently obvious to the EU , which invests a very large part of its budget in the agricultural sphere , in regional policy and in the structural funds , that these areas should be examined from an environmental point of view .
We cannot go in and do this directly but should do so as quickly as possible whenever new plans come out .
It is unreasonable to do what is at present done with EU funds and to support such activities within these sectors as are opposed from an environmental point of view in other contexts .
We must try to create a system in which we think in environmental terms from the very beginning , even when it comes to economic problems .
This is a major and important issue .
I realise that large sections of this House do not agree with me , but my group and I completely support Mrs Schörling in this connection .
Mr President , I am going to refer briefly to four points which were fully debated in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
We are basically in favour of the proposal of the Environment Committee and its rapporteur .
With regard to the inclusion of some of the sectors in the directive , in particular the extractive industry and the defence industry , we believe that they should not be left out .
Provided , of course , that the necessary precautions are taken .
I would also like to stress the importance of the inclusion of the management of water resources .
An ambitious government plan will be presented soon in Spain , the National Hydrological Plan , which will have a clear impact on the places where it is put into practice .
We feel it is essential that these assessment studies should be carried out .
Also very important to us is the role of the public , i.e. transparency .
There is a directive on the right to information , No 313 , which has been repeatedly ignored by the Member States and by local and regional authorities .
Likewise , we must include the quality of the studies and the issue of health amongst the significant sectors affected .
High environmental standards and good health are very closely related .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to make a brief contribution to this debate and in so doing acknowledge the positive role of Parliament in setting the agenda for the highest standards of environmental protection .
There is of course a cost factor in environmental management , but equally an economic return , which not easily quantified but exists none the less .
The proposed directive , which requires an environmental assessment before the adoption of a regional or county plan , makes good environmental and economic sense .
Far too often in the past we have seen costly development plans collapse because of environmental considerations that were not addressed at the initial planning stage .
Finally , I would appeal to professional planners to use their common sense by taking account of the views of public representatives and community groups .
A textbook approach of the kind seen far too often has not always served to meet citizens ' requirements in this important area .
Planning must not become the sole preserve of those who have an academic qualification .
Elected Members must exercise greater care and concern when drawing up development policies that will ultimately affect Union citizens .
Mr President , strategic environmental impact assessment is an instrument which allows governments to assess whether policy proposals , plans and programmes are compatible with the concept of sustainable development .
In this way , we can ensure that environmental concerns form a more integral part of the economy . Indeed , decisions at macro-economic level too should be accompanied by a preliminary strategic environmental impact assessment .
It is therefore important for public administrations to be very aware of the usefulness of this exercise in order to prevent environmental damage as far as possible .
It is equally important for us to clearly outline which plans require environmental impact assessments and which do not .
The Council has dealt with this extensively .
I am in favour of submitting policy proposals , including environmental impact assessments , to public administrations .
In that case , a public administration may decide to scrap a plan , programme or proposal , call these off in good time or replace them by environmentally-friendly alternatives .
On the other hand , there is a substantial risk of too many plans and programmes being subjected to environmental impact assessments .
If extensive studies are carried out of plans and programmes whose impact on the environment is negligible , then this is a waste of energy .
What is more , the instrument as such is being weakened .
So in this light , including all financial plans , as proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection would therefore be going too far .
Mr President , the best way to integrate environmental issues with all areas of policy is to get the environmental perspective in the picture at the earliest possible stage .
In this way we will avoid the problems we have at the moment with regard to harmonisation of the use of land , financial activity , and the expectations of the public .
There is in existence a strategic evaluation of the impact on the environment that applies not only to town planning but also agricultural , transport , travel and energy sector programmes , among others .
In order for us to be able to harmonise all these important aspects and proceed in an environmentally and socially sustainable way we need plans that are sufficiently long-term in nature : long-term inasmuch as they act as genuine guidelines for separate and independent measures .
In this connection I have to thank the rapporteur for her excellent work .
It is quite natural that Structural Funds programmes , plans and measures should be included in any examination of this issue .
It is also important that we take the proper course of action at different levels , and not act in too complicated or bureaucratic a manner , but take account of the new information we get all the time .
In this respect there has perhaps been too much anxiety about overlap , but I hope that , after this debate , this report will be as successful as possible as far as this is concerned .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a new instrument and it accords with Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which concerns the integration of environmental policies into other areas .
It is a delicate flower and we all want it to be a success .
I also want it to be well received by my electorate back home .
Hence I sometimes ask myself the questions that they ask themselves .
When I look at the Council ' s proposal , I assume that people will ask themselves this : how can the EU introduce an assessment regime that excludes the plans and projects financed by the European Union itself ?
This is completely unacceptable , and that is precisely how I see it .
The scope of application must be extended to include areas that are financed by the European Union .
Secondly , the people of Germany , in particular , may well ask themselves why the assessments are to be carried out at state level , national level , regional administration level , and at local level , which will drag the procedures out .
This is indefensible in my view .
It is the real issues that count , not having the same thing assessed at every level .
Therefore we must make it clear that a duplication of effort must be avoided .
Accordingly , Guido Sacconi ' s Amendment No 31 has my unequivocal support .
A third question the people may ask themselves is this : why is nothing happening now that an assessment has taken place which may have raised certain issues ?
Therefore we must make it clear that the regulation is binding .
We certainly cannot have a situation where an assessment is carried out and the findings are then filed away , never to be seen again .
We need a binding commitment to the effect that any findings will be acted on .
Therefore , I emphatically support Amendments Nos 17 and 18 , which provide for us to make the transposition of environmental protection measures following assessment a little more binding in nature .
With this in mind , I wish Mrs Schörling ' s report every success .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur for her constructive approach and for being open to dialogue with all the interested parties - including the Commission - which I hope will finally enable us all to achieve a positive result in relation to this directive .
I would also like to highlight the quality of the report which we are debating today and I would like to talk about what I see as the most significant problems raised in the various amendments that have been tabled and the interventions of the various Members . My sincere thanks for all your comments and points of view .
Of the key questions , I would firstly like to mention those amendments which involve broadening the scope of the future directive .
The joint position clearly distinguishes the plans for which the strategic environmental assessment is obligatory from those for which it is necessary to make a selection , a screening .
The Commission is inclined towards this approach , provided that the joint position is improved , because we believe that otherwise it would be insufficient .
Firstly , there must be a balance between the plans for which the strategic environmental assessment is obligatory and those for which we have to make a selection .
Secondly , the scope of the directive must , in any event , be sufficiently broad and systematically include those plans which have a significant impact on the environment .
This is why the Commission enthusiastically supports some of Parliament ' s amendments which broaden the scope of this directive and do so in a balanced fashion , such as , for example , the second and fifth sections of Amendment No 5 , which have been mentioned by the rapporteur and also by some other speakers , such as Mrs González , which proposes also including extractive activities . We also support Amendment No 6 .
Nevertheless , we believe that some amendments go too far and propose the strategic environmental assessment for plans which will not probably have a significant impact on the environment .
For example , section 4 of Amendment No 5 would make these assessments obligatory for all the plans for the sectors listed in the directive .
The third section of Amendment No 10 would mean an unnecessary burden for the Member States .
Some amendments limit the directive ' s scope even further and actually contradict what I have just said .
Certain amendments would reduce the scope , such as Amendment No 3 , which limits the scope to the plans financed by the EU , or Amendments Nos 11 and 31 , which allow States to choose the level or levels of planning with which these strategic environmental assessments will be carried out .
This would exclude many plans which have an impact on the environment .
Now , if Parliament were to adopt these amendments together with those which broaden the scope to plans with no significant impact , it seems to me that we would end up with a text which is inconsistent with itself .
These amendments seem to be inspired by the fear of the assessment being duplicated .
In my view , this fear is not sufficiently justified .
Planning is usually carried out at various levels and each one has its own specific characteristics .
The carrying out of assessments at various levels of planning is not a duplication of the assessment , especially given the safeguards contained in Articles 4 , 5 and 10 of the joint position which are intended to prevent just the kind of duplication which Mr Lange , for example , referred to .
Thirdly , I would point out the amendments which establish the procedures for planning and programming the screening and the definition of the scope of the assessment - Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 13 - and which require the screening to be carried out on a case by case basis , with the participation of the public in all cases .
I believe that the objective of the screening and the definition of the scope of the assessment is to determine , quickly and efficiently , which plans and which environmental problems are the most relevant .
Establishing the best way to deal with these issues will require practical experience .
We therefore believe it is too soon to establish that all circumstances justify a screening and a broad scope .
We therefore believe that , by incorporating the provisions on the screening and the definition of the scope into their national legislation , Member States would be liable to exceed the requirements of the directive and , for that reason , we will not accept these amendments .
Nor will we accept the amendment which implies a rejection of the joint text - Amendment No 26 - which contradicts the other approaches .
I do not believe it is necessary to point out that this directive on the strategic environmental assessment is a key instrument for integrating the environment into policies and for promoting sustainable development in the European Union .
I believe that a rejection of the joint position would deal a serious blow to these principles which are at the heart of the Treaties and which must inspire all our policies .
I understand that this may seem insufficient to some of you , but we must appreciate that sometimes it is not always best to seek perfection .
I believe that we should seek something acceptable , which would be a step forward , rather than reach a deadlock .
Mr President , having carefully examined all the amendments , I can tell you that the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 5 ( sections 2 and 5 ) , 6 , 12 , 28 ( section 1 ) and 29 .
Amendments Nos 9 ( the part which refers to the requirement to justify that the strategic environmental assessment is not necessary ) , 10 ( sections 1 and 2 ) , 15 , 17 , 18 , 20 , 23 , 24 and 25 are acceptable in principle , providing that there is some rewording of its content .
The Commission cannot , however , under any circumstances , accept Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ( sections 1 , 3 and 4 ) , 7 , 8 , 9 ( in the part on the requirement to justify the need for a strategic environmental assessment ) , 10 ( section 3 ) , 11 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 19 , 21 , 22 , 26 , 27 , 28 ( section 2 ) , 30 and 31 .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bouwman , for his efforts over quite a long period of time in negotiating this very satisfactory proposal which will - as all colleagues have said so far - significantly reduce the amount of pollution dumped illegally into the seas around Europe .
Let us pause and reflect on the scale of the problem .
Mr Bouwman quite rightly referred to Erika .
This was indeed a tragedy of enormous proportions , with significant and perhaps enduring consequences , but the amount of deliberate spills from oil tankers along all our coasts dwarfs the amount of oil that was spilled from Erika .
It is that problem that this particular proposal aims to tackle .
I am delighted that it will , by ensuring that the Member States provide adequate facilities at all their ports , that their ships and masters are obliged to use them , that the fees system is fair and balanced and above all that 25 % of ships are inspected to ensure these requirements are met .
I particularly welcome the three-year review , because my only concern is that Member States should implement this legislation that they have now signed up to .
As Mr Jarzembowski will know only too well , on port state control several Member States still do not inspect 25 % of ships .
If they cannot do it on that , what is to say they will do it on this ?
That is our challenge to them : to make sure they adhere to the very worthy agreement that we are hopefully going to be endorsing this week .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Bouwman on the publication of this text , which had been uncertain for a long time .
This is indeed a very important date in maritime history .
A number of our colleagues have said that this text is a precursor to the Erika package and , in many respects , it aims to solve a problem that is even more serious .
This problem concerns acts of ecological piracy , when ships discharge waste at sea , discharging hydrocarbons and a huge amount of waste onto our shorelines .
It is also a victory for Parliament over the Council ' s reluctance to imposing a common-sense fee-paying system .
The principle of polluter pays is not working in the case in point , because the polluter cannot be identified .
If we want to settle this issue , we must move towards a universal fee system , which will be mandatory and not linked to the act of waste treatment .
I am among those who , in their capacity as French Members of Parliament , have made every effort to ensure that this text is published , even acting against the sympathies of their government towards this text or against its reservations .
I am among those who welcome this compromise .
But this compromise cannot be allowed to become a let-out .
It must be implemented and its implementation must be strictly monitored at the level of the Member States .
In this connection , I would like to give you the position of a Frenchman who has worked so hard , despite the reluctance of his government .
It is clear that this text currently favours large ports and puts small ports , which are not equipped , at a disadvantage .
I therefore call on the Council to help Member States equip small ports , possibly in the framework of the Structural Funds , or in the form of some kind of loan , because small ports are also important elements of national and regional development and of regional and local economies .
And I believe that , if we provide small ports with waste treatment plants , we will secure the success of this directive .
Mr President , first of all , I want to congratulate the rapporteur on a commendable result .
I do not normally make a habit of doing this here in Parliament but , since there is good reason for doing so on this occasion , I would thank the rapporteur and the others who have worked on this report .
As Mr Stenmarck said , we are familiar with this system from the cooperation that has taken place in the Baltic .
Since March 1998 , the Baltic Recommendation has taken such a system for granted .
I should like to say , however , that the agreement is in certain respects a disappointment in the perspective of what has happened in the Baltic .
I should also like to refer to the law we have passed in Finland which stipulates that the fee ought not to depend upon how much waste the vessel leaves at the port .
In Finland , we have had such a system for waste oil since 1 June .
In that respect , the agreement is a disappointment .
In the last few days , we have learned that , even when it comes to grey water and pollution which is eutrophic in its effects , intentional and unintentional discharges from vessels are the main sources of pollution in the Baltic .
We are used to the fact that the polluter-pays principle does not operate in the case of oil , but there are problems too when it comes to eutrophy caused in other ways .
We are aware that everyone has been exposed to tough lobbying from the port organisation in Europe which has consistently set its face against this proposal .
The outcome is , therefore , nonetheless a good one .
However , it will be extremely important to follow up the proposal .
The Commissioner is known to have a major interest in the sea and in obtaining a clean environment .
It is important that the follow-up should be carried out seriously so that any supplementary measures can be taken , if need be .
This is a first step , but I would observe that it is important that we should have stricter conditions for the Baltic , which is perhaps far and away the most sensitive inland sea in Europe .
Mr President , the report by Mr Bouwman , which is the outcome of a long process , has in the interim become even more topical in France because of the shipwreck of the tanker , the Erika , on the occasion of which the Minister for the Environment did not see fit to interrupt his holiday .
This report goes some way to preventing marine pollution because it deals with ships that discharge waste at sea .
These acts are not covered by the media in the same way as shipwrecks , but they nevertheless make up most of the pollution of our seas .
We must however recognise that Community legislation would not be necessary if the Member States of the European Union , who are all signatories to Marpol , the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships , had taken the necessary steps .
Nor is it enough to accuse unscrupulous shipowners or captains ; we must bear in mind that it is often impossible to discharge waste inside the ports , due to the lack of appropriate facilities . The problem of waste storage is also extremely difficult to solve , as this in turn gives rise to the problem of waste treatment .
Nevertheless , it is difficult to believe that , in an age when agricultural installations are monitored by satellite , it is so difficult to monitor a ship discharging waste at sea .
We will , however , vote for this report , because it seems to be moving towards better prevention of pollution and because , wishing to remain at a general level , it leaves Member States a certain latitude in their choice of implementation tools .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very happy to be here today to participate in the debate on the approval of the directive on port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues .
Like previous speakers , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Bouwman , on the excellent work he has done .
During this time he has combined steadfastness with flexibility and intelligence to achieve a result which is acceptable to all the institutions and which will serve to make our seas cleaner .
I must tell you , for example , that this summer , one of the items in the news in the country I know best , Spain , involved the southern coastlines being affected by the pollution resulting from oil tankers cleaning our their holds in international waters .
This is one of the 100 000 cases which occur throughout the year on Europe ' s coastlines .
What we have to do is find out how we can , if not end , then at least limit as far as possible , given the capacity we have , these harmful effects on our seas . In order to end it , we would have to reconsider Maritime Law which , to a large extent , originates from the maritime situation of the 17th and 18th Centuries , which bore no relation to the current situation .
I believe we have made a great deal of progress which will noticeably improve the marine environment in the face of the deliberate contamination by certain ships - because not all of them do this sort of thing - of our coastlines .
The current version of this directive has the support of everybody .
It has the support of the shipowners because it provides them with waste facilities , which already exist in some European ports but unfortunately not in all of them , particularly not in the smaller ports , where the Member States will have to make significant investments .
This version of the directive has the support of the ports , because it means that their investments in this type of facility will not put them at a competitive disadvantage , which has unfortunately been the case at times , since some ports have made considerable efforts and others have not .
It has the support of those sectors which are most sensitive to the problem of residues and the fight for sustainable development .
I believe that the whole of this House and also the representatives of the Council and the Commission are included in this group , not only the ecologists , but all those who are concerned about this type of problem .
We believe that issues such as the planning of residue management , the ships ' delivery obligations , prior notification , the controls - 25 % of the controls - , fees which incentivise the use of port facilities for cleaning the holds of ships , will necessarily contribute to a reduction in marine pollution .
This directive , of course , enjoys the support of the three institutions , the Commission , the Council and Parliament , because we know that it will mean something positive for our citizens .
It would have been very sad if we had been unable to reach this agreement , which was so longed-for by everyone .
I would like to thank the Council for its flexibility and its constructive will , and Parliament also , especially the rapporteur , for the work carried out over this period and during the conciliation procedure .
The Commission has obtained some commitments which have helped this agreement . These commitments enable us to specify that " significant " means that at least 30 % of the costs of the cleaning of holds in ports must be covered in a general sense , whether or not these port facilities are used .
If over the next three years we see that the Member States ' actions are not sufficient and the desired results are not obtained , the Commission reserves the right to present a new directive clearly establishing a minimum percentage which must be covered by the general fees or by an obligatory cleaning fee in the various European ports .
It is also the Commission ' s responsibility to verify that that control of 25 % , another key element of this directive , is carried out by the Member States .
I would like once again to thank Parliament for standing firm on the need for a strengthened mechanism for reviewing the fees system , which will undoubtedly allow us to move forward and make a detailed study of the current system which we have implemented and the consequences for the environment .
Mr President , it has already been said in the debates that we have suffered from the impact of the Erika tragedy , but the cleaning out of holds is equivalent to more than one Erika each year on Europe ' s coastlines .
We are , therefore , taking a great step forward today .
This does not mean that we are not going to move forward on issues relating to oil tankers and safety in the transport of polluting materials , such as oil and its derivatives , issues which we hope will not only make progress in this House and the Council , but which will also be supplemented by means of additional initiatives which , as the Commission has stated , will be presented shortly .
Thank you very much , Mrs de Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 noon )

Madam President , can I impose on your goodwill and Parliament 's goodwill for a moment in welcoming to the diplomatic gallery a delegation from Kazakhstan ?
They are in Parliament today and tomorrow to raise awareness of the former Soviet empire 's nuclear testing programme which impacted not just severely but hugely on their country .
They had 607 nuclear explosions in the atmosphere between 1949 and 1990 .
This has left part of their country completely devastated and I hope Parliament will give them a sympathetic hearing in the seminar they are holding here this afternoon .
They have a huge problem in raising world awareness of this former Soviet problem .
We shall also be discussing the problems of the submarine that sank , another part of the nuclear legacy that has been left by the Soviet Union .
Thank you , Mr Provan .
I am very happy to welcome this delegation .
Comments by Mr Verheugen concerning enlargement
The next item is the communication on Mr Verheugen ' s statement on enlargement .
I welcome President Prodi to the Chamber and I thank him for being present .
I must warn you that President Prodi will have to leave us at 4.35 p.m. to travel to New York for the Millennium meeting .
We are nevertheless grateful to him for having made the effort to take part in this debate and , without further ado , I shall give him the floor .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to make a personal statement before this house , together with Commissioner Verheugen , in order to clarify the political significance of the interview with him in the Süddeutsche Zeitung of 2 September and the political significance of a number of ensuing press statements .
Mr Verheugen will shortly explain to you exactly what he said and why he said it .
For my part , I want to reaffirm solemnly before you , Members of Parliament , the full commitment of my Commission to the great task of enlargement .
I have repeatedly stressed that enlargement is the Commission ' s single most important task and that the Commission is committed to starting the process off along the right track .
There is a pressing need for this new page in the history of the Union to be completed , in accordance with the objectives set by the European Council and the Commission itself and frequently presented before this House .
As you are well aware , this is a highly complex issue from a political point of view , and with your strong , unwavering support , the Commission is conducting the negotiation process transparently and objectively , with rigorous adherence to the conditions laid down in its mandate .
The democracies of the countries which are going to join the Union are making a huge effort , which we are in constant danger of underestimating .
However , this effort must be matched on our side by considerable political generosity , expressed in many different ways .
The Union ' s first act of generosity , and I must stress that once again , must be to be ready to open its doors to new Members by January 2003 .
In order to put our house in order , therefore , the Union ' s main concern must be to agree in Nice , at the end of the year , upon a high-quality institutional reform which will prevent our system from being watered down .
There is another side to the political generosity which it is our duty to display : we must all make every effort to win as many citizens as possible over to supporting the enlargement process .
For my part , I fear that the public is not yet sufficiently convinced .
In seeking democratic support for this historic enterprise , we are certainly not attempting to delay the process but to reinforce it .
It is clearly up to each individual Member State or candidate country to decide which ways and means to use to ensure support from its citizens .
In particular , the national procedures for ratifying enlargement are purely national issues .
It is certainly not the intention of the Commission or Commissioner Verheugen to interfere in this matter .
Nevertheless - and this is a different matter - we must all play our part in making clear to our citizens what is at stake .
I have always found Parliament , before which I sit today , to be fully committed to doing just this : explaining to our fellow citizens , over and over again , that enlargement is not a threat but a historic opportunity in all respects , and , above all , a historic step towards establishing peace in our continent .
The loyal commitment of all the Commissioners to the Commission ' s policies is a hallmark of my presidency , and , as this House is aware , I do not lack the means to enforce that if necessary .
In this particular case , I am entirely confident that Günter Verheugen fully supports the Commission ' s policy , which this House has approved on many occasions .
I therefore have every confidence in his ability to bring the enlargement negotiations to a swift , successful conclusion .
. ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very grateful that we are having this debate , because it gives me the opportunity to offer a word of explanation - and therefore have the final word , as I see it - on the interview that unleashed this furore .
I made the point , in this interview - in a personal capacity and in a purely German context - that referenda can help to involve the public more closely in major European projects that change the constitutional nature of the State .
I cited the Treaty of Maastricht as an example of this , and not enlargement .
Finally , I also said that the German constitution makes no provision for this .
No one regrets more than I do the fact that this statement was taken to mean that I was calling for a referendum on enlargement .
I hereby declare that I did not raise such a demand , either for Germany or for any other country for that matter .
If you read the text with complete impartiality and do not rely on second-hand reports , you will come to no other conclusion .
But what was the real message ?
The message was this : ' we want enlargement and we want it to be implemented as quickly as possible and as comprehensively as is necessary . '
A huge number of Members of this House know that for a year now , I have been trying , with a passion , to get a direct message across to the citizens of the candidate countries and the Member States , to the effect that we really do want these new Members .
What I am trying to do , is to breathe life into a process that could easily slip into pure practicalities .
We want to secure peace and stability throughout Europe .
We want to give young democracies the chance to participate , on equal terms , in Europe ' s political and economic development .
We want to boost Europe ' s role in international competition .
We have no alternative .
Since the Prodi Commission took office , the outcome of the enlargement negotiations has been positive .
The progress reports that the Commission is due to submit in the autumn will reveal that the candidate countries have made an enormous amount of progress and are approaching the stage when they will be ready for accession .
The Commission is intending to propose new elements for the negotiating strategy in the autumn , which should make it possible to proceed even more rapidly with negotiations and to tackle the key issues that arise at the negotiating table .
I might point out that it will only be possible to make this kind of headway in close cooperation with the Member States and the European Parliament .
I would expressly like to thank the European Parliament for its outstanding cooperation and for the unconditional support it has given me , so far at any rate .
I also warmly commend the European Parliament and its Members for their positive role in the efforts being made to raise awareness of this historic project amongst the people of Europe .
I have always advocated that we should obtain the broadest possible support amongst the public , and highlight , in a wide-ranging public debate , the major benefits that the accession of new Member States would bring .
We must convince people that enlargement will be politically and economically advantageous to both sides from the very outset .
We need to have a wide-ranging , democratic debate on this historic project .
These were the basic ideas I wanted to bring out in the interview .
( Applause ) The Commission has absolutely no intention - and it was most certainly the very last thing I intended - of introducing any new political conditions into the negotiating process or the decision-making process .
The strategy has been laid down by the European Council .
The Commission pursues this strategy with vigour .
And as President Prodi has already said , it makes perfect sense for the accession treaties to be ratified in the individual Member States in accordance with their respective legal systems .
Three conclusions can be drawn from this , to my mind .
Firstly , we must wage a broadly-based communication campaign in the Member States and the candidate countries .
The Commission has already made the necessary preparations to this end .
Secondly , we ought not to dismiss any fears or concerns people may have , rather we should talk openly to them and help them ....
( Applause ) ... to seize the new opportunities and rise to the new challenges .
I am thinking , in particular , of the border regions .
The Commission is working on a programme here too .
And thirdly , when it comes to issues beset with fears and emotions - and they are there in the enlargement process ; take , for example , the issue of immigration - we must proceed with the greatest caution and keep a sense of perspective as far as we possibly can .
But there are ways and means of solving these problems .
And these must , and will be , decided on when the time is right , and in the appropriate manner .
( Applause )
Human cloning ( continuation )
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that every person who is motivated by faith in man , right from the very first moment of his existence , must be guaranteed the unconditional respect which is morally due to the human person in its entirety .
Therefore , we must state , loud and clear , our opposition to experiments which involve the destruction of human embryos .
An embryo is already a human person with a very specific identity , and every action which is not intended to benefit the embryo is an act of violence against the right to life .
Parliament must reiterate what it has declared many times in recent years , including last May .
It is immoral to use human embryos for research , for those very operations to which the President of the United States , Bill Clinton , has allocated public funding , those operations which have been approved by Tony Blair ' s British Government .
Sadly , it would appear that commercial interests are driving scientists to explore types of research which involve shortcuts and disregard all consideration for the protection of human life , which we consider to start at the moment of conception .
The human body is not a possession , it is nothing to do with ' having ' , it is to do with ' being ' , with being a living person , and it cannot therefore be reduced to a machine made up of components and gears , materials and functions .
What people are trying to achieve is almost an attack on life ; it is the opposite of the ethic of love of man and his body , even in that initial stage of being alive , of being in the world , the human world , with that body which is himself .
To the extent that those who take human embryos and disembowel them , removing the mass of cells inside and extinguishing their life , contrive to say that there is no-one inside , for if there were somebody inside they would be worthy of love or , in a loveless world , they would at least have the right for their human dignity to be respected . Otherwise , the world would consist of violence , brutality and cynicism .
Ladies and gentlemen , to oppose destructive research on embryos is not just to adhere to religious principle , but to uphold a principle of civilisation as well : the absolute ban on one man being master of another which should still be at the very heart of our civilisation .
We cannot allow man to have such great power over his fellow man .
But this does not mean that we are against research , quite the contrary .
Alternative research is possible : research on the stem cells present in adults and on cells removed from the umbilical cord immediately after birth , for example .
In addition to all this , research is indeed being carried out on adult cells and looks likely to yield results .
Many research scientists are involved in alternatives to cloning and they are about to form major national research groups to work in this specific area .
Lastly , we propose that a temporary committee be set up to study these issues .
We would like there to be in-depth studies of new issues thrown up by the life sciences , on the condition that it is clear that the positions adopted by Parliament cannot be renegotiated .
It is those positions which the Commission must take as its starting point to assist us in producing well-founded recommendations .
Mr President , Article 1 of the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights states that the dignity of the person must be respected and protected .
Article 3 states that in the cases of medicine and biology , the following principles must be respected : the prohibition of eugenic practices , specifically those that are aimed at human selection ; the prohibition of making the human body or any of its parts a source of profit and the prohibition of the reproductive cloning of human beings .
Such formal statements are not necessarily sufficient .
Scientific advances are mind-boggling .
The speed at which scientific research progresses is sometimes difficult for average humans , and even for politicians , to comprehend .
This rhythm of progress in the techno-sciences , that is , in the marriage of science and technology , raises ethical questions that have major consequences .
This applies above all to the new mastery of living mechanisms .
In this respect , the British government ' s proposal to refer legislation which seeks to authorise some scientific research into therapeutic cloning , including the human embryo , to the parliament at Westminster has led to all sorts of reactions and comments , both positive and negative .
Certain political groups in this Parliament are proposing a vote on a supposedly ' urgent ' motion for a resolution .
The Socialists are of the view that such issues are too important for the future of medicine , biology and human society , and because they are so important , this Parliament should carry out a more thorough job than a resolution adopted at top speed .
This is not the gunfight at the OK Corral : This is not about being the first to draw .
This morning ' s discussions on the monitoring centre for industrial change showed that this Parliament is capable of voting on everything and its opposite in the space of a few minutes .
The Socialists are unhappy with this type of vote , which looks more like Russian roulette than serious parliamentary work .
We would like to see a calm discussion of a vital problem , covering the opportunities opened up by genetic engineering and also the lines that cannot be crossed in this field .
This raft of issues concerns various standing committees in this Parliament .
This is clearly a cross-sector issue , which deserves to be dealt with by a special temporary committee , which has the task of calling in experts and of holding hearings of opposing views so that we can have an objective debate , which is not skewed in advance by deeply-embedded prejudices .
I shall end , Mr President , by asking you , by asking all of us , to take this task seriously .
We are prepared to withdraw our motion for a resolution if the other groups do the same and to try to work constructively together .
I welcome the Commissioner 's statement and particularly its measured and considered nature .
The ELDR resolution that has been tabled takes the same view .
We do not want a quick , ill-conceived reaction to events that have taken place in my country and the announcement made by the British Government .
These are serious matters and reflect our citizens ' deep concerns but we should appreciate the full context of the UK announcement , acknowledging the subsidiarity principle to which the Commissioner referred .
It is only a proposal , not a decision , and it follows a very careful and considered report by the chief medical officer 's expert group on cloning .
The matter has been under consideration for two years - too long , say some commentators , when measured against the lives of people with cancer , Parkinson 's disease or organ failure who might be aided by this research .
The experts ' group merely proposes an extension to existing UK rules on the purposes for which embryos can be used in research .
I emphasise this is an extension to existing rules and controls in this very , very delicate area .
We must respect the there are deep and genuine public concerns on both sides of this argument and this is what our resolution tries to do .
The British Government has recognised that in its proposal because it will be the subject of a free vote , possibly later this year .
I believe , although it is not my party 's government , that the British Government has been measured and considered in its response .
I ask this Parliament to be measured and considered in the way it deals with this important issue .
Mr President , once again we face a fundamental ethical debate on developments in biotechnology as applied to humans .
There are two opposing views in play : the first refuses to turn the human being and more specifically the embryo into a tool and is concerned at the potential risks for human society of the widespread use of certain techniques such as cloning .
The second view considers that the right of those suffering from serious and hitherto incurable illnesses to be able to benefit from the potential of medical research takes precedence over any other consideration .
The British Government , without any prior consultation with other countries - and I emphasise this point - has apparently opted for the second approach , by declaring itself to be in favour of therapeutic cloning .
The idea behind this decision is that therapeutic cloning , that is , the cloning of embryonic cells that are undifferentiated from human embryos available for research and production is a promising way forward .
Even if this idea is well-founded , it is nonetheless true that this option gives human embryos the status of stock cells for medical use and involves the production of embryos , first for research purposes , and then , probably , for production .
I feel that it is extremely important to make two observations at this point .
First of all , I would remind you of the Council of Europe 's Convention on Human Rights and Bio-Medicine , adopted in Oviedo , in April 1997 .
It is probably fair to criticise this convention for its vagueness on a number of points , but in Article 18 , it states quite clearly that the production of human embryos for research purposes is prohibited .
There has been consensus on this point throughout Europe until quite recently , but this consensus has just been broken by the position adopted by the government of the United Kingdom .
My second observation is that , according to several experts , and as Mr Busquin , Commissioner for Research mentioned earlier , there are other routes open to respond to the legitimate expectations of those who are suffering from serious genetic illnesses .
In particular , there are routes that do not require the production of embryos by cloning , but which use adult cells . Why then , given this scenario , should we immediately rush into something that is ethically and socially questionable ?
To conclude , I believe that the knowledge that has been acquired in gene therapy could be promising for humanity , but that they are also full of potential risks and are open to serious abuse .
We therefore need a rigorous legal framework and clear legal guidelines .
Upholding the ban on human cloning , rather than establishing it in the first place - I am talking about upholding the ban - is crucial in this respect .
Our Parliament has the responsibility of restating this , not by rushing into anything , but simply by remaining consistent with our earlier positions .
Mr President , two hundred years ago , Doctor Cabanis , a philosopher of the Enlightenment , proposed to dare to reconsider and improve on the work of nature .

His idea was that , having demonstrated such great curiosity about how to make the animal races more beautiful and better , how shameful it was to completely neglect the human race , as if it were more crucial to have big , strong oxen than vigorous and healthy people and to have sweet-smelling peaches rather than wise and good citizens .
Mr Cabanis ' dream is today close to becoming reality .
His dream has a name : eugenics .
This dream is in fact a nightmare .
This nightmare takes on many guises , each one more monstrous than the last , whether it involves prenatal diagnoses , for example , which serve to destroy embryos affected by Down ' s syndrome to avoid the trouble of eradicating the disease itself ; whether it involves the production of excessive numbers of embryos that pile up in freezers ; or whether , finally , it involves the cloning of human beings .

These embryos are human beings , whose lives are sacred .
They are people .
It is our duty to respect their dignity .
What good are our grandiose declarations on human rights if we then treat human dignity with such scorn , and in the secrecy of our laboratories , at that ?
There is no doubt at all that the cloning of human beings would mark the birth of a new form of slavery , in which test tubes take the place of chains and laboratories the place of galley-ships .
Our bleeding hearts will , of course , reproach us for refusing to give scientific research the resources it needs in order to progress and even worse , to cure our illnesses .
I do not accept this form of intellectual terrorism .
Furthermore , I am almost inclined to think that in the minds of all these people , research is nothing but an excuse to conduct experiments befitting a sorcerer ' s apprentice .
As the wife of a doctor , I am extremely concerned that such research should be allowed to develop .
In this respect , it would probably be more appropriate to ask scientists to conduct further research into the possibility of obtaining differentiated stem cells for therapeutic purposes , particularly from adult organs .
In order to combat those whose dream is to conquer the mystery of life , we have the right to protect the dignity of all human beings by strictly prohibiting the cloning of human beings .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in his speech just now , Mr Fiori made things very clear : he stated clearly that this is a matter of likening religious principles - his own - to the principles of civilisation .
For my part , I believe that what the institutions must affirm is the principle of secularity , and they must confirm that what may seem morally unacceptable to some must not by virtue of this be legally discounted .
We must make the difference between the law and religious principles clear .
If we do not observe this principle , then I fear that there will be no hope for us .
Mr President , to return to the matter in hand , we are aware that , in the face of new ideas - even new ideas which seem promising in terms of treatments for illnesses affecting millions and millions of people - the normal , conventional reaction always kicks in : to ban , to crusade , to shout ' Barbarians ! ' without even stopping to ask whether the ban can work , whether it would work or whether we are in a position to ensure that it is observed or to monitor it .
It is the same reaction as that which has been aroused by normal social phenomena for a long time now , in matters of abortion , migration or even drugs .
We declare a ban and then we wash our hands of the matter .
It is my opinion , however , that the responsibility of policy-makers - which may be more difficult , more complex - is to regulate certain issues , set limits and avoid situations out of a western .
This is the mandate of the institutions , independently of the religious consciences of any of their Members , where applicable .
It is for precisely this reason that we , the Radicals of the Bonino List , feel that we can just about support the compromise of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
We want to try and reduce the gap between science and politics , to endeavour to govern new phenomena secularly together with the pragmatism of experimentation and successive approximations , without immediately launching into prohibitionist campaigns which we already know to be ineffective .
What we are doing now , exactly as we did in the case of illegal abortion , is merely sparking off , once again , the medical tourism of millions of people who will seek treatment on the black market elsewhere .
What I am saying is extremely serious and fills me with concern . Watch out : when applied to science and social phenomena , prohibition has never worked .
I believe that it is our responsibility to set the limits , or take on board the risk of setting the limits , of successive approximations without trying to impose any ethical principles - in the case of those who have any - or principles of civilisation .
The real civilisation of the institutions is the civilisation of secularity , experimentation and discussion .
Mr President , I must apologise for my absence earlier .
I had notified the services that I would be temporarily unavailable .
Mr President , my group disapproves of the decision taken by the British Government on the cloning of human cells .
In our view , it does not take account either of European legislation on this matter or of the opinion that the European Union ' s ethics committee is in the process of drafting on the consequences of research in cloning .
We wish to state our support for prohibiting any research into human cloning and we oppose any commercial exploitation of biotechnological inventions that involve cloning .
Having stated these general positions of principle , the debate is only beginning on the attitude we should adopt towards biotechnological research , both in order to fully weigh up its ethical implications , but without running the risk of slowing down work which is likely to bring about improvements in human health .

Given the extremely sensitive nature of these issues , which concern civilisation itself , my group does not wish to see resolutions adopted in haste .
Instead , we have from the outset stated our support for the establishment of a temporary committee on cloning and on biotechnological research so that we can hold the hearings necessary for adopting a position with a full understanding of the issue when the time comes .
This is why my group has not signed any of the compromise motions for resolutions that have been submitted to us today .
At this stage , each of us will speak according to his or her conscience about the principles that I have just stated .
Mr President , in January 1998 we held a debate on the Council of Europe ' s Protocol which contained a ban on human cloning .
I then expressed the fear that countries such as the United Kingdom and the Netherlands , which refused to sign the protocol at the time , were probably not in favour of imposing an outright ban .
This is less than two years ago .
Meanwhile , the British Government would like to permit therapeutic cloning of embryos for research .
I cannot help thinking that the boundaries are forever being extended .
Initially , there was a complete ban ; now cloning is allowed on a therapeutic basis but not for reproductive purposes .
As if this would explain and justify everything .
What then is the big difference between therapeutic and reproductive cloning of human embryos ?
And what do we do if we are put under pressure soon to apply the research findings in the pharmaceutical field , or to clone for reproductive purposes ?
As far as I am concerned , every new human being is a gift of God .
Any form of human life should be treated with respect .
This is also the only way to safeguard human dignity .
The treatment of the human embryo as a consumer article , supposedly justified by the argument that this is in the name of research , fills me with disgust , especially because there are other ways of cloning stem cells .
I do wonder why this option is taken , despite all the ethical concerns which exist worldwide .
I would urgently call on the British Government to reconsider its far-reaching decision and would ask the British Parliament not to back this proposal .
Mr President , a proud man wants to play God .
He refuses to acknowledge that he is only a creature .
He wants to be the creator .
The issue before us today is a battle between creation and man 's discoveries .
There are scientists so arrogant today that they are already patenting their discoveries , as if they had stumbled upon their own creation .
Dr William Hesseltine , the chief executive of Human Gene Sciences Inc . , has already patented 100 human genes and his company has submitted applications for 8000 .
They argue that human cloning is about the promotion of health .
I am arguing today that human cloning is about the wealth of certain scientists and their companies .
Some scientists have taken the lunacy of Hitler 's fascism from the battlefield and are prepared to validate it in the laboratory .
Parliament needs to reject this and as a member of the British Parliament I will be voting against it in my own Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the PPE-DE Group was dismayed to hear of the British Government ' s plans with regard to the cloning of human embryos .
Hitherto , all those in positions of responsibility within the European Union were agreed that the cloning of human beings should be rejected out of hand .
During the fifth research framework programme , the Council - inclusive of the British Government - voted unanimously in favour of a form of words that rules out cloning , as well as so-called therapeutic cloning .
Parliament and the Council voted in favour of a text for the Directive on the patenting of biotechnological discoveries that completely rules out cloning of human beings , because this type of technology offends common decency and is an affront to law and order .
Commissioner , over the past few days , a number of articles in the press , as well as your speech , have given rise to some confusion regarding the fifth research framework programme , and especially concerning the Patenting Directive .
The impression has been given that only reproductive cloning is banned .
This is completely wrong .
I was involved in the careful drafting of both texts , and both directives rule out therapeutic as well as reproductive cloning .
Take a close look at the documents , Commissioner , and clarify matters , or else you will have the European Parliament to deal with .
And I do not think that is something you would want .
Now this consensus between the States of the European Union and the institutions has been disrupted by the government of one Member State .
We as a Parliament must withstand this attempt to shatter taboos .
But it is not just a case of making our feelings known , we must also ensure that action be taken as a result .
Hence the PPE-DE Group has called for a strict ban on the cloning of human beings at all stages of their development to be incorporated into the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Finally , I urge the Commission to ensure that there is strict compliance with the fifth research framework programme ' s call for no support to be provided for any form of human cloning .
This also means boycotting the cross-subsidisation provided by research institutes in Great Britain .
The best way to achieve this would be to ensure that those institutions involved in the cloning of human beings no longer receive any financial support whatsoever from the European Union .
Mr President , you should listen to the Commissioner !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt whatsoever that biotechnology and genetic engineering are highly significant fields these days .
They will continue to gain in importance in research , and in terms of their many applications .
No one doubts that either .
But is this difficult field , with all the hopes and fears it brings , being handled in a manner that is beyond reproach ?
I suspect not .
Today ' s debate is positive proof of this suspicion .
As a Parliament , we are reacting too hastily to a legislative proposal in a Member State of the European Union , which caused consternation amongst the public a few days ago .
And what form has this reaction taken ?
A quick glance at draft resolutions on the table reveals that all Parliament has been able to do , in its haste , has been to reiterate its already frequently expressed stance on critical fields of research and the application of biotechnology and genetic engineering .
That is all very well , but it is not enough !
We must make biotechnology and genetic engineering , but above all bioethics , one of the European Parliament ' s key concerns .
I am not alone in calling for this ; I have the backing of my group .
The people of Europe want to see more foresighted commitment from us in this area .
We cannot afford to be overtaken by events any longer .
We must no longer be in the position where - huffing and puffing to catch up - we find ourselves commenting on developments that are already at an advanced stage .
The European Parliament must point the way , so that biotechnology and genetic engineering develop for the benefit of mankind , rather than being to its detriment owing to the transgression of ethical boundaries .
Therefore we should vote overwhelmingly to adopt the proposed committee , which will form the basis for far-sighted legislation .
We must be aware that biotechnology is bound up with what is presumed to be the greatest revolution in medicine and technology .
This revolution must not be attended by irresponsibly conceived legislation .
We must appoint the best experts to advise the Council and ensure that there is consistency in the legislation across the Member States .
The ethical issues and the need to protect human dignity , in particular , are so important that we cannot afford to leave them at the mercy of fragmented , possibly even contradictory pieces of legislation introduced by individual Member States .
We must get to grips with all the ethical issues raised by medicine , technology and science , as a matter of urgency .
The appropriate parliamentary committee must therefore get down to work as quickly as possible .
Our vote will set this in train .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , biotechnology is currently one of the most promising technologies which can bring about a breakthrough in the medical world .
Putting an end to cloning techniques in Europe will only shift research elsewhere , for example to the United States or , in the worst case , to countries whose ethical standards are worse than those in the European Union .
As a result , expertise , research activities and employment will drain away to overseas countries .
Furthermore , the products will end up back on the market in the European Union anyway .
What is this really about ?
Who are we to deny people the right to recovery ?
Would it not be too easy to ban promising technology with great potential on ethical grounds ?
Is not every person entitled to health and welfare ?
Who has the right to put the label of ethics on it ?
I can tell you that I , along with the Liberal Group , will be giving this resolution my wholehearted support .
Mr President , we have the awful situation where one EU Member State permits therapeutic cloning , which we have always been critical of .
The people of the European Union are expecting the European Parliament to take a stance on this .
I think it would be irresponsible if we were draw a veil over the issue by saying : ' just to pacify you , we will set up an interminable debating society , or a temporary committee . '
We must take a stance on this decision , which is to be taken in the course of the next few weeks - yes as soon as that- without further ado , and then of course we must state our position on the issues we can expect to deal with in the future .
But on no account must we gloss over this by failing to make our feelings known and by trying to conceal things in committees , which will disconcert the public .
I believe that what is happening now is of crucial importance .
If we accept therapeutic cloning , then we will be opening Pandora ' s box . It would bring the nightmare scenario of cloned and made-to-measure human beings that much closer .
The arbitrary distinction between reproductive and non-reproductive cloning is semantic sleight of hand .
The term ' therapeutic cloning ' is equally problematic , because there is no question of it being a therapy .
Cloning , including therapeutic cloning , is the first step along the way to human beings being regarded merely as biological material .
It is indefensible to deliberately - I repeat , deliberately - create life in order to use it as research material .
This conflicts with human rights .
We are also dividing up the concept of human dignity when we deliberately produce embryos in order to have a ready supply of spare parts .
That is why Parliament must use its power to act .
Commissioner for Research , I am also expecting you to make an unequivocal statement today , on how you propose to proceed when a Member State disregards the resolutions of Parliament and the Council .
We need a clear signal , and I feel it would be a sad day for politics if we were to cast aside all our ethical misgivings out of loyalty to Blair .
Mr President , Commissioner , it goes without saying that human cloning which seeks to reproduce a human being similar to another with the sole purpose of improving it must be clearly prohibited .
This has always been this Parliament ' s position and I think it is useful to restate this .
Today , however , we are discussing the use of cloning techniques for therapeutic purposes and this has many implications .
These implications are , in themselves , medical .
We must make the distinction between therapeutic cloning , which must be clearly differentiated from reproductive cloning .
Cell therapy today represents great hope for many patients suffering from genetic or degenerative illnesses such as Alzheimer ' s , Parkinson ' s and cancer .
There are also ethical and philosophical implications .
What status does the embryo have ?
In order to answer this question , we might refer to the many debates that we have had on abortion or on in-vitro fertilisation .
What is the status of unwanted embryos , produced by in-vitro fertilisation and condemned to be destroyed ?
Could they not provide new life ?
There are economic and social implications .
This debate concerns the whole of society .
What is the American or Japanese point of view on these issues ?
Europe must take a global view and take account of the potential for research offered by therapeutic cloning .
There must be an in-depth debate .
You have called for one and we agree .
Perhaps it would be useful to define in advance what is prohibited and to produce a strict framework for acceptable practice .
Safeguards are crucial .
These issues are viewed differently from one country to another , according to their culture .
This is why the European Union ' s action in this field must be guided by major fundamental principles alone .
These principles exist and are : respect for the person , respect for life and for freedom but also for progress that will benefit everyone .
Mr President , cloning and patentability are and must remain illegal wherever human beings are concerned .
There is no difference between cloning for therapeutic purposes and cloning for reproductive purposes .
The end cannot justify the means when human dignity is at stake , for human dignity must be respected above all things .
The use of human embryos to produce organs can therefore in no way be justified .
In fact , when an embryo is used in this way a potential human being is eliminated , which clearly contradicts the value attached to the declared goal of saving other human lives .
It would certainly be a different matter if mere stem cells were to be used rather than embryos .
In our opinion , it is ethically wrong to attempt to alter the nature of the fundamental rules of the origins of life .
We must stop and reflect on the possible implications of upsetting the laws of nature .
The precautionary principle must be invoked and applied to the possibility of cloning for therapeutic purposes .
Indeed , it is no coincidence that the 1998-2002 fifth research and technological development framework programme excludes the financing of projects which involve the cloning of embryos for reproductive purposes and does not provide for funding research into cloning for therapeutic purposes .
In respect for the differences of opinion on the matter , we feel that it is vital to lay down ethical standards based on respect for human dignity in the biotechnology sector .
We call upon the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to take the risks of going beyond certain limits into due consideration , for once these limits have been passed anything appears legitimate if human dignity is not respected .
I hope that , as President Prodi maintains , Europeans will be able to unite on the basis of common values .
To this end , the Commission must facilitate an open debate aimed at finding the right balance between ethical inflexibility based on the refusal to exploit the human body for commercial ends and the obligation to meet the need for medical treatment .
We call upon the Council to take up the initiative of organising an international convention on the use of live tissue to prevent human embryos being marketed and used for unnatural purposes .
It is important , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that we do not create another species of human being in the same way that we appear to be provoking natural and environmental disasters .
Mr President , it is a pity that none of the British delegates who support the government ' s stance have taken the floor .
It would have been interesting to hear their arguments too , because I am quite sure that they must have had a few thoughts on the matter .
In Great Britain , it has been permissible , since 1990 , to experiment on embryos up to fourteen days old .
I believe this is the next logical step .
Why does Great Britain behave differently to the continent ?
That is certainly an interesting question .
The difference obviously does not depend on which government is in power .
It was a Conservative Government before , and now they have a Labour Government , and yet nothing has changed .
Why is public opinion in Great Britain unlike that on the other side of the Channel ?
It would be entirely appropriate to discuss this kind of issue during this debate , because we have the privilege of being in the company of delegates from the four corners of the European Union .
That was the first comment I wanted to make .
Secondly , I wanted to say how impressed I was with Mrs Bonino ' s comments .
It really struck a chord with me .
I too would advocate that we should allow ourselves to be guided by the laity in matters of principle .
The State is not religious , but it has a duty to respect religion .
I too have respect for whether someone is Catholic , Evangelical , Jewish or whatever .
But I also want my opinion to be respected .
However this is only possible within a lay context .
Claims of infallibility have already done Europe untold damage .
We should endeavour to leave this behind .
No one has a monopoly on ethics .
People who see things differently are ethical too .
Incidentally , we have seen time and again how bans are watered down in practice .
Everyone could cite examples of this .
That is why I am firmly convinced - whatever we decide here - that in a cosmopolitan society performing research from a variety of perspectives , knowledge will out .
At the end of the day , we will have no choice but to deal with this knowledge in a responsible manner by trying to circumscribe it .
Mr Wurtz , a ban on any type of research may be called for , but it would be extraordinarily naïve to believe that this ban would be observed .
In the final reckoning , we will have no choice but to lay down boundaries .
I feel as many other people do about this issue .
The thought of embryos being meddled with and experimented on makes my hair stand on end .
There are certainly boundaries .
But practical experience has shown me that at the end of the day , it will probably not be possible to do a great deal more than simply circumscribe everything .
There is no need for us to take action at present .
We still have time .
We need to think very carefully about how we are going to proceed in this matter .
We have committees for this purpose , and sometimes reading a good book has its uses .
An important European value that we all , whether lay or religious , purport to share is that any experimentation on a human being should only be for their exclusive and direct benefit .
We depart from that principle at our peril and here we clearly have departed from it .
We cannot experiment on human beings at any stage of their development and we certainly cannot mass-produce embryos for experimentation .
The next stage will be commercial exploitation , which our own bio-patenting directive allows for .
The UK authorities argue that in spite of ethical doubts the cloning of human embryos is necessary because it is the only way to help patients suffering from various diseases .
Many scientists dispute this and recommend more research with adult stem cells to achieve the same results in curing diseases .
Can we not get together and find a way of dealing with stem research without experimenting directly on human beings ?
I hope this House agrees that this is a value that Europe was built on .
This is an emotive subject , not least because of the title ' Human cloning ' .
Stem cell research would be a less tendentious title . But my purpose is to ask for calm reflection and consideration of the facts and the implications for us the human race , for our health and well-being , for the future of science and the health industry in Europe and , by no means least , for our spiritual well-being .
So let us get some facts straight .
Fact : human reproductive cloning is banned in the UK .
There is no intention to change this and the UK industry has no intention of carrying out human reproductive cloning now or in the future .
The research use of embryonic stem cells is a short-term response to a scientific need to discover ways of reprogramming adult cells .
Fact : stem cell research is tightly regulated under a stringent act of Parliament by the highly respected and rigorous Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority .
It would perhaps be a good idea if other Member States were to have something similar .
Fact : there have recently been interesting advances in adult stem cell research , but there still remain significant disadvantages compared with the unique characteristics of embryonic stem cells .
The aim of research in embryonic stem cells is to find ways of using adult stem cells which overcome these disadvantages .
So we come down to the basic dilemma . Is an embryo up to 14 days old a living being with the full rights of a living person or of a foetus ?
Rightly or wrongly , the UK and the US legislation have permitted this type of research for ten years and many benefits have resulted .
And after consulting world-wide for many months the Donaldson report recommends extending such research for therapeutic purposes .
The choice is yours , colleagues .
You have to be true to your conscience and your faith but also consider the future well-being of your neighbour .
Caring for your neighbour is also a Christian enjoinder .
He may have Alzheimer 's or Parkinson 's or diabetes .

Mr President , this is a serious and complex subject , which has been brought to the fore by the British decision .
It should also be pointed out that national legislation on this issue varies enormously , which can lead to uncontrolled practices , but these practices , as Mrs Grossetête said just now , may make us question the value some countries place on the reality of the principle of respect for human life from the embryonic stage , stated in Article 18 of the European Convention on Human Rights , which forbids the production of embryos for human purposes .
The difference between provisions shows how complex the debate is and raises several questions that merge into one another .
What does respect for life mean ?
What does the pre-embryo mean in relation to the embryo ?
Do we have the right to authorise research into the embryo for therapeutic purposes ?
Where do the stem cells come from ?
Should embryos be cloned ?
Do stem cells come from foetal tissue as well as from adult tissue ?
Do we have the right to create embryos for any purposes other than for life itself ?
In the face of serious illnesses , which are currently incurable , do we have the right to prevent research being carried out , which we are told may bring hope ?
All of these questions are laden with consequences and concern the meaning of life itself .
This is why we must have dialogue , especially within the European bodies , and I regret the fact , Commissioner , that President Prodi gave a sneak preview of his interventions on Monday to the press before he shared them with the European Parliament .
I must say that his comments were very cautious and carefully measured on this issue .
Secondly , I think that in order to hold this debate , Parliament should create an ad hoc Parliamentary committee which , could , in the first instance , quickly take the initiative of hearing experts from all disciplines , both from Europe and from across the Atlantic .
This debate must also , however , be held in the public domain .
That is why I propose that European ' assises ' for bioethics be launched and there should finally be a provision which allows us to frame practices in this area at a time when we are pointlessly establishing monitoring centres .
I propose that a European Agency for reproductive and biotechnological medicine be created .
.
( FR ) Mr President , I feel that I should respond , because Mr Liese asked a specific question during the debate .
His question concerned the fifth framework-programme .
On this issue , it is quite clear , as Mr Liese surely knows , as it is clearly stated in the fifth framework-programme , since it is subject to a codecision procedure , that research involving cloning techniques for reproductive and therapeutic purposes are quite explicitly excluded .
As a result , in the framework-programme , this is clearly completely excluded at the moment .
I simply wanted to clarify this point , Mr Liese , since you asked the question .
With regard to the debate , on the other hand , as I said in my introductory speech , the Commission would like to enter into a debate with Parliament on these issues which are , as we have seen , very complex and very interesting .
I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0535 / 2000 ) . We will examine questions to the Commission.First part
Question No 41 by ( H-0613 / 00 ) :
Subject : Cooperation with drug counselling networks Cooperation between the Commission and the networks it promotes has deteriorated significantly since 1998 : contracts between the networks and the Commission are often not concluded until the projects have already been under way for months .
The Commission nevertheless insists that the projects should begin on the strength of nothing more than a provisional written notification .
Payment of instalments by the Commission is sometimes delayed for years .
All the networks are affected by the ever-growing bureaucratic burden and , above all , by the Commission 's failure to make repayments , and are very much hampered in their work .
Some associations have even had to close down because of delays in payment by the Commission .
Why has the Commission not succeeded in recent years in providing the networks it supports with contracts and instalment payments rapidly and in parallel with projects ?
The Commission shares the concerns of the honourable Member about the problems relating to contracts and payments for the drug prevention networks subsidised by the Community action programme on prevention of drug dependence .
These problems have several causes .
Firstly , it is clear that there has been a human resources problem in the Public Health Directorate in Luxembourg , which deals with this work .
In short , the staff complement has been insufficient to deal with complex procedures and often inexperienced beneficiaries proposing too many small projects .
This situation was aggravated last summer when a decision was taken in the light of the report of the Committee of Independent Experts to end the contract with the technical assistance office which helped in the implementation of this programme .
Secondly , a large number of small projects are implemented under the anti-drugs programme , placing additional strain on the already limited human resources at our disposal .
During the last five years , the average size of projects in terms of co-financing granted by the Commission has been EUR 180,000 .
Thirdly , experience shows that participants in the network have had little understanding of the Commission 's contract and payment procedures .
In many cases , therefore , the Commission has had to make repeated requests to the drug prevention networks for missing documentation needed to finalise contracts or produce payments .
Fourthly , in the light of experience with subsidies from the Community budget and the criticisms of the Court of Auditors , greater rigour may have been brought to bear on the documentation relating to contract costs , resulting in knock-on effects on the timing of payments .
In responding to these problems , I am taking a number of steps .
The Commission 's proposal for a new public health framework and strategy highlights the need for clearer objectives and more efficient management with a greater impact on key priorities .
Therefore , fewer but bigger projects will be co-financed in future , making for more efficient use of the human resources needed to manage implementation of the programme .
As the budgetary authority repeatedly stresses , we must match resources and priorities more realistically in the future .
In addition , as you are aware , following the Commission 's recent review of its staffing needs , a request for additional posts is being put forward to the budgetary authority , including a significant increase in posts for the health and consumer protection DG .
If the budgetary authority agrees , a number of these posts could be allocated to tackle the kind of problems which we are discussing today .
The inexperience of contractors regarding financial control requirements will continue to necessitate significant advice and other inputs from already limited staff resources .
The Public Health Directorate intends to carry out an information campaign to help contractors to understand the Commission 's procedures and requirements more clearly .
On the issue of red tape , the departments concerned are currently reviewing their documentary requirements with the aim of simplifying and speeding up payment procedures without neglecting the necessary financial control measures .
As a result of the measures already taken , the situation has been improving , and I expect it to improve further so that contracts can be agreed more quickly and payments made in accordance with the Commission 's 60-day rule .
Should you have any specific points to make , perhaps you could provide me with the relevant information in writing , and I will certainly raise them with my staff .
Commissioner , I am pleased to hear that certain measures are to be taken .
Nevertheless , I call into question the fact that when the Commission encounters problems with the partners participating in particular projects , it attributes at least half of these problems to the partners themselves .
I have information to the effect that even small project partners are in full possession of the facts about the contracts and know exactly what they have to submit .
I have had a case described to me where the same paperwork was submitted on three separate occasions , but the Commission still maintained that it had never received this paperwork .
I therefore wish to put in another request for the application procedure to be attended by extremely clear guidelines laid down in advance .
I have encountered problems of this kind before , not just in the drugs sphere , but with many other partners that work with the Commission and seek co-financing .
It is not only in the drugs sphere where the application procedure takes such a long time and is so complex , and I believe the problem does not lie wholly with incompetent , small project partners , but can also be put down to the fact that the requirements set by the Commission are not clearly formulated .
The question remains as to whether we really want to cut back on the small organisations within the European Union , when it is important to support drugs projects - including those in the regions - using a whole range of approaches , specifically in this area , but also in general .
I believe it would not be in our interests to only give large organisations a chance to move things forward in this sphere , rather our aim must continue to be that of promoting a variety of organisational structures .
That would be a wholly misguided attempt at a solution to my mind .
. In relation to the first issue raised , I do not suggest that the problem lies wholly with , as you say , incompetent project partners .
What I am saying is that is the reason for some of the problems that have arisen .
It is something I am concerned about and am seeking to address by making sure that there are clear guidelines , as you suggest , so you and I are fully in agreement on that point .
With regard to the size of projects , since 1996 a total of 149 projects have been selected for over EUR 25 million , with an average amount of EUR 180 000 per project .
Under the new health strategy we will reduce the number of projects and increase their value and impact , thereby using our limited human resources more effectively .
It does not always follow that smaller projects are better than bigger projects , but if human resources are applied efficiently it will be for the betterment of the projects concerned .
Question No 42 by ( H-0629 / 00 ) :
Subject : Scientific advice concerning phthalates Will the Commission now release the statement agreed on 25 November 1999 by the CSTEE ( Scientific Committee on Toxicity , Ecotoxicity and the Environment ) on that committee ' s view of the misinterpretation by the Commission of the scientific advice on the subject of phthalates , the statement being referred to in the minutes of the Scientific Steering Committee ' s meeting of 10 December 1999 ?
Will it indicate who in the Commission is responsible for this failure to follow accepted practice on the publication of all minutes , reports and agreed statements by scientific committees , and will it indicate who was responsible for delaying the publication of the main minutes of the CSTEE meeting of 25 November 1999 until April 2000 ?
Thank you for giving the opportunity to clarify the issue that is the subject of your question .
As referred to in the minutes of the plenary meeting of the Scientific Steering Committee of 10 December 1999 the chairman of the Scientific Committee on Toxicity , Ecotoxicity and the Environment informed the SSC about the SCTEE 's intention at its plenary meeting of 25 November 1999 to attach a statement to the minutes of the meeting , clarifying the interpretation of its opinion on phthalates in toys .
The minutes of the meeting under discussion would normally have been adopted at the occasion of the next SCTEE plenary meeting which took place on 4 February 2000 .
However , at that plenary meeting several committee members considered that the minutes were in general too long and requested the secretariat to follow the format of other scientific committees .
Following this request the committee decided to postpone the adoption of the minutes to the next plenary when the draft of a more succinct version would be available .
This inevitably delayed the process of adoption until the subsequent plenary meeting held on 11 April 2000 .
Once approved its content was immediately made public on the Internet - in the course of that very week in fact , as is the usual Commission practice .
There has accordingly been no failure in publishing the minutes .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his reply although I have to say that five months is a long time to wait for minutes .
What I say now is no reflection at all on the Commissioner himself , but I hope that he would accept with me that science must inform our decisions on risk and how to manage it .
In this case the science was less than adequate .
It was not validated by peer review and so on .
So when it came to the Science Committee and the chairman 's views it was significant that his advice - in his words - did not justify a banning action .
The resulting ban on other phthalates had nothing whatsoever to do with children 's toys or teething rings .
This exercise brought into some disrepute the precautionary principle .
That principle only holds good if the decisions are scientifically irreproachable .
It was not a happy experience and I hope the Commission would agree that both the Commission and Parliament have a lot to learn from this experience .
I fully agree with the honourable Member when he says that science must inform our decisions and that is what happened in this instance .
The relevant committee produced its report , as it is required to do in its area of responsibility which is of course risk assessment .
That information was passed on to the Commission , since it is one of the EU institutions responsible for risk management .
The Commission took the view , having regard to the advice contained in the documents sent by the relevant committee , that phthalates or toys designed to be placed in the mouth posed an immediate and significant risk to babies under the age of three .
The Commission made a clear assessment of this issue .
I submitted emergency proposals to the Commission as I am entitled to do under the General Product Safety Directive and my colleagues agreed that this was the appropriate to action to take in the circumstances .
My colleague , Commissioner Liikanen , has adopted a more long-term approach to the whole issue of phthalates and placticisers in toys and so on .
I wish to say once again that I agree that science must inform our decisions , and that , in my view , is what happened in this instance .
As the author is not present , Question No 43 lapses .
Question No 44 by ( H-0688 / 00 ) :
Subject : Water needs in the Middle East The constantly increasing demand for water in the Middle East is set to play a significant part in relation to the outlook for cooperation and understanding among the peoples of the region .
After a three-year break , the Steering Committee of the Multilateral Working Group on Water Resources ( MWGWR ) for the region began work again in 1999 and adopted specific programmes on the saving and use of water resources in the Middle East , with EU funding .
The issue of water in the Middle East was also discussed in the context of the EU-Israel Association Agreement , and the Israeli side has also raised the subject of further funding for such programmes .
What policy will the Commission pursue on this matter , with a view to promoting cooperation among the peoples of the region and averting conflicts arising from water needs ?
Water will be a crucial issue for the Middle East in the coming decades .
The region has the lowest per capita availability of water anywhere in the world and it is steadily decreasing .
Water is indeed one of the main issues of the Middle East peace process , not only in the negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians but also between Israel and Syria .
The Commission 's policy focuses on the various dimensions of the water question in the Middle East , the security as well as the economic , environmental and social dimensions .
Just and comprehensive water agreements between Israel and its neighbours , sustained by effective regional cooperation , are necessary for lasting peace in the region .
The Commission is an active participant in , and a main donor to , the multilateral water working group of the MEPP .
As a concrete contribution we have committed another EUR 4 million in 1999 for the completion of the regional water data banks .
We also promote the concept of a regional cooperation structure .
The Council 's special taskforce on water in the Middle East has met with the Israeli , Jordanian and the Palestinian water commissioners and is actively coordinating EU water policy .
The Commission 's policy aims at helping the region to achieve a sustainable management of the scarce water resources in combination with assistance to explore new resources .
Current water management and consumption in the Middle East cannot be sustained .
Estimates suggest that in the overall Mediterranean region agriculture absorbs over two thirds of total national water consumption , while accounting for only one third of GNP and labour .
This discrepancy is even sharper in the Middle East .
Therefore assisting reform of domestic water policies in the countries of the Middle East is a priority .
Indeed the Euro-Mediterranean Foreign Ministers Conference in Stuttgart in 1999 decided to make water a priority for the partnership .
As a first result the EUR 40 million action plan adopted by the Euro-Mediterranean ministerial conference on local water management in Turin in October 1999 would provide a further opportunity for cooperation in this sector .
A call for proposals will be published soon .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your answer .
In addition to highlighting the seriousness of the problem and its effect on the Middle East peace process , my question was aimed at regarding the lack of water resources as a serious political issue .
We all talk about the impending crises over water shortages .
Something must be done .
Commissioner , what initiatives are you going to take to formulate rules of international law in the management of water resources so as to eliminate any hotbeds of local and regional political antagonism , seeds of crises and a peculiar type of imperialism ?
Your answer to the Israel - Syria question should go somewhat beyond ; to the Tigris and to the Euphrates , to Turkey and to Syria and elsewhere .
I believe that rules of international law must be established to manage water resources . These rules must contain clear conditions for all the countries involved , through which rivers that cross more than one country flow .
This must also apply to lakes that belong to more than one country .
The Commission is supporting crucial water projects in the Palestinian authority and in Jordan through MEDA .
The most recent example is Community support of EUR 5 million in grants for the project management of the Greater Amman water sector improvement programme , plus a substantial loan from the European Investment Bank .
Apart from the support we give to the multilateral water working group , I can mention the Euro-Mediterranean water information system three-year action programme .
The European Commission contributed EUR 1.2 million towards its implementation .
The Euro-Mediterranean conference on water management in Marseilles on 25 and 26 of November 1996 was organised on the initiative of the European Commission and the French Government , with the support of the city of Marseilles .
The International Office for Water took charge of the secretariat .
So the Commission is constantly involved in this project , has been for some time and continues to be .
Question No 45 by ( H-0689 / 00 ) :
Subject : Transport of animals In the year 2000 television documentaries are still being broadcast in the Member States which clearly show that live animals are being transported on EU territory in breach of the provisions of the directive on animal transport and in disregard of all ethical principles .
How does the Commission intend to ensure that the Member State authorities monitor shipments of animals and scrutinise routes between Member States ?
When will the Commission put forward revised proposals for directives to govern the transport of live animals ?
What view does the Commission take of the fact that in those Member States in which shipments are carried out properly costs are higher than in those which repeatedly breach the relevant rules , even though the EU has a single market in foodstuffs ?
What steps is the Commission taking to halt shipments over long distances as a general rule and replace them with shipments of frozen and processed products ?
Second part
I agree that it is a matter for concern that rules on the transport of animals are not being sufficiently enforced in certain areas .
While Member States are responsible for the day-to-day enforcement of Community legislation , the Food and Veterinary Office of my Directorate-General undertakes specific control and inspection missions to check that Member States apply Community legislation in an effective and a uniform manner .
These checks have revealed certain shortcomings in the compliance of some Member States with the Community legislation .
As a result , infringement proceedings based on Article 226 of the Treaty have been opened against certain Member States and others are under evaluation .
I will shortly present a report to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation in the Member States of the Community legislation on the protection of animals during the last quarter of this year .
The report will show that Member States currently have difficulties in fully implementing Community legislation .
As the conclusion to the report , I intend to present proposals to improve the transport of animals , address the difficulties I have referred to , ensure inspection by the FVO and provide for infringement proceedings if appropriate .
As soon as possible , several basic issues of the directive should be evaluated on a scientific basis , notably data concerning travelling times , stress related to loading and unloading operations and loading densities .
In this framework , measures to encourage the slaughter of animals closer to the places where they are raised also merit examination .
I conclude by assuring you that animal welfare is very high on the agenda of the Commission .
I look forward to further discussion when I present the report on transport in the next few weeks .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your reply , but I would like to say very briefly that , now , as the EU is enlarging to the east in accordance with a very tight timetable , and they have been transporting horses from the Baltic countries , among others , into the EU area on journeys of up to a hundred hours long , I think it is quite odd that at the same time we are calling on applicant countries to adhere very closely to the guidelines and legal provisions .
In our own territory , however , we allow such violations that - as has been seen in public - are simply inhumane , considering we are supposed to be a civilised western Europe .
I would like to highlight this and ask what sort of timetable is now in place for real action , taking into account the fact that we have to put our own house in order before new Member States join the EU ?
Although I cannot give you a specific timetable , I do assure you that infringement proceedings have already been opened and others are now being evaluated .
The situation is under constant review , I have had a number of discussions with the Director-General of my DG , who is an expert on transport , and I am drawing on his expertise .
You also draw attention to our relationship with the applicant countries .
The Commission believes that the most effective way to achieve a widespread improvement in animal welfare standards is to work towards an international consensus .
The long-distance transport of horses has been discussed with heads of veterinary services in the central and east European countries currently negotiating accession to the Union .
A protocol of action to improve the protection of the horses and donkeys transported over long distances was agreed in April .
The first results of the implementation of the protocol will be discussed at a specific meeting with all the competent authorities of the accession countries at the end of September this year .
So I can give an assurance that this issue is high on the list of priorities in my service and we will be monitoring it closely and pursuing it actively .
Mr President , it would be interesting to know if the Commission is intending to have research carried out in this field , based on the best practice model .
Are you intending to create incentives , with a view to ensuring that live transport is carried out in such a way that is actually tolerable for the animals concerned ?
I am satisfied from the advice that I get from my service and the other information that is made available to me that any measures that are necessary are being taken .
On that basis , the directive is being amended to improve the protection of animals during transport , providing in particular for additional measures to protect the horses with a mandatory unloading and fixed resting period for commercial consignments of horses passing through a border inspection post of the Union .
I should like to ask a related question regarding the banning of Staffordshire terriers in Germany under their dangerous dogs law .
Many of my constituents in the United Kingdom are writing to protest against this German law banning certain breeds of dogs which appear to pose no threat to public safety .
Given the pets ' passport project at European level and a right for pets now to move freely within the European Union as a result , does the Commission have any legal competence to intervene and protect animal welfare and , in particular , these domestic pets in Germany , of which there will be a needless slaughter potentially and possibly even extinction of a fine breed of British dogs ?
Commissioner , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , this is not a supplementary question .
We could invite Mr Tannock to ask this question during the next part-session , but if you wish to reply to it , you may do so .
As a matter of courtesy to the honourable Member I would say that had you given me notice of this question I would probably have been in a better position to give you a comprehensive answer to it .
I am the Commissioner responsible for animal welfare . There is a competence to deal with these issues relating to animal welfare .
If such issues are brought to my attention and come within the relevant directive , then action can be taken .
The only practical suggestion that I can make to you is that if you would like to write to me and give me specific details of the issue that you have raised I will have my services examine it and deal with it .
Mr Tannock , you may express your opinion in writing on a bilateral basis or you may do it in public in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , and the Commissioner will reply .
Thank you very much , Mr Byrne , for your cooperation with Parliament this afternoon .
Questions to Mr Vitorino
Question No 46 by ( H-0600 / 00 ) :
Subject : Communication on children 's rights Following the Commission 's statement to Parliament to mark the tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in November 1999 when it indicated that it would be publishing a Communication on children 's rights , can the Commission now give Parliament a definite timetable for the publication of the Communication ?
Given that the United Nations General Assembly 's Special Session ( UNGASS ) on children will take place in September 2000 , what is the Commission 's plan for coordinating EU and Member State input to the Special Session ?
Is the Commission prepared to acknowledge that , in view of the special session , a Communication on children 's rights is of the utmost importance ?
I would refer the honourable Member to the letter dated 20 June which she and a number of her colleagues received from President Prodi on this very subject .
In his letter the President made absolutely clear the Commission 's commitment to all measures which safeguard children 's rights and mention a number of areas both external and internal where the Commission was active on these highly important matters .
However , the President also sought to situate the Commission 's action in these areas , as in others , in the context of the Treaties ' revision .
He acknowledged that competence for action concerning children remains primarily with the Member States given the lack of a clear legal basis in the Treaty for the Community to safeguard children 's rights in terms that go beyond the existing framework .
In the current framework the European Commission has already undertaken a considerable number of initiatives to protect children 's rights as in the Daphne and Stop programmes which fall under my competence .
The Commission is also pursuing action in the social and educational field with a view to improving the situation of children .
Further evidence of the importance we attach to this subject can be found in the fact that it was the Commission which undertook the initiative to include a specific article on children 's rights into the charter of fundamental rights .
The draft article concerning the protection of children incorporates the main principles of the New York Convention as the right to such protection and care as is necessary for their well-being and consideration .
We will continue to insist that the charter foresees the prohibition of the employment of children .
In his letter the President also expressed the view that it could indeed be useful for the Commission to evaluate if all Member States have pursued the content of UN Convention on the rights of the child .
Although all the Member States have ratified the Convention , its implementation varies widely and the views of the Member States on how to best protect children 's rights diverge to a considerable extent .
It is my conviction that such an evaluation might represent a useful contribution for the participation of the Union in the special session of the United Nations general assembly in September 2001 .
The Commission believes that its ongoing actions in favour of children , its active advocacy for an appropriate inclusion in the charter of fundamental rights and its support for this idea of having an evaluation as described represents evidence of its commitment to this important subject .
As you know , I am a great admirer of yours and I am sure that you were as uncomfortable repeating your answer today as I was hearing it .
I know of your own personal commitment but actually you have not given me any clear indication of what the Commission is actually going to do in the UN conference which is taking place in a couple of weeks time .
Having listened to the extent of plans that the Commission has in relation to animal welfare , I can only wish that they had similar plans in relation to the welfare of children .
Accepting the legal limits within which you have to work , could you in fact give me any indication that anybody from the Commission for example is going to be present at this United Nations conference in September ?
In what context and are they proposing to make any input into the conference ?
I will answer with pleasure .
As a matter of fact , we are both talking about the same thing , which is the United Nations Special Meeting of the General Assembly on Children 's Rights in September 2001 next year .
Since we are talking about that my approach is that we should have a study to evaluate how the United Nations Convention on Children 's Rights has been implemented in our Member States .
This study should be completed in time to be used as basis for the Union 's participation in the United Nations Special General Assembly next year .
I am sure that we can count on the support of the incoming Swedish Presidency in the first six months of next year .
It has already made it clear , that it will be making children 's rights a top priority .
So I think I have explained what action we propose to take and when we propose to take it .
Mr President , does the Commissioner agree with me that there seems to be a new and growing abuse of children which is within the competence of the European Union ?
Children are being used by mothers from eastern and central Europe on the streets of our cities for begging .
They are mostly coming into the Union as refugees .
Either they should be taken into care or the begging is unjustified because they should be receiving social benefits from the state .
This is something perhaps which should be added to the list of child abuse which we as a Community ought to be looking into very carefully .
I share the concern of the honourable Member in the sense that begging is an activity where children are forced , sometimes by their own family , to act against their dignity .
As you know , the responsibility for protecting the dignity of children falls , above all , within the competence of the Member States .
Nevertheless we are now launching a debate on a specific legislative initiative to define the list of crimes against children .
I will consider your suggestions with an open mind .
Question No 47 by ( H-0606 / 00 ) :
Subject : Absence of passport controls in the Schengen area In the Commission 's view , how has the absence of passport controls under the Schengen Agreement worked during the European football championship in the light of the mass arrests made in Brussels and Charleroi ?
First of all , it should be pointed out that many of those involved in the incidents that occurred in Brussels and Charleroi , come from one of the European Union ' s Member States , the United Kingdom , which is not a member of the Schengen area .
These are therefore people who , when travelling to see football matches at Euro 2000 , were subject to checks carried out at the external borders of the Schengen area .
It should also be borne in mind that for the duration of Euro 2000 , the Belgian and Dutch Governments made use of a safeguard clause in Article 2 ( 2 ) of the Schengen Agreement , which lays down that , when public order or national security are threatened - and in my view , the fear generated by these cases of ' hooliganism ' certainly meets these criteria - a Member State may decide that , for a limited period , national border controls , adapted specially for the situation , can be implemented , even at internal borders within the Schengen area .
The Belgian and Dutch Governments adhered to the prior consultation procedure laid down by the Schengen Agreement .
The controls that are envisaged therein were temporarily reintroduced at internal borders , but this was not carried out in a systematic way .
These were targeted checks , specifically based on information supplied by the Member States in the framework of police cooperation , concerning supporters likely to pose a threat to public order .
Establishing controls at the external borders and , temporarily , at the internal borders of the Schengen area is not the same as closing a border or systematically turning away people who wish to enter the territory in order to attend a football match .
In accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community , the Union ' s citizens have the right to move freely through the territory of Member States .
Restrictions may be imposed , however , for reasons of public order and in individual cases only , i.e. when the person concerned represents a genuine and sufficiently serious threat to society ' s fundamental wellbeing .
This is why I say that Community law does not allow for a collective restriction to be imposed .
Having the nationality of a given Member State and wanting to attend a football match are not sufficient grounds for being turned back at the border .
This is why an assessment of the measures for cooperation between the authorities of the Member States concerned is already underway and why this joint exercise aims to learn the lessons of Euro 2000 , in order to see how police and judicial cooperation can in the future be improved in terms of combating hooliganism .
I should like to thank Commissioner Vitorino for his answer .
I supported Portugal as well as I could there at King Baudouin ' s Stadium in Brussels , but France won in the end in a match in which it has to be said that France had the better team .
I was gunning for Portugal for as long as I possibly could , though .
As I say , thank you for your answer , but I should still like to ask a follow-up question .
A lot of people find it appalling that , here in Europe , there are riots , hooliganism , aggressive language and violence such as are unknown in connection with sporting events in , for example , the United States .
I know that Great Britain is not a signatory to the Schengen Agreement , but that day may come .
Do you think that the measures we are now taking are adequate , and what lessons can be drawn for the future ?
Perhaps next time , Portugal will also be in the final .
I do not consider there to be any link , whether direct or indirect , between Portugal ' s defeat and the outbreaks of hooliganism .
It is a fact of the game that sometimes luck is not on your side .
In any event , Portugal will be hosting Euro 2004 , and that is why , for Euro 2000 , the Commission supported several practical initiatives for police cooperation in order to try out new methods of cooperation and to learn lessons from them .
We are now in the process of assessing those measures .
As soon as the report is available , it will be discussed and legislative measures will be adopted at European level , which is our objective - to adopt measures at European level that are capable of supporting this police cooperation in the fight against hooliganism .
I am currently awaiting this report .
As soon as it is ready , it will certainly be made public and the debate on what initiatives need to be taken will begin .
I have a follow-up question also concerning the Schengen Agreement and exemption from the requirement to carry a passport .
As the Commissioner surely knows , the Nordic countries are to become signatories of the Schengen Agreement in March of next year .
It has emerged that , in future too , Swedish citizens who are to travel within the Schengen area will have to carry their Swedish passports with them because Swedish ID documents do not state the country of which they are citizens , as required under the Schengen Agreement .
What was promised as a union with exemption from the requirement to carry passports still makes the latter compulsory for Swedish citizens .
I wonder if the Commissioner can confirm that , once Sweden has entered into the Schengen Agreement , the latter ' s regulations will , in the future too , require Swedes to have their passports with them when they travel to other countries within the Schengen area .
What are your views on this ?
Mr Sjöstedt , I would say that this matter should be seen from a different angle : that of creating common standards for travel documents , whether they are passports or identity cards .
That these common standards should exist is laid down in the Treaty , and the Commission has a proposal at an advanced stage of preparation for the adoption of common standards for the instruments in question .
I cannot give you a fixed timetable , that is , I cannot guarantee that these documents will be adopted before the expected date for the integration of the Nordic Passport Union into the Schengen free movement area .
What I can guarantee is that we are working hard at formulating uniform standard models of documents that will solve problems such as the one the honourable Member has just indicated .
Question No 48 will be replied to in writing .
Question No 49 by ( H-0692 / 00 ) :
Subject : European police academy What stage has been reached in the plans for a European police academy , with regard to virtual networks linking existing bodies and the creation of an actual academy at a particular location ?
The European Council of Tampere of October 1999 called for the establishment of a European police college for the training of senior law enforcement officials which should start as a network of existing national training institutes .
Considerable progress has been achieved so far .
The Portuguese Presidency submitted a draft Council regulation at the end of June 2000 .
The French Presidency aims at adding a Council decision adopted by the end of this year .
This would make it possible to meet the deadline of having the European police college in place by 2001 , as mentioned in the Commission 's scoreboard on justice and home affairs .
A number of Member States are in favour of creating the European police college as a permanent network of national training institutes .
Other Member States regard the current presidency proposal for a network as a temporary stage on the road to an institution at a fixed location .
The Commission has , from the beginning , insisted that the European police college will become a fixed institution after having functioned as a network for an initial period in line with the Tampere conclusion .
This has led to the draft regulation now containing the following approach .
From January 2001 the European police college is set up as a network of national training institutes , a virtual academy .
It will function in this form for three years .
After that period a decision will be taken on the form in which to continue with the European police college .
The Commission continues to take the position , however , that the draft regulation should contain a clear obligation for the European police college to become a fixed institution after having functioned for a few years as a network .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his precise answer and substantial input in this matter .
In the meantime , I have been appointed rapporteur for the subject and I am sure that we will work closely together with a view to moving matters on .
But the question I have is this : is the Commission still planning to conduct a study into the feasibility of making this college a fixed institution ?
Because as you know , the European Parliament has called for this to be a fixed institution and not a virtual academy .
Are you proposing to conduct a study on the feasibility aspect ?
You can rely on receiving our full backing for this .
There is a first study on feasibility by the General Secretariat of the Council which was the basis of this current draft resolution of the Council .
But we intend to promote our own initiative in the area just to make sure that we will have all the necessary information to take a further step ahead as soon as possible .
It is urgent to have that second step in order to make the European police college a fixed institution .
The Commission will not drop that idea .
Thank you very much , Mr Vitorino , for your replies this afternoon .
Question No 50 will be replied to in writing .
Questions to Mrs Diamantopoulou
Question No 51 by ( H-0647 / 00 ) :
Subject : Social security in a stronger European economy One of the European Union ' s main tasks in the 21st century will doubtless be to ensure that due importance is attached to the social dimension by comparison with the economic and political dimension .
Common social policy objectives must be defined and attained in order to ensure that the process of increasing integration and the forthcoming enlargement is supported by the European public .
Can the Commission say whether it will take action with a view to the increased harmonisation of social security systems , which still differ widely , and the harmonisation of professional qualifications in all areas ?
Is it correct to assume that the EU ' s extremely sparse powers in the fields of social policy and employment will be expanded in the future ?
Mr President , the two basic issues are whether we intend to harmonise social policy and whether the power of the Commission will be extended to cover social policy issues .
I will start with the Lisbon Council resolution , which made clear reference to the need to combine the policies of competitiveness and social cohesion , the need to update the social model , to invest in people and to combat social exclusion .
Under the Treaties , it is naturally impossible for the Commission to put forward policy on issues relating to social policy But we feel that , in the wake of Lisbon , there is agreement within the Council , and the Council has unanimously decided to cooperate in the field of social policy and to extend the method of open cooperation to issues such as social exclusion and social protection .
I am bound to say that the agenda that was tabled in June , in relation to which there was special cooperation with Parliament and with the rapporteur of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mrs Van Lancker , accurately describes the measures and actions relating to social policy under the Treaty , but it also categorically states that the harmonisation of social polices is not on the cards .
Harmonisation is deemed to be impossible .
But our objectives can be achieved using methods such as social dialogue , the Structural Funds , especially the European Social Fund , which has a large budget , mainstreaming , political analysis , research and , finally , legislation .
In July 1999 , the Commission presented a communication entitled ' A Concerted Strategy for Modernising Social Protection ' .
This put forward a two-pronged approach .
The first is to combat social exclusion and the second concerns future cooperation on issues of social protection and pension systems .
To achieve these goals , the Commission is giving priority to the enactment and implementation of social indicators , which are necessary to assess polices , to specify objectives relating to poverty and culture , which will be discussed during the course of the French Presidency , and to reach agreement on axes concerning the viability of pensions .
Commissioner , thank you very much for providing these clarifications .
Allow me to express the wish that is dearest to my heart in the form of an additional question : what special measures will the Commission endeavour to take in the future , with a view to working towards the harmonisation of the social security systems , professional qualifications and the social dimension in all areas ?
It was extremely interesting to hear how matters stand in this respect , and to learn that the trend is more positive than it has been hitherto .
However , I believe we must convince the people of the European Union that freedom of establishment is not a hollow expression which ultimately applies in full to tourists , rather , they must understand that for people who work , or have worked - firstly in terms of the insurance system and then in terms of the pensions system - freedom of establishment is a reality , and not a hollow expression .
I believe we must join forces to this end , in order to try and persuade the Council to frame policy in this area that is more transparent , progressive and forward-looking .
Mr President , I would agree with the general approach taken by the honourable Member , but I would like to remind him of the margin for manoeuvre of these policies at a European level , especially since they are national policies . Secondly , according to our studies , there are such major discrepancies in the structure and organisation of pension and social security systems that it is impossible to talk about harmonising them .
Thirdly , regarding the rights of workers as they move from one country to another , there are already two regulations in existence .
In July , the Council of Employment Ministers held an in-depth debate on changing the regulations for workers living in one country and working in another . But I must emphasise that these systems are so different that the difficulties in bringing about the harmonisation you propose are virtually insurmountable .
Mr President , Commissioner , the harmonisation of social security systems would require harmonisation of the financing of social security , or , in practice , the harmonisation of taxation , not just with regard to its technical framework , but also its levels of taxation .
We all know that consensus has still not been reached on this as far as policy is concerned , and that that is not going to come about quickly .
For that reason I believe that a policy like this of taking small steps at a time is quite in order in this matter , and I would also ask how one aspect of this one-step-at-a-time policy is going , in other words the directive on a single market for additional pensions .
The directive was supposed to have come from the Commission for a reading in the European Parliament in July , and now we have heard that it is probably being postponed until September .
It may also be that it will not get discussed throughout the whole of the French presidential term .
Could you give an update on this directive on a single market for additional pensions ?
Mr President , I would like to say that this directive , which is being prepared in collaboration with other departments and other Commissioners , such as the Commissioner for the Internal Market and Competition , is still being developed . I will be able to give you a more complete text at a future sitting .
We are currently at the debating stage .
Question No 52 by ( H-0649 / 00 ) :
Subject : European social non-governmental organisations The role of European social NGOs as an important link between Europe ' s citizens and the Commission , Parliament and Council is increasingly recognised in areas such as social policy , trade , development and the environment .
What plans does the Commission have to propose a legal basis for civil dialogue between the EU ' s institutions and organised civil society ?
It is clear that , during the preparation of the White Paper on a new form of government within Europe entitled ' Spreading Democracy within Europe ' , one of the basic issues is the role of civil society in the new forms of democracy that will be operating in Europe and in all Member States .
The level of cooperation and the forms of collaboration between the Commission and NGOs are of particular concern to all Ministers without portfolio whose programmes are implemented through NGOs and who have , I would say , a special burden to bear in the social field .
As you know , a dialogue is taking place today based on the working document submitted by the Commission on the Commission and NGOs and the construction of a stronger partnership .
This dialogue aims to enable us to come up with new proposals on issues such as the representativeness of these organisations and issues of a procedural nature such as their funding and operation . Within the framework of this dialogue , on 30 March 2000 I met members of the platform of European NGOs and a dialogue took place , which focused on two categories of issues .
The first category covered the proposals they put forward , which were invaluable for the social agenda .
The second focused on issues concerning the representativeness and the organisation of NGOs in the social arena at a European level , the financial problems they are faced with and the special procedural difficulties they have in obtaining funds . Related issues included the quality and the specifications of the services they offer .
I am bound to say that their contribution to this dialogue was extremely significant .
Just a short time ago , in June , a meeting took place between the official group of the Secretariat-General and the platforms of European social and developmental NGOs , and we believe this dialogue will soon come to an end . After assessing the current level of cooperation and the institutional framework within which the NGOs operate , the Commission will be in a position to put forward a new , integrated proposal , consolidating their statutory role and their ability to function .
Thank you , Commissioner and I certainly agree with the substance , particularly of the early part of your answer .
I welcome the fact that NGOs are funded through the exclusion and anti-discrimination action programmes .
But I have one specific question : why are only eight or nine NGOs , as far as my information is concerned , funded through these two lines ?
Secondly , NGOs feel that they are being unfairly denied access to core funding .
My information is that they are being pushed into project funding and 18 environmental NGOs , for instance , are receiving from the Commission funding towards their running costs .
It occurs to me that two years after the 1998 budget freeze , it might be time now for the Commission to respond to what are very clear needs from the European-based social NGOs for core funding to cover their running costs .
As you know , concerning particularly social issues and NGOs , there were some rules concerning the size , the representativeness and the results of these NGOs .
We know that in this social field there is a huge number of NGOs and it is very difficult for the Commission DG to know with which of them they can cooperate .
Sometimes there is confusion at national level .
So we have decided to establish the criteria and to agree with NGOs the criteria on the basis of which we can select the NGOs we can work with .
This is why we must solve the problem of the issue of representativeness , and the issue of the network to be established at European level .
Question No 53 by ( H-0675 / 00 ) :
Subject : Employment in Greece In its answer to my Oral Question H-0778 / 99 on the Greek action plan for employment , the Commission stated that the Greek Government recognised the problem concerning the difficulty of recording fluctuations in employment and unemployment and had therefore undertaken , first , to reorganise the country ' s public employment services , second , to establish effective centres to promote employment and , third , to introduce a system of computerised employment cards and to employ appropriate computerised systems to monitor all these policies .

What is the unemployment rate in Greece at present ?
To what extent is the Greek Government meeting the undertakings it gave regarding the above-mentioned matters ? Can the Commission provide statistics concerning the number of jobs created as a result of the implementation of the employment programmes , in other words how many of the unemployed have found work ?
According to statistics provided by Eurostat , the unemployment rate in Greece in 1998 was 10.7 % , whilst the European average during the same period was 9.9 % .
For the moment , Eurostat does not have statistics on Greece for 1999 and forecasts for 1999 were 10.4 % .
It is clear therefore that there are no appropriate statistics recording fluctuations in employment , which makes it difficult to assess the policies and measures being implemented . The new action plan for employment and the new measures announced by the Greek government based on this new action plan for employment are a move in the right direction .
There are significant undertakings concerning , firstly , the organisation and coordination of statistical services in Greece with those in other European countries and of Eurostat . It is clear that , without a statistical base , it is difficult for us to put in place specific policies .
Secondly , there is an undertaking to speed up the reorganisation of public employment and statistical services . This reorganisation will be completed by the end of 2001 .
The Commission does not have any information on the number of unemployed who have found work through the various employment programmes in Greece . That is why there is also an undertaking to continuously assess the existing training programmes , together with the Commission , to ensure that those who pass through these programmes are adequately monitored .
I would just like to say that the tabling of your question coincided with the announcement of recommendations for all Member States .
The most fundamental recommendations concerning Greece are , firstly , to make changes to the statistics , the indicators , the studies and the employment services . Secondly , tax disincentives and other disincentives militating against the provision of community subsidies for entering the labour market will be examined in detail .
Thirdly , training and the participation of social partners in this process will be promoted .
Fourthly , business enterprise will be encouraged and procedures to create new companies will be simplified .
Finally , cooperation between social partners will be encouraged and the organisation of labour relations will be brought up to date , at the same time guaranteeing flexibility and security .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I have more or less the same statistics as you . Indeed , I am this very moment holding in my hands the latest Eurostat report of 5 September 2000 .
The figures are more or less as you gave them .
What I would really like to highlight is the following : for many years now , Commissioner , long before you were appointed to your post , I have been trying to find out - even a rough estimate will do - how many people have found work as a result of these employment actions , and I still have not succeeded .
What prospects do we have of finding out at some point , albeit from one action if not more generally ?
Secondly , you said we would have the results by the end of 2001 .
But I think it is totally unacceptable that there can be a debate using these figures , which have been collated throughout the European Union , month by month , category by category , and only the column referring to Greece is empty .
I just wonder what we can discuss on this basis .
I apologise for having to say this , but I have run out of patience .
Greece is going through a period of transition which , I would say , equates with the first period of the policies concerning its accession to EMU .
It is clear that certain areas that have been mentioned have suffered delays in relation to other countries .
I agree with you that especially the part about statistics is extremely important , not only for the assessment but also for the implementation of policies . The undertaking in the employment action plan is a clear undertaking .
The recommendations make specific reference to this . The Employment Guidelines for 2000 give priority to the action plan .
It is one of the issues to which the Greek Government has made a commitment . I hope that this time next year we will be in a better position .
Madam President , personally I like you , but I have to say that I do not like the Greek Government , especially concerning its stance on employment .
The results speak for themselves . And I think that what you have said thus far also speaks for itself .
How can anybody shape employment policy when they do not know what employment is , when they do not know how many people have found work thanks to training programmes ?
I want to focus on one thing . I want to ask you a specific question so as not to have a long discussion about this .
Specifically on training , what do you believe and what do you propose asking the Greek Government to change in the 2000-2006 period by comparison with the previous period , during which we all have the impression that things were not going well , despite the fact that the statistics were not accurate ?
The information that does exist even shows that things are getting worse .
So what will change in the 2000-2006 period ?
Before I start , I would like to point out that , for historical and political reasons , every country has a different starting point and that , in the framework of the Third Community Support Framework , the next five years will be a great opportunity for all countries to assess strategies and funds alike .
With specific regard to training , to which you made reference , as you know , in Greece there is the EKEPIS [ National Certification Centre for Vocational Training ] , a certification centre set up with the approval of the Council , which has had very satisfactory results and has made some positive assessments . Over the next period it will complete its certification procedures .
In other words , it will certify trainers and programmes , which has hitherto not been carried out .
Secondly , training must be geared towards the choices made by a country in a service and information society . In other words , the fields covered by training must be linked to the choices made by the country .
Thirdly , the establishment of centres to promote employment must be completed .
So far , 24 have been established .
We must have at least 100 , according to the plan that was drawn up at national level .
These centres must distance themselves from the classical provision of services for the unemployed and must come into line with the models that we already have in the European Union . These models relate to the individualised provision of services for the unemployed .
And of course the system of computerised employment cards must be implemented for monitoring to be successful .
The action plan for employment for 2000 contains these undertakings .
The funding is available for these programmes and my opinion is that , during the 2000-2006 period , training programmes must be geared towards the specific points I have mentioned .
As the author is not present , Question No 54 lapses .
Questions Nos 55 , 56 and 57 will be replied to in writing .
Questions to Mr Fischler
Question No 58 by ( H-0602 / 00 ) :
Subject : Delay in issuing a ' certificate of specific character for foodstuffs ' In 1994 , after a long process of preparation , research and discussion in the Italian sector concerned , an application was drawn up in respect of whole virgin honey in accordance with Regulation 2082 / 1992 / EC .
The file , accompanied by a request for a ' certificate of specific character ´ , was submitted by the whole virgin honey association and forwarded to the Commission by the Italian Ministry for the Environment on 8 September 1995 .
It was not until August 1999 that the Commission 's approval was obtained , and then only thanks to various approaches by the Italian Government and the Minister , Mr De Castro , in particular .
Since then , however , the association in question has heard nothing more .
In view of the fact that eleven months have gone by since the Commission expressed its favourable opinion , and the regulation in question lays down specific time limits for issuing the certificate , could the Commission explain the problems that have prevented the official award of the certificate and what action it intends to take to resolve them ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , the registration application in respect of whole virgin honey , which is at issue here , is not in accordance with the requirements of the legal provisions currently in force in the Community .
In particular , the application of this designation is contrary to 1974 Directive 409 , which is presently in force .
Therefore , it has not been possible to date , to grant the Italian application for protection by means of a ' certificate of specific character ' within the meaning of Regulation 2082 .
However , as you are aware , there is a proposal to amend this directive .
As soon as the Council and Parliament have amended the directive , and a designation of this kind is permissible , it will at last be possible to bring the assessment of the application for the aforesaid honey to a successful conclusion .
I am very grateful for your precision , Commissioner but I have to say that I am not satisfied .
If I am not mistaken , as I said in my question , the Commission expressed a favourable opinion .
I am aware that , since then , the common position on the directive has been redefined and that Parliament is expecting to hold a debate on the subject .
However , it would appear that the reference to regulation 2082 / 90 may be a departure from the directive and that the directive and the regulation could be considered to be separate channels .
I would therefore ask you to clarify this point , or I will not be a bearer of good news for the Italian farmers .
Mr President , Mr Sacconi , that is easy enough to explain .
We cannot introduce protection of origin for a product , when to do so would be contrary to Community law provisions .
Therefore , it is absolutely essential for this amended Community regulation to come into force first , because this will rule out any conflict .
It will then no longer be a problem for us to grant the protection sought by the Italian Government , or the region concerned .
Question No 59 by ( H-0609 / 00 ) :
Subject : EU funding to Coillte According to a European Court of Justice ruling of August 1999 , Coillte has illegitimately received EU loss of income forestry grants under forestry funding Regulation 2080 / 92 amounting to £ 6.5 million from 1993 to 1999 .
The European Court ruled that as Coillte , the Irish semi-state company responsible for forestry development , was a ' public entity ' , it was not entitled to such payments .
In light of this judgment , is it the view of the Commission that Coillte is not entitled to further payments of £ 30.5 million of funds as part of the next round of forestry funding under Regulation 2080 / 92 ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Mckenna ' s question boils down to whether Coillte is entitled to receive co-financed grants from the agricultural fund , specifically the guarantee section , in order to offset loss of income in forestry developments , under Regulation 2080 / 92 .
I would like to point out that there has been no judgement from the Court of Justice on this specific issue .
However , it is true that the Commission classifies this company called Coillte as a state enterprise , because it is owned by the Irish State .
It is therefore not entitled to loss of income grants .
According to Article 2 , paragraph 2 , letter b of the Regulation on Forestry , these grants are reserved for farmers and other natural or legal persons under private law .
The Commission will therefore refuse to co-finance grants paid out , backdated to 1 August 1996 .
A total of some EUR 4.8 million was paid out in 1997 and 1998 .
The Irish Government contested this financial rectification in so-called mediation negotiations .
The arbitration body is still working on this and has not resolved the issue conclusively as yet .
The Commission has taken the stance during these negotiations that , to date the Irish Government has failed to provide any evidence that Coillte should be classified as a private company .
The Commission is unable either to confirm the sum of GBP 6.5 million quoted by Mrs Mckenna , or that of 30.5 million , which obviously relates to future payments .
However , the Commission will adopt the same stance it has adopted to date with any future applications .
I am very glad to hear the Commission 's reply because the funding that Coillte has was set up by the state , it was the state that set Coillte up .
It is a semi-state company and it is responsible for forestry development .
Now it actually used the money it was getting from these interest payments on land that they were purchasing .
What is interesting as well as that the chairman , Ray MacSharry is a former European Commissioner for Agriculture and he is still refusing to acknowledge the fact that Coillte is a public entity and that it is not entitled to such payments .
At a recent meeting with Coillte I was told that the government is gong to challenge this decision .
I believe it is actually a waste of taxpayers ' money to challenge it because I think it is quite clear to anybody with an ounce of common sense that they are not entitled to this money .
What is really devastating is that they have actually prevented the people who should have got the money from rural depopulation for ensuring that people who did lose income actually got the money and I would like to see the Commission ensure that Coillte get no more money because they were not entitled to it in the first place and that they have to pay it back .
They are now saying that the state will have to pay it back which is not acceptable either .
Mr President , there is really nothing I can add to that .
What Mrs McKenna has just had to say describes and elucidates precisely the Commission ' s position .
There can be no question of a State as an entity , and in this case , as the 100 % owner of a company , being a drawer of income , and therefore it cannot suffer loss of income either .
It is therefore evident that this money must be paid back , and that this company must not receive any fresh funding .
In addition , I would point out that this mediation procedure is not equivalent to an arbitration procedure , instead it merely represents the opinion of an institution that was set up by the Community .
However , the findings are not binding on the Commission , as we have already mentioned on more than one occasion here in Parliament .
On the other hand , each party is , of course , at liberty to go to the European Court of Justice , but we have no authority to decide on the matter .
As the author is not present , Question No 60 lapses .
Question No 61 by ( H-0618 / 00 ) :
Subject : Cost of enlargement and Mediterranean agriculture In view of the forecasts and the most recent legislative proposals for Mediterranean agriculture covering products such as cotton , rice , fruit and vegetables , tomatoes , shell nuts and olive oil , which will have a highly adverse impact on employment and social progress in these poor areas of Europe , and bearing in mind the budgetary plans with a view to EU enlargement , will the Commission say how it intends to ensure that Mediterranean agriculture does not in fact end up footing the bill for future enlargement ?
Commissioner , perhaps you could give me a clearer reply to the following question , which is extremely important for enlargement :
Does the Community legislation applicable to candidate countries from the moment they join , the so-called acquis communitaire , include , in your view , the aid and financial support of the CAP ?
Mr President , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I assume that when you talk about support , you are referring primarily to the direct payments provided for in the market organisation , and which constitute a major theme in the enlargement debate .
You are right in principle .
All Member States will have to respect the same acquis communitaire in the long run .
Therefore , there can only be one common agricultural policy and not two different ones .
But you yourself know only too well - and this has been the case hitherto for any country acceding to the EU , be it Spain or Portugal , or any other State - that the accession treaty , which does in fact constitute a primary right , contains transitional arrangements , which of course allow for departure from the acquis in some cases .
That is , after all , the point of having transitional arrangements .
As such , it will not be possible to answer the question as to when the Member States-to-be will actually receive their full quota of direct payments - as provided for in the common market organisation - until the enlargement negotiations have been concluded .
After all , it is precisely this issue that the enlargement negotiations are focussing on .
Question No 62 by ( H-0633 / 00 ) :
Subject : Subsidies for growing tobacco Tobacco growing in the European Union is subsidised to the tune of millions of euros per year while at the same time over half a million EU citizens die each year of diseases caused by tobacco .
The subsidies paid for tobacco growing should be redirected so that they encourage current tobacco farmers to go over to growing healthier crops .
How does the Commission propose in future to amend the basis for the allocation of structural fund aid so that large-scale tobacco growing can be halted in the EU ?
What does the Commission consider would be a realistic timetable for carrying out the necessary changes ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Matikainen-Kallström ' s question covers old ground as I see it .
I would remind the House that the Commission presented Parliament and the Council with a report on the common market organisation of tobacco as early as 1996 .
The report pointed out that this sector makes a decisive contribution to maintaining the viability of certain regions within the Community , some of which are highly disadvantaged , and where there are few alternatives .
In the light of an inquiry at the time into the social and economic consequences of abolishing Community subsidies for tobacco cultivation , the decision was taken not to go down this path .
However , this was also because there was evidence to show that subsidising tobacco cultivation has practically no effect on tobacco consumption , and thus on the risk to EU citizens ' health .
This led to radical reform of the tobacco sector in 1998 .
The key aspects of this reform were as follows : firstly , there was an improvement in quality , in particular , tobacco growers switched over to low-nicotine and low-tar varieties .
Secondly , research activities have been stepped up , financed by the Community tobacco fund .
The appropriations for said fund were doubled .
One of the main objectives of this research is to investigate the possibility of switching from tobacco cultivation to alternative activities .
Thirdly , with a view to encouraging farmers to go over to other crops , the reform measures also made provision for a mechanism whereby quotas are repurchased from farmers who are willing to give up tobacco cultivation .
In this way , these farmers are offered money , as it were , in order to facilitate conversion to other crops .
The provisions laid down in the tobacco market organisation can also be supplemented within the framework of the support measures for rural development .
On a final note , I would just like to say that the Commission will of course assess the reform measures taken .
We will provide the European Parliament with a report on the functioning of the amended market organisation by 1 April 2002 .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am grateful for your replies .
This is a question of redirecting aid in support of other products .
I have made these comments on many an occasion , as nothing rocks mankind so much as tobacco , which kills so many .
Regarding the analyses you refer to , I would like to know on what sort of objective analyses they are based , as I am concerned about the health of all of us and , similarly , the livelihoods of tobacco farmers .
We should be able to change their means of livelihood and keep them at that economic level where they can produce health products for all of us .
Mr President , Mrs Matikainen-Kallström , I am sorry that there was no interpretation at the beginning .
To be brief : naturally I would be only too pleased to send you the analysis that was carried out at the time .
The social implications , and the effect on income were also assessed during this analysis .
I will gladly make the documents you have requested available to you .
Is the Commissioner aware of research at the Scottish Crop Research Institute in Invergowrie near Dundee that shows that tobacco plants can be genetically modified to accept the implanting for multiplication of potential anti-cancer vaccines ?
It is quite ironic really .
Would it not be desirable to redirect the European tobacco-growing industry towards such benign purposes and to further promote this type of research ?
Mr President , Mr Purvis , I have to be quite honest with you , and tell you that I have not been informed about the results of this research ; perhaps because it was conducted primarily for health reasons , and therefore falls within the remit of the Commissioner responsible for health .
But I am keen to acquaint myself with them .
Only , irrespective of whether these results are positive or less than positive , as I see it , it is imperative that we - and we must never forget this - convince smokers of their importance , with a view to encouraging them to buy cigarettes that meet these requirements .
It is not the tobacco growers ' problem , because they will inevitably grow the kind of tobacco the market demands .
Perhaps the best all-round solution is to carry on as I have been doing for the past 15 years - I too was a smoker in the past - and not smoke at all .
Then the problem will only exist on a very small scale .
Mr President , preventive health care is a major priority for everyone here in this House .
We know that tobacco growers in the Member States have different priorities .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission the following question , although I have always been , and still am , a non-smoker : does the Commission not think that if tobacco cultivation were to be completely discontinued within the European Union with immediate effect - as called for by a fair number of people - people would just carry on smoking regardless because tobacco products would be imported into the EU ?
Commission . ( DE ) Mrs Schierhuber , when you look at the balance of trade in the tobacco sector , you notice that the vast majority of products - and especially tobacco - used in the manufacture of cigarettes , are already imported .
The only difference is that , we are trying , as it were , with the aid of the common market organisation , to produce some of the tobacco that people consume anyway , ourselves , so that we do not have to import everything .
In so doing , we are giving some families the opportunity to draw an income from this type of cultivation .
I am absolutely convinced that the health problem , which undoubtedly exists as a result of tobacco consumption , can only be brought under control if we alert consumers as to the effect smoking can have on their health .
There will be no decline in tobacco consumption until we have succeeded in driving this message home to consumers .
We are deluding ourselves if we think we can control the problem from the supply side .
In economic terms , the only way to achieve this is to alter patterns in demand .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler , for your replies .
Questions Nos 63 to 109 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Water policy
The next item is the report ( A5-0214 / 00 ) by Mrs Lienemann , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee on the Council directive establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy [ C5-347 / 2000 - 1997 / 0067 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that together we have produced a useful piece of work in this water framework directive .
We have produced a useful piece of work ; it may be a collective compromise , but it is a compromise which incorporates stringent requirements , which I think will clear the way for a qualitative and quantitative leap in water management .
In the long term , our fellow European citizens must enjoy high quality water everywhere , whether surface or groundwater .
This compromise was made possible by active commitment , by the balance of power that the European Parliament was able to create , by the participation of all the groups , in particular the shadow rapporteurs who assisted me , and by Mr Provan , the chairman of our delegation in this difficult conciliation procedure .
I would , however , also like to thank the other participants who are , of course , the Commission , which had to play the role of intermediary and technical innovator , and did so extremely rigorously and effectively , the Commissioner and also all the staff of the Commission .
I would also like to thank the Council , especially the Portuguese Presidency and their Minister of State , Mr Pedro Silva Perreira , who made this agreement possible .
I have all the more reason for saying this , because this directive certainly requires a greater effort on the part of the southern European countries than it does from other Community countries with easier access to water .
In which areas has significant progress been made ?
Firstly , the directive is strictly binding in legislative terms .
Second , the implementation of measures concerning the issue that we in Parliament considered absolutely crucial , that is the elimination of priority hazardous substances and a complete end to discharges of such substances .
You are aware that this House wanted our directive to be compatible with the commitments given under international conventions , in particular OSPAR , as stated in the directive .
The arrangements introduced will clear the way for a list of priority substances to be gradually drawn up every 4 years , that is , priority substances which must be reduced in quantity , and priority hazardous substances , which must purely and simply be eliminated .
Third , there was the important and sensitive matter of groundwater .
We were faced with the problem of producing a rigorous definition of what we called good groundwater status .
In order for this good status to be specified , it was decided that a ' daughter ' directive should be drawn up , that is , a directive that will implement the framework directive .
Parliament was rather afraid that the new directive would provide an opportunity to delay requirements to combat pollution and immediate measures to prevent the pollution of groundwater .
This is why we wanted , and secured , the stipulation , first of all , that if the directive were not approved by the Members of the European Parliament , the Member States would draw up rules guaranteeing good groundwater status .
If the Member States did not do this - it is a kind of Sword of Damocles - if 75 % of the level laid down in the applicable pollution standards governing good groundwater status is reached , then the Member States will have to reverse the trend .
In general , the directive takes account of Parliament 's determination to ensure that action by the Member States enables any upward trends in the pollution of groundwater to be reversed .
So you see , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that in this way we have come up with a system that enables us to make significant progress , and not just in terms of the main principles , but also in the overall effectiveness of the decisions that have been made .
Nonetheless , we shall all have to be vigilant .
Firstly with regard to all the daughter directives , which will implement the framework directive .
We shall be involved in the codecision procedure to determine the list of priority substances and priority hazardous substances .
A first report has already been examined by the Commission and a rapporteur has been appointed .
The second major task for this House will be the substance of the framework directive on groundwater .
In short , I think we have done the bulk of the work .
We will continue to work together , but I have a feeling that at the dawn of the 21st century , with this framework directive , Europe is entering a new age where the protection of water , that most fundamental resource , will become a priority in terms of policy and the behaviour of all those involved , whether they be farmers , industrialists or consumers .
In any event , this is the intention of our directive and I have no doubt that the Commission and the Member States will ensure that it is implemented .
Mr President , with the outcome of the conciliation concerning the Water Framework Directive , we are completing what , for the European Parliament , has been a tough but successful piece of work lasting ten years . At the same time , however , we are , as a result , standing on the threshold of new tasks that are at least as important .
Since the end of the 1980s , a range of Commission proposals had been submitted to the House , aimed at revising existing directives and made necessary by scientific and technical developments .
When those of us in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy initially examined the proposals , we found that no effort had been made to coordinate their provisions or the concepts behind them .
In June 1995 , and at our group ' s insistence , the European Parliament ' s Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy held a hearing of experts on the European Union ' s water policy .
The experts ' statements confirmed our concerns .
The Council and the Commission complied with the call for comprehensive European water protection legislation to be drawn up .
The idea of the current Water Framework Directive was born at that time .
In February 1996 , the European Commission tabled its proposals in the form of a communication .
In a very comprehensive report , our fellow PPE-DE Group member , Mr Florenz , has clarified the European Parliament ' s aims and identified the current shortcomings .
In the light of the discussions between the Commission and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , the Commission proposal of December 1996 , which had been produced under great pressure of time , was supplemented in two stages in 1997 .
The definitive , official Commission proposal was finally ready in February 1998 .
By working together closely in this way , Parliament and the European Commission gradually moved towards a consensus , a process also helped by the intensive discussions during the first and second readings in the European Parliament and the conciliation procedure .
I should particularly like to thank the Commissioners responsible , Mrs Bjerregaard and Mrs Wallström , and especially the Commission officials involved , for this constructive cooperation .
In Parliament ' s view , the result we now have before us is a great success of a kind which would still have been unthinkable two years ago .
This success is reflected in the removal from the statute books of the hitherto fragmented EU legislation in the field of water protection , the coherence of the relevant water directives at EU level , the legally binding nature of the measures taken pursuant to Article 4 , the shortening of the deadline for complying with the aims of the directive , the satisfactory way in which the issue of costs has been settled , also in accordance with Ireland ' s wishes , the introduction of the combined approach whereby limit values and quality objectives are established with a view to reducing the levels of pollutants , significant improvements over the common position regarding the requirements for groundwater protection and , finally , the inclusion of the goal and the definition of the OSPAR Convention with no stipulations in terms of time .
I should like once again to make explicitly clear in this connection the particular importance we attach to reconciling Community law and international conventions , albeit in such a way that the substance of international conventions does not automatically become legally binding in Community law .
Finally , mention should be made of the guarantee that codecision will apply in connection with future procedures .
Welcome as this result is , we cannot , however , rest on our laurels .
The Water Framework Directive now needs to be put into effect .
I should also , of course , particularly like to thank the Portuguese Presidency and , finally and most especially , the rapporteur , Mrs Lienemann .
Our shared success has only been made possible by her incredible commitment and the huge amount of time and energy she put into her work .
It was a pleasure for me to cooperate with a colleague in this way .
My own special thanks go to you , Mrs Lienemann , and our own staff here in Parliament .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mrs Lienemann , the rapporteur , very much indeed , as we can all see how committed she was to this work .
In addition , Parliament got its own point of view across quite well , especially with regard to the important issue that , at last , we have the prospect of attaining a situation in which hazardous substances can no longer get into groundwater supplies .
In my opinion , it should be as clear as day that when we know a substance is dangerous , in no case should it be able to get into groundwater , as water , apart from anything else , is a very important resource for people in terms of health .
Obviously it is just regrettable that the deadlines for implementation are an unreasonably long way off .
All in all it has to be said that in certain fields of industry in the European Union we have made progress .
In many areas , for example , the community and industry have played their part relatively well .
Agriculture and forestry , however , are still problems , with their diffuse discharges .
More needs to be done about this .
Regarding consumers it is naturally important how consumption is controlled , and here charges and taxation are of prime importance .
For that reason , it is a bit hard for me to understand how people can even begin to think that water could be a commodity paid for out of general taxes , as it is only through charges that consumption can be controlled really sensibly .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at the Edinburgh Summit nearly ten years ago , Mr Kohl and Mr Major assured one another that there was no need for a European water policy .
If the Spanish wish to pollute their water , they should do just that .
But the tide of deregulation has turned .
In 1996 , the Commission proposed the ecological water directive , which did not amount to more than five pages , however .
We now have a substantial legislative document of 60 pages , with 90 pages of appendix .
This is thanks to cross-party cooperation , between the groups within the European Parliament . I would especially like to thank Mrs Lienemann , but also Chris Davies from the liberal group and Mrs Schleicher from the Christian-Democrats .
The Greens feel that 80 % of this document has been a success .
What was disappointing was the water price policy .
What is successful is the fact that we have a new principle for chemical substances .
Chemical substances are no longer banned because they are also harmful to human health , but in line with a new principle that harmful substances do not belong in the water .
I think we can be proud of this .
Mr President , the conciliation has been quite difficult .
This has to do with the fact that the subject is itself both extensive and technically very complicated .
It also has to do with the fact that the positions of Parliament and the Council were far apart when the conciliation began .
The fact that the result has turned out as well as it has is largely due to the tireless and committed work done by the rapporteur , Mrs Lienemann , whom we wish to thank .
The directive could , of course , have been still better and beefed up even more , for example as far as the timetables are concerned .
That would have been desirable .
Yet , it is obvious that the European Parliament has gained most and that the Council has had to give most ground in the negociations that have taken place .
The clearest proof of this is that the rules are binding , something which Parliament had demanded .
In certain respects the directive forms a framework whose contents are still unclear .
This is especially true in the case of the phasing-out of dangerous substances .
This is an issue upon which further work will be done in the daughter directives .
Crucial to how the directive will operate is the question of how it will be implemented and monitored .
All in all , the foundations have been laid for a coherent water policy and for long-term improvements in water quality .
We shall therefore be happy to vote in favour of the proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to say that I am making this speech on behalf of Mrs García Orcoyen , who was unable to attend this sitting .
Tomorrow 's approval of this framework directive will represent a great step forward on the road to the cohesion and harmonisation of the legislation of the Member States with regard to the quantity and quality of their water .
In this last stage of the long parliamentary process undergone by this directive , in particular during conciliation , the European Parliament has been able to present a united front in defending its arguments before the Council .
The rapporteur 's superb coordination and the will to reach an understanding shown by all the political groups have made this final text possible , and it has been improved in basic aspects such as the legally binding nature of the objectives without omitting to take account of the various problems in the Member States .
I must also congratulate the Council on its flexibility in the face of the criticisms put forward by Parliament , and the Commission for its effective mediation .
Tomorrow , a new and equally important stage in the directive ' s development will begin , in which the European Parliament must continue to participate extremely actively in monitoring and controlling the fulfilment of objectives and deadlines and the drawing-up of reports or legislative acts derived from the directive .
One of the weakest points to have become apparent during the drawing-up stage must be strengthened : the incontestable need for more and better means of technical advice for subjects which , like this , require highly specific knowledge , and in which the social and economic cost of a small calculation error can be great .
Finally , I would like to emphasise what makes this directive a real tool for sustainable development : the balance achieved in the consideration of water as an extremely valuable economic resource and as an essential element in the conservation of European ecosystems .
The development of this directive may provide an important meeting point in the much-reviled relationship between economy and ecology .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Water Framework Directive contains many positive initiatives in favour of comprehensive and integrated water protection .
Yet the objectives are timid , vague and extremely long term .
We cannot wait 30 years for the European Court of Justice to decide whether or not the environmental objectives are in fact legally binding .
The Member States have been called upon to improve the quality of our water quickly in order to achieve the objectives in 15 years ' time .
Where groundwater protection is concerned , Parliament has unfortunately bowed to the interests of industrial agriculture and recognised its right to go on polluting the environment to the same degree .
It is now also the responsibility of the Member States to ensure that existing standards are not undermined , the yardstick by which the success of the Water Framework Directive will be measured .
Any more kow-towing to industrial agriculture would lead in the longer term to our most important drinking water resources being destroyed once and for all .
We are pleased , however , that the Greens have achieved a great breakthrough when it comes to emissions of dangerous substances , which now have to be identified on the list of priority substances .
In this area , we must make genuine efforts to meet the OSPAR objectives as well and to avoid what is an incalculably serious risk to health and the environment .
Mr President , the forthcoming Water Framework Directive is based on the justified principle that citizens of the European Community are entitled to use drinking water on a daily basis .
This should be provided for by law .
A simple , uniform and coordinated Community law on the protection of water and groundwater is to be welcomed .
Important directives such as those on protecting the food we eat , on municipal sewage disposal , on plant protection and on nitrates are being revised and redefined on the basis both of ecological criteria and criteria of origin .
The tasks are therefore broadly defined .
As a farmer , I advocate the closer involvement of those who represent the interests of professional groups and serious consideration of their criticisms .
Farming , forestry , fisheries and , in particular , the horticultural industry should also be involved in the decision-making process so that the required combination of voluntary restraint and state regulation is achieved .
The calls for zero limit values can hardly be met by means of legislation alone .
Transposing the directive presents a genuine challenge for the Member States of the European Community .
I agree with the rapporteur : it is only through cooperation that success can be achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , it was a very turbulent night sitting in which Parliament , the Council and the Commission agreed upon a common water policy for all Member States .
Parliament ' s really quite significant victory consists in the fact that this directive is to be binding .
Let us remember , however , that until the very end a number of Member States vehemently resisted any requirement that they should manage their own water resources more carefully and in an environmentally more conscious way in future .
However , it was splendid to see the way in which the Members of the European Parliament transcended all party differences and quite clearly agreed that there should be no common position without a legal requirement .
A further important victory for MEPs involved the protection of groundwater .
Dangerous substances must completely have disappeared from groundwater within 20 years of the Directive ' s publication .
Will we achieve this objective ?
It now remains for whatever dangerous substances are meant here to be listed in an annex to the Directive , and it is already clear to me that there will certainly be further heated discussions on this matter .
I believe , however , that the great objective of protecting Europe ' s groundwater for future generations is not in dispute .
The process of re-thinking has taken place : a considerable victory for the political process and a considerable victory on behalf of our children .
I am pleased that there has been a satisfactory outcome to the conciliation procedure with regard to the important report dealing with numerous technical issues on water policy , an outcome which we owe to the persistence , competence and motivation of our rapporteur , Mrs Lienemann .
Over the next quarter-century , we will make more progress in this field in the protection , good management and renewal of this resource than in the discovery and exploitation of new deposits .
I would like to make two points to emphasise the importance of integrated water management :
firstly , I would like studies to be carried out on the establishment of a federal " water and environment " management system in the various countries at European Union level ,
second , we must ensure that the proposals of the directive are implemented and encourage them , not only at European Union level , but also in the aid that we give to third countries in the form of " water " projects , the impact of which lies in a hydrographic ecosystem affecting the countries of the European Union , but also those that are part of the MEDA agreements , for example , which must be taken account of in the MAP projects and even in others , like the Upper Nile basin or Switzerland .
Mr President , the commitment that has been obtained on the text of the new Water Framework Directive is generally positive , even though it contains certain controversial aspects , worthy of criticism , which can nevertheless be ironed out when the various studies , action plans and draft regulations provided for in the text we have just approved are drafted .
It is a positive development that water management requirements are to be integrated into a single system - hydrological basin management , which is based more on geographical and hydrological areas than on administrative and national borders . This is a particularly important issue for Portugal , whose main rivers are shared with our neighbour , Spain .
Equally positive is the statement that water is not a commodity that should be bought and sold like any other . This means , of course , that special measures must be put in place to protect a commodity that is publicly owned , whilst safeguarding the interests of the population , in particular , domestic water supply and agricultural activity , especially small farms and family-based holdings .
The final text does state that Member States can attend to the social and economic effects on the affected area as well as the geographic and climatic conditions . This will enable Member States to deal with their different situations by means of established exceptions , which may nevertheless prove to be insufficient to cope with agricultural situations in the South , particularly where Portugal is concerned .
We shall nevertheless pay close attention to the way this policy is implemented in practice in the years to come .
Mr President , this is a framework directive with ambitious targets for the protection and improvement of water quality , taking account of the polluter-pays principle .
We will not have the entire picture until the relevant daughter directives are in place over the next few years .
Water pricing policies by the year 2010 will have to provide adequate incentives for users to use water resources efficiently .
The new paragraph 4 of Article 9 will allow for the continuation of the established practice in Ireland of not applying water charges to the domestic water sector .
You can only govern with the consent of the people and by 2010 domestic water charges could well be acceptable to the Irish electorate .
At the moment , it is a hugely politically-charged issue .
I thank my colleagues for their understanding , particularly Mrs Schleicher , who represented our case with understanding through all stages , especially at conciliation .
The principle of subsidiarity in relation to water pricing policy is jealously guarded in Ireland , but public opinion will probably change by 2010 .
If we do not apply household or domestic water charges by then we will have to explain our action to the Commission .
There is growing appreciation in Ireland that clean drinking water is a scarce resource and that all services , particularly the cost of distributing clean water to all households , have to be paid for .
At the moment the central exchequer or the taxpayer , is paying for this , yet many do not benefit .
Many have to pay to sink their own pump in Ireland and pay the electricity charges .
Many are on group water schemes which are not part of the public water supply and have to pay dearly each year for the privilege of rather questionable quality water being distributed to their houses .
So we are talking about a question of equity and changing public opinion and we appreciate the matter being left to the Irish Government to decide and to influence public opinion .
Mr President , I believe that today we are witnessing an important act .
We are coming to the end of a long road on which there has been a long battle , long discussions , but in the end , some positive agreements and constructive positions on the part of the three institutions , the Council , Parliament and the Commission , which have made this agreement possible .
As with any agreement , some will think it too little , others too much , but there is a middle point , a balance that is acceptable for the diverging points of view of those who have worked all this time .
Furthermore , they have carried out serious work on a highly complex subject .
On behalf of my colleague , Mrs Wallström , I would like thank Mrs Lienemann for her kind words . As rapporteur for all this work , she has played a leading part and carried out a colossal task , with the persistence and tenacity of her principles which , combined with a dose of realism , have enabled this agreement to be reached .
As she herself points out , and this is no minor issue , a subject such as water demonstrates the diversity of Europe , with its radically differing characteristics between countries .
In some countries , vast expanses have under 400 millimetres per year , that is , semi-arid zones , while in others the average far exceeds 2 500 or 3 000 millimetres .
The focal point of this directive , in which water is considered as a whole , a total flow , with no distinction between surface and groundwater , which is the mistake that was made for a long time , is the right focal point and implies a step forward .
The effort to keep our aquifers in the European Union as clean as possible , or as unpolluted as possible , is a key effort if we want to guarantee balanced development , sustainable development and a habitable Europe for future generations .
On this subject , I have to say that a moment ago one of the Members referred to conversations between two European leaders .
Yes , some may still pollute their aquifers , but some have been polluting them for some time , for example with huge pig farms .
I do not want to go into detail , but people in glass houses should not throw stones .
Mr President , I would like to point out that monitoring and follow-up are essential to this directive .
Monitoring and follow-up that , subsequent to the flexibility and realistic approach that abound in all the articles of the directive , will undoubtedly allow us to guarantee the cleanliness of our water .
This is absolutely essential as , in short , there is no life without clean water .
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commission what is happening with the 1991 Directive on ecological water quality which has so far not officially been withdrawn by the European Commission .
One further request , both to Parliament ' s President and to the Council and the Commission : the texts are still deficient in so far as the specialist terminology in the specific languages is not correct .
I would ask for this to be re-examined , for the terminology in each country is quite distinct .
It is a problem which the translators could not solve because the text is so specialised .
It would be a poor show if the legal texts did not contain the correct and necessary terminology .
I would therefore ask for this matter to be looked into again .
In the German version alone , I have found more than twenty mistakes .
I happily leave it to you to examine this matter .
Mr President , with regard to the directive on ecological water quality , to which I believe Mrs Schleicher is referring , this framework directive incorporates all the essential elements of the proposal on the ecological quality of water and I understand that the latter has already been withdrawn .
If this is not the case , it will be withdrawn in the near future .
With regard to the translation problem , what Mrs Schleicher is referring to is a very important factor as the terminology is indeed highly technical in this field and a suitable translation is essential .
I shall simply pass on these observations to the competent departments and the translation departments in particular so that , if appropriate , a more detailed revision of the specific terminology and definitions contained in the directive may be carried out .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
End-of-life vehicles
The next item is the report ( A5-0212 / 2000 ) by Mr Florenz , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a Council directive on end-of-life vehicles [ C5-258 / 2000 - 1997 / 0194 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , to begin with , I should like to take the opportunity of thanking my colleagues for bravely cooperating in the intensive way they did .
It was , of course , not always as simple as that . With me , it never is .
However , I am very grateful to you that we have got through all this .
A number of years ago , the European institutions made the right decision to attend to private motoring .
We began with cars and oil and are now faced with the question of what to do with the nine million cars which end up on the scrap heap every year .
Tonight , we shall also be discussing tyres , and we shall certainly one day also have to discuss how roads need to look in the future , given that they are much too noisy .
In view of the nine million cars withdrawn from circulation every year and the 45 million litres or so of waste oil , I think something needed to be done about this issue .
I believe the Commission has undoubtedly submitted a somewhat overly prescriptive proposal with , in my opinion , some outmoded initiatives in terms of environmental policy .
Fortunately , more work has , however , been done upon the proposal in the course of the three readings , and we now have a proposal which is along the right lines .
Let us bear in mind that , where motoring as a whole is concerned , 80 % of damage to the environment is due to driving , 19 % to car manufacture and only 1 % to the disposal of vehicles .
We must therefore set the correct priorities where this issue too is concerned .
I therefore believe that , by setting exhaust values and quality standards for fuel , we have begun in the right way , and today we closed with the question : how do we deal with the issue of end-of-life vehicles ?
We have introduced rigid quotas , without which no progress can be made .
This Parliament ought also , however , to have had the courage to make a really bold decision in favour of a really new type of car for the future , one which will not weigh 1 500 kg but perhaps only 1 000 kg and which , with its lifetime ' mileage ' of 300 000 km , may be seen to have genuine advantages in terms of environmental policy .
On the basis of the Commission ' s proposal , we have unfortunately allowed ourselves to be persuaded to adopt old quotas which frankly promote cars made of steel rather than modern , versatile cars which are made of other materials and which are much lighter .
Cars of this kind , made out of plastic or fibreglass or whatever , do not , however , have the advantage of being able to be recycled .
How , for example , can you seriously expect to recycle an airbag , which is there as a safety feature and not for recycling purposes ?
A bold move towards a special quota for really light cars would therefore have been appropriate in this case .
Unfortunately , we have missed that opportunity , something I particularly regret .
One general point - and also a disputed one in this House - was the question of costs .
The Commission has been quick to say that , in the future , all costs are to be borne by the manufacturer .
At first glance , that is a brilliant idea .
The only thing is that , in the end , this would harm the consumer by eliminating competition .
And that is my overall objection to this Directive .
Certainly , we would now be clearly transferring the costs to the manufacturer , but to one who no longer had any competition and who would in future dictate the cost of recycling cars . And it is precisely this which is anti the consumer .
We need more , not less , input from the market in this area .
This is a wrong decision , which I very much regret because it will have consequences .
We see this already where computers are concerned . The Directive concerned is , in fact , on the table .
Before long , it will be lawnmowers , then mopeds and then furniture which will be subject to such directives . I wonder to whom , one day , we shall return our old roads when they are too noisy , and who is to pay for the transaction .
Cost allocation is therefore not as simple as all that .
I should really have liked things to have worked out differently , but I accept the majority decision .
The bans on metals are quite in order because we need , in the longer term , to come up with a ban , and not only because of the scientific results .
We have made exceptions which will be reviewed by the Commission in three years ' time for , together with the scientific advisory board , the Commission has overall responsibility for making the relevant decisions in this area in three years ' time .
I believe it will do so .
All in all , I believe that , apart from the issue of cost , this Directive is a great success and marks a step forward .
I would thank the Commission and the Council and , once again , my fellow MEPs .
It has been a pleasure to work with you .
Mr President , I too have reason to thank Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz .
I also found that the Parliamentary delegation very much got its act together during the conciliation and has finished by submitting a very good proposal .
Two aspects are of particular importance for me .
First of all , we have succeeded in clarifying the fact that , from the end of next year , end-of-life vehicles will have to be properly disposed of throughout the European Union .
In other words , it will no longer be possible to dispose of cars illegally or to abandon them somewhere in the woods . Nor will there be the impulse to export them in one way or another to Eastern Europe .
Instead , they will have to be properly disposed of on the spot by authorised companies .
For me , that is one of the great , fundamental successes of this directive .
The second important point for me is no longer the issue of costs and competition .
These are problems we argued a bit about and finally solved quite reasonably by means of a compromise which all sides find workable . Instead , the second important point is the fact that , by means of this Directive , we have established that new cars must demonstrate in their type verification and test that they are easy to recycle .
In this Directive , we are calling upon the Commission to alter the directive on type licensing so that , in the future , new cars have to be built in such a way that they can easily be recycled .
That is the crucial thing .
In that way , we are moving away from the end-of-pipe technology whereby we always have to consider what to do with the remains of cars .
Instead , we need to bear in mind , right from the time that vehicles are built , that cars , like other products , have to be re-used and disposed of .
That is precisely the right way of going about matters , and I am therefore very pleased that we have got the directive up and running in this way .
Mr President , the compromise that has been reached is a great success for environmental and consumer protection .
It is the first time that manufacturers ' liability for waste has been up for debate at all , and the fact that manufacturers ' liability is soon to become a reality is to be welcomed .
The compromise reached on heavy metals is also a giant step towards an environmentally friendly strategy for dealing with the flow of materials .
I believe that this outcome , which is also excellent from a green point of view , will help encourage the motor industry to be more innovative and to begin to develop cars which can be recycled more easily .
However , the compromise is also a slap in the face for our Chancellor and , more precisely , for the German car industry , particularly Volkswagen which has unfortunately tried to stand in the way of this Motor Directive .
I also hope that the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , will draw the relevant lessons from this debate and , when it comes to the Directive on Electronic Waste - which is again concerned with manufacturers ' liability - will also , in actual fact , try to act in the interests of the consumer . I hope too that we do not allow ourselves to be put under pressure by individual industrial interests .
Mr President , our group is quite satisfied with the result of the conciliation , even if there is always , of course , room for a little further progress .
Our objective has always been to obtain as soon as possible a comprehensive system for recovering end-of-life vehicles , with stringent demands in terms of recycling and a ban on dangerous substances .
We also wanted manufacturers to be held completely liable , so that it is the manufacturers who take financial responsibility for recovery .
Once this decision has been made , the position in a few years ' time will be quite close to what we had wanted to achieve .
What is worth noting , as far as the conciliation process is concerned , is the fact that Parliament has unfortunately slowed down this development towards manufacturer ' s liability instead of speeding it up .
It would be quite alarming if Parliament were to exchange roles and , instead of making the running , hand over that role to its opponents .
Mr President , as the rapporteur and Mr Lange have already said , the positive outcome of this legislative procedure is useful , not just in terms of what the directive lays down but also because it marks the start of a process and there is the prospect of a gradual change across the entire manufacturing process in a sector as important as the automotive industry , and a review of the entire process , from vehicle design through to the choice of new materials and components to make proper recycling possible .
Not only is manufacturing reconciled with environmental protection , but we are taking the first steps along the road which has been defined as the environmental conversion of the economy , in what is , I repeat , such an important industry .
Of course , we have only achieved this result after complex negotiations with car manufacturers , who have at last agreed to bear the financial burden of scrapping cars as from 2007 .
Lastly , it is important to highlight another point too , which is of a more specific political-institutional nature .
Let us be honest , we are all aware that we started the conciliation procedure from very opposed positions - there was even a certain amount of interinstitutional tension between Parliament and the Council - with many national differences in terms of both experience and interests .
And yet , thanks to the commitment and sense of responsibility of all concerned , we reached a consensus in a difficult , major and highly controversial field , and in doing so we have added another building block in the construction of Europe .
At this point in time , in terms of the more general debate currently underway , this is a significant result .
Mr President , Commissioner , with regard to end-of-life vehicles , we have reached a sound compromise .
For the first time , European legislation defines manufacturer ' s liability in no uncertain terms .
In 1994 , the packaging directive provided for liability to be shared between the government and manufacturers .
This has proved ineffective in practice .
We are now dealing with manufacturer ' s liability in the case of end-of-life vehicles .
I welcome this for it will be in the interests of manufacturers to produce their cars in such a way that they can be recycled more easily .
Unfortunately , the text stipulates that the manufacturer will be wholly or mainly responsible .
This means that systems will be set up which differ from country to country , which is unfortunate , as this runs counter to the internal market idea .
In the case of the electronic and electrical waste directive , this must be regulated more effectively .
We need to move towards individual manufacturer ' s liability .
My own country , the Netherlands , has a great deal to learn in this respect .
Mr President , it is true that the legislative procedure has been long and difficult , and I have said so .
It should be noted that the Commission 's initial proposal was presented in July 1997 .
During this prolonged procedure and in spite of the complexity of the legislation , it has been possible to solve a series of problems thanks to the colegislators and , once again , to the three institutions ' will to come to an agreement .
I am therefore pleased with the agreement on a joint text , reached on 23 May this year at the Conciliation Committee .
I would particularly like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , and to the members of the said committee .
I am sure that the joint text represents a good balance between the need to guarantee a high level of environmental protection and the legitimate concerns of the various participants .
I would , however , like to emphasise three statements that the Commission will make when it adopts the directive .
The aim of these three is to make some clarifications which the Commission considers to be essential .
Firstly , the provision laid down in Article 5 ( 1 ) does not oblige the Member States to establish separate collection systems with special funding requirements , but allows them to use the existing waste collection systems .
Second , with regard to Article 5 ( 3 ) , it is the responsibility of the Member States to decide which producers , concessionaries and collectors must be registered in accordance with the framework directive on waste or in a new register created specifically .
Third , I would like to clarify that Article 7 ( 1 ) does not lay down requirements , conditions or additional criteria in relation to the technical inspection of vehicles .
Generally speaking , this text constitutes a significant step towards sustainable production and consumption , a model for future Community initiatives in the field of specific waste management such as , for example , the directive on electrical and electronic waste , to which reference has been made .
Many thanks , Mr President .
Once again , I congratulate all the speakers and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , on the work carried out .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Air transport and the environment
The next item is the report ( A5-0187 / 2000 ) by Mrs Lucas , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - Air Transport and the Environment [ COM ( 1999 ) 640 - C5-0086 / 2000 - 2000 / 2054 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the Commission on a very timely and far-reaching communication which explicitly acknowledges the rapidly growing environmental impact of air transport and clearly recognises that this growth is unsustainable .
Before coming to the proposals contained in my report , it would be helpful to remind ourselves of some of the key issues in this debate .
Essentially , the problem can be expressed very simply : aviation is growing at an unsustainable rate .
It is a serious environmental threat and not only is it a problem , but we are actually subsidising that sector , which is making the situation very much worse .
In terms of aviation growth , air traffic is forecast to almost double in the next 15 years .
When you think what that means in terms of congestion and environmental impact , then clearly that is a nightmare .
To take a case that I know well in the UK , the government 's own air traffic forecasts which were published in June this year show total passenger numbers at UK airports rising from 160 million in 1998 to 400 million in just over 20 years ' time .
That increase of 240 million is equivalent to four new airports the size of London Heathrow or eight new airports the size of London Gatwick .
Obviously the environmental consequences of such expansion would be totally unacceptable and these projections only serve to show the nonsense of assuming the possibility of continuous exponential growth .
What are the environmental impacts of this growth ?
On the noise side , we know that as far as ordinary people on the ground are concerned those changes that have been introduced to make individual aircraft quieter are actually in danger of being cancelled out by the increasing frequency of each noise incident .
On the emission side , air travel is the world 's fastest growing sources of greenhouse gases which cause climate change .
That may only count for 3 % of total emissions today , but by 2050 it is projected it could account for up to 15 % of total global emissions or even more .
You would think that litany of environmental problems , coupled with a projected growth that is clearly unsustainable , might have produced some measures to discourage the exponential growth of this sector , but not a bit of it .
On the contrary , global aviation policies are actually encouraging the unrestrained growth of this sector .
Aviation is massively subsidised .
Unlike motor vehicles or trains , airlines pay no tax on their fuel .
Indeed it has been calculated that the European aviation sector receives about EUR 30 billion in subsidies every year .
To mention some of the key points of my report very briefly : on noise , current noise standards for new aircraft have actually been in existence since 1977 and there is therefore an urgent need for more stringent standards .
I am recommending that the EU uses the World Health Organisation 's own guidelines for Community noise to develop new guidelines for daytime and night-time exposure by 2003 .
On emissions , a perfectly feasible target for the developed countries would be to reduce all greenhouse gas emissions from aviation by 5 % on 1992 levels by 2012 , which is the first budget period according to the Kyoto Protocol .
This would be a first step to reverse the current exemption of international aviation from responsibilities .
On subsidies , the report makes it clear that in principle we support the taxing of aircraft fuel at an international level , but we recognise that there are political difficulties with this because of the need to get international agreements at ICAO .
In the light of those political difficulties , we are proposing instead an environmental charge based on the polluter-pays principle .
In fact , such a charge would be a more subtle instrument since it could actually be calculated to reflect both the amount of fuel used and also , by factoring in the efficiency of the aircraft 's engine , the amount of pollutants generated .
Indeed the political difficulties of introducing such a measure would disappear since it is perfectly within the rights of the EU to introduce a levy on all flights starting from airports in the EU .
One final but very important point , you will hear the airlines say that all this is very well but it should be undertaken by ICAO , the international body .
The fact that it is an international body means that it moves at a very slow pace and what the Commission communication proposes - and what I endorse in my report - is the principle that some of the more industrialised regions like the EU should be able to move more swiftly towards more stringent standards than other regions like the developing countries .
This does not spell the end of ICAO .
What it does is to introduce some flexibility into ICAO which is perfectly consistent with other international organisations . Others do just the same thing .
The reaction of the airlines is to ask why we are picking on them .
In fact , clearly the opposite is the case .
The airlines have been getting away with not paying their way for over 50 years .
Meanwhile , other Members of this House are quick to claim that the measures I propose will have devastating effects on the European aviation sector .
That is nonsense .
An environmental charge along the lines I have described would not have adverse effects on competition because it is levied on all airlines using EU airports regardless of their origin .
They claim it will have crippling effects on the European economy and that too is nonsense .
The aviation sector is responsible for some jobs but it should not be forgotten that making aviation pay its way in terms of taxation will create thousands of jobs in other sectors .
So I commend this report to you .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that all Members of this House care deeply about the environment despite the fact that the rapporteur and members of the Greens would have you believe otherwise .
Environmental concerns must , however , be balanced against the needs of the aviation industry to ensure its success in the future .
I was disappointed with the report from the Commission , not least because it was so negative towards aviation .
Unfortunately this has been built upon by the rapporteur .
I would like to assist honourable Members by pointing out the following information : air transport is responsible for generating 25 million direct jobs world-wide .
In the United Kingdom alone aviation is responsible for supporting nearly 500 000 jobs .
The United Kingdom transports GBP 35 billion worth of exports , maintaining unrivalled access to global markets and contributes around GBP 3 billion per annum to the exchequer .
If multiplied by the number of countries in the European Union one can see and understand just how important this industry is to our economies .
In terms of environmental impact , aviation uses less than 8 % of the land required for rail and less than 1 % required for road use .
In practical terms , aside from maritime transport , aviation is the only form of international transport now transporting a third of all goods world-wide .
Over the past 15 years CO2 emissions have declined by 70 % and unburned hydrocarbons by 85 % .
Aviation is responsible for just 2.5 % of CO2 emissions .
Short-term measures are available , such as tackling the 44 % air traffic flow management delays and 30 bottlenecks which take place over France , Italy , Spain and parts of Germany .
National governments must take action now .
They should also tackle land planning around existing airports and take responsibility for their decisions in the past .
To suggest that either a tax on kerosene , which is internationally exempt from tax for the aviation industry , or VAT on tickets or aircraft purchases is the answer is incorrect .
The industry already pays all its infrastructure charges , some of which go towards environmental improvements .
It is not subsidised .
Finally , if Mrs Lucas ' proposals were passed , they would decimate the aviation industry : aviation , tourism , businesses and the aerospace industry .
Their supporters would love to abolish cheap flights .
In short , they would make Europe uncompetitive and give Americans and overseas carriers an unfair advantage .
I would hope in future the proposals from the Commission are thought through more carefully .
Otherwise its members may find that flying to or from Brussels or Strasbourg or on holiday , for that matter , with a European carrier may not be an option .
Mr President , allow me to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Lucas .
My group has not proposed any further amendments for this plenary discussion .
This means that we agree with the thrust of the report , and I would like to dissociate myself somewhat from the comments made by Mrs Foster , suggesting that the Commission proposals or those included in the report would spell disaster for aviation .
I do not think you should try to block a sound environmental policy by making this type of threat .
The Commission statement on aviation and the environment is a first step towards better European legislation .
This is needed given the growth in aviation and , along with it , the growth in environmental pollution caused by it .
We therefore endorse the key points of the Commission proposals .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists is all for imposing European rules on the aviation industry and making it pay for the environmental pollution which it causes .
As Mrs Lucas has already stated , we do not want aviation to be given preferential treatment .
But today we are merely tracing an outline .
What conditions must European legislation meet ?
We will then look forward to the further regulatory and legislative proposals which will also contain the details and specific standards .
So what are the guiding principles of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ?
We are at any rate of the opinion that rapid growth in aviation leads to the creation of more and better train alternatives , to give an example in terms of short-distance travel .
I believe that the shift from one mode of transport to another which is more environmentally-friendly is of great importance .
We do not think that capacity growth in aviation is unlimited .
Secondly , we would like European noise standards : in the interests of the public and to discourage competition between certain airports .
Noise at night should , in our opinion , be given more attention and we share Mrs Lucas ' view that , in the development of standards and more detailed rules , the standards of the World Health Organisation should come first .
Accordingly , we are expecting ambitious proposals from the European Commission .
The third point naturally relates to emissions , the emission of pollution to be precise , which , in our view , should be tackled as well .
This is also why we support the principle of a tax on kerosene .
However , the viability of these ideas and proposals is questionable .
As stated in the report , we would like international consultation and further research .
Since the outcome of this research is uncertain , we support the fall-back position , as formulated in Paragraph 20 of the report , in the form of a European environmental levy .
In the final analysis , what matters is for us to follow the Kyoto agreements , and aviation should contribute substantially in this respect .
We prefer to have effective agreements on noise and emission worldwide , but should these not materialise , we certainly will not rule out a European policy .
I believe that that is also an important element in the report , and it has been formulated clearly in our view .
We hope that international consultation will bear some fruit .
Should this not be the case , we feel that we should be able to table European rules in a few years ' time .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her report .
It is indeed the case that aviation is growing rapidly .
I share Mrs Foster ' s view that aviation is a major economic sector , a sector which provides services which are irreplaceable up to a point .
At the same time , however , it is abundantly clear that such a sector also brings with it a number of adverse environmental effects , such as noise and air pollution , and that we need to invite the sector to take a pro-active approach in dealing with this issue as quickly as possible , more so than is the case at present .
Both the Commission statement and Mrs Lucas ' report provide guidelines as to how this can and must be done .
I would like to highlight a few points .
It is clear , as Mr Wiersma has already stated , that the different modes of transport - road , train , etc. and also aviation - must be treated the same way as much as possible , which is not the case at the moment .
There are specific reasons for this , but something must be done about the matter .
I believe that it is clear that , in tackling the problems of noise , standards , tax on kerosene , etc , we should certainly at the present time opt for a worldwide approach .
A regional approach is premature at the moment , and I am pleased that the rapporteur has amended a number of her points in the original text to this effect .
In my opinion , the European Union does not need to take any unilateral measures at the moment , if I can put it that way .
There are important negotiations under way , Commissioner , which will have a positive outcome , or at least we can still be hopeful of this .
I believe that this is a factor of importance .
Another important point is that noise must be tackled by means of a package of measures .
Hence my amendment to provide details of these measures .
I have also tabled an amendment to develop a common method of measurement which will enable us to curb competition between different airports , as referred to by Mr Wiersma .
It is , of course , important for competition between airports not to have any adverse effects on the people who live in the vicinity and on the environment .
I believe that this is a factor of importance and that is why we need European regulations in order to prevent competition between the different airports .
Mr President , at the present time the United Kingdom has rates of fuel duty which are spectacularly higher than in other parts of the European Union .
One of the effects of this is particularly detrimental to the peripheral parts of the country .
It has a disproportionately distorting effect on competition , affecting local firms in the periphery competing against large multinationals in the UK .
That is an important caveat to put down about ways in which fuel taxes can distort local economies .
I do not think there is a good environmental argument for trying to drive most of the population of the United Kingdom into the bottom south-east corner .
I did not enter politics to repeat the Highland clearances .
That said , it is also clearly absurd to exempt aviation from the duty to diminish greenhouse gases and ozone depletion and it is also a good thing to look towards an equality of taxation across the European Union , as Mrs Lucas has done , rather than grossly distorting differentials between different parts .
I have considerable reservations about how this will work in practice , but we should welcome the principle that Mrs Lucas has put forward .
Mr President , the fight against noise pollution and gaseous emissions is a just fight , which we support , as it pursues the objectives of citizens ' well-being and environmental quality .
Nonetheless , the reduction of these noise or gaseous emissions must be limited to the commendable search for technical solutions that are to everyone 's advantage .
It must not serve as a pretext for other objectives in the field of tax or for extending the competence of the Commission .
The latter should instead concentrate on correctly carrying out its already vast range of tasks .
In these circumstances , we cannot accept the instigation of this eco-tax .
This first step towards a European tax will only affect passengers , once again , without achieving any of this report ' s objectives .
Our citizens are already squeezed hard by taxes and , at a time when the Member States are trying to reduce taxation , a European tax could put our businesses in a difficult position in relation to their competitors , in particular American businesses or others , with numerous disastrous consequences for employment .
We cannot accept this .
Furthermore , we demand that tax subsidiarity in favour of the Member States be observed .
Europe , rather than artificially swelling its budget by means of this tax , should use this budget more effectively , with respect for the freedom of the individual .
The political dependency of the Member States depends in large part on their freedom in terms of tax .
The eco-tax will solve nothing .
This is a purely ideological measure , with no direct effect on the environment .
We would prefer a rational measure that respects the interests of the individual and favours economic development while fully respecting the environment .
Mr President , where air traffic too is concerned , the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats supports the initiative of the European Commission and of the responsible Vice-President , Mrs Palacio , to reconcile causing as little damage as possible to the environment with citizens ' and companies ' interest in being able to travel .
The Committee too has made a decision along the same lines , although we ought in all honesty to say that we had completely to re-write Mrs Lucas ' report , since it was based upon totally unrealistic premisses .
However , we finally reached a majority agreement .
The summer has again shown how important air travel is for people heading for their holiday destinations .
Particularly where families with children are concerned , air travel offers the quickest means of getting away to the sun , and the one which puts least strain on the nerves .
At the same time , it provides the basis for jobs and businesses in many parts of the European Union .
Business travel and freight forwarding on international air routes are also vital to trade and commerce .
On the other hand , air travel has an obvious detrimental effect upon the environment due to exhaust emissions and noise pollution .
We must make sure that we limit these forms of damage to the environment , at the same time , however , as distinguishing between the damage caused to health around airports and the ways in which people ' s ordinary well-being is prejudiced .
I fear that , if we were to adopt the WHO ' s regulations , none of us here this evening would be allowed to go on working , since more than ten hours spent in this Chamber is scarcely compatible with these regulations .
So let us be realistic , please .
The Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats in any case calls for a significant reduction in permitted levels of noise pollution - which , in view of the international character of air travel , ought more sensibly to be regulated within the framework of the ICAO - and for noisier aircraft to be excluded from using European airports following brief transitionary periods .
We hope , and are campaigning for , a situation in which the Member States of the European Commission will provide a clear mandate .
If , however , we were not to obtain success at ICAO level , then we should have to take action ourselves , for Europe is densely populated and we do not have the luxury of the large distances between population centres that are to be found in America or Africa .
We have to protect our citizens from unnecessary noise .
Mr President , we know that traffic emissions are one of the greatest environmental problems we have and they have also proved to be one of the hardest to get rid of .
That is because the volume of traffic is growing even faster than the economy .
In this sense the problems of air traffic are still greater because we have to find global solutions for them .
On the other hand , we have heard that the Kyoto Protocol does not contain provisions concerning air traffic emissions .
Furthermore , air traffic problems are not discussed in the directive on ceilings for emissions which is under consideration .
Being in this situation we really have to channel greater efforts into the work that is done in ICAO and its environmental protection committee , which drafts international environmental norms .
This is a regrettably slow process , but we have to be able to set objectives that are sufficiently ambitious in scope and create negotiating mandates to be able to make progress accordingly .
In my opinion it would not be a bad idea if the developed , industrialised countries , including the European Union , were to set an example in this matter .
It is important to develop engine technology , as a decline in the volume of traffic is not foreseeable .
We will have to have recourse to different acts , environmental taxes , charges and administrative measures , for example regulation of departure and arrival times , taking account of the fact that rail traffic exists alongside air traffic in areas where long distances are not a hindrance , and that must be developed .
Mr President , I would like to emphasise the importance of the aim to use efficient , alternative transport , in place of short flights , which was mentioned in this report .
For example , high speed trains , and , in some cases , short sea crossings offer a more environment-friendly alternative to short flights .
This will be vital to ease congestion at airports and for environmental reasons too .
Replacing short flights with alternative forms of transport will make room for long haul flights , for which there is no alternative .
In Parliament we discussed several reports before the summer recess that aimed at improving the competitiveness of railways and sea transport .
In addition to improving rail and sea transport competitiveness , we also need to take other action .
One possibility is an environmental charge specially designed for air traffic .
It should be introduced in such a way that the charge would be less for the unavoidable long haul journeys than it would for short flights for which there is a more environment-friendly alternative .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report is the third in a series which deals with the air transport situation .
Whilst the previous two focused on the freedom and growth potential within aviation , this one highlights the downside , justifiably so , in my opinion .
As I have already indicated when we discussed the Atkins report , the measures which are currently being drafted for aviation only provide short-term answers .
They cannot provide a lasting solution for the problems of congestion and environmental pollution .
This report looks beyond the near future , which is why I would like to congratulate Mrs Lucas .
It is not an unnecessary exercise to indicate the pre-conditions within which aviation should function , both in terms of space and the environment .
This , however , does require sufficient expertise and alternatives .
At present , there is room for considerable improvement with regard to both of these aspects .
This should not deter us , however , from sketching the outlines for the future and to expect this to be done internationally .
This report sets the right tone for this , especially for the benefit of the Commission .
Despite our positive attitude to this report , there are a number of elements which , in my opinion , do not belong in a report such as this one .
I am referring to the amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens and the regionalists .
They may seem like a kind gesture , but these matters are better dealt with by the Member States .
Mr President , this Parliament would not be able to function without aviation , which according to some might not be such a bad thing .
But we need to focus all our efforts on how we can minimise the effects of the rapid growth within this sector on the environment .
I would like to highlight a number of points .
In my opinion , the European Union should support the ICAO process .
Only within the context of this international body is it possible to discuss tighter rules for noise generated by aircraft .
We should however urge caution .
Proposing new standards has a huge impact on the European aviation industry as a whole .
In concrete terms , a standard considerably stricter than the current one would mean that out of the present European fleet of 3,300 aircraft , 1,067 would need to be replaced .
Such a rapid and forced decommissioning would make it practically impossible to replace these aircraft with new ones , due to , among other things , the small production capacity for new aircraft .
We only have two manufacturers .
The consequences for European aviation are not hard to imagine .
It would need to surrender part of the market to its competitors , and it is very questionable whether this would benefit our safety .
Furthermore , it would lead to a considerable reduction in employment , with all the problems that this entails .
Air fares would go up .
I am very aware that this would be a bonus for some , but do remember that , for airline passengers who need to travel short distances , there is still no real alternative , contrary to what one of my fellow MEPs just stated , to the effect that we would all much prefer to see such passengers travel by train ..
Member States and my country in particular , the Netherlands , are extremely slow in introducing high-speed trains which could form a viable alternative for short-distance travel .
Aircraft manufacturers should be put under considerable pressure to build cleaner and quieter aircraft .
That is why the new standards cannot be put on hold forever .
We will try to exert this pressure at international level but we will run out of patience at some stage .
Finally , I would like to say a few words on noise-sensitive airports .
In my opinion , measurements should be taken in a truly objective manner and complaints from those living in the vicinity should not be the only point of reference .
An international standard needs to be established , but some airports , which do not cause any pollution whatsoever to those living in the vicinity , should be exempt so that they are not hindered in their development .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think we are all convinced that we have an obligation and a duty to protect the environment and contribute to sustainable development with an environmental policy that has seen its importance increased subsequent to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I agree with the Commission on drawing up more stringent standards on noise and also on establishing transitional provisions to satisfy the needs of the regions that are confronted with noise pollution problems .
We also believe that it is essential for us to participate as one in the 33rd assembly of the ICAO in autumn 2001 , speaking with one voice because , without a doubt , there is strength in unity and on subjects as important as the tightening of standards against noise it is vital .
It would also be important to ask the Commission to present proposals for the introduction of economic incentives aimed at achieving a reduction of the negative effects on the environment .
Naturally , what we do not agree on is the unilateral establishment of tax on kerosene , as a unilateral decision without the backing of the ICAO would have a minimal impact on the environment , would create legal problems , would damage competition among European airlines and would consequently affect users , who would see their tariffs rise .
It would also be essential that , before taking any measures with regard to the adoption of taxes on the aviation industry , a study should be carried out on the costs and benefits that these measures would imply .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasise the importance of efficient management in the aviation industry in reducing pollutants , placing the emphasis on improving airport management and clearly supporting the creation of a single European sky , by means of which we would also undoubtedly contribute to reducing environmental pollution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to give Mrs Lucas credit for her report .
I mean her original version .
She is right when she points out that if the volume of air traffic continues its rapid growth it will be absolutely necessary to take measures to control the problems it causes .
It is part of sustainable development to reduce emissions and bring noise levels down .
The report gained the support of everyone in the committee .
The amendments made to it , however , throw the baby out with the bath water .
The original report was a natural extension of previous EU legislation , but if the amendments are adopted it will mean enormous financial losses for European companies that have taken investment decisions on the basis of EU acts .
For example , the time span for noise reduction is very long .
The time that passes between the decisions taken and implementation can be up to two years .
But now some excellent aircraft which have just been modified in accordance with Chapter 3 would have to be scrapped in four years ' time .
The citizens and companies of the Community must be able to have confidence in legislation , as continual shifting of the goalposts undermines long-term plans .
The resultant costs weaken the area ' s air transport competitiveness as compared with airlines outside the EU , and , at the same time , in fact , makes it harder to adopt environment-friendly technology in the airlines based within the EU .
What is economically realistic about demands for new technology in the name of environmental protection to replace aircraft which are still serviceable and in good condition ?
On the contrary , this sort of action will constitute a burden on the environment , as materials will have to be produced and aircraft built before the economic lifetime of existent equipment is up .
In addition , scrapping serviceable aircraft will mean an additional burden on the environment .
Drafting radically new regulations on aircraft noise has to happen globally and under the auspices of ICAO , and careful , long-term community and town planning consequently has a key role in this .
Finally , I would like to remind everyone that increasing fuel tax in the air transport industry would bring with it an added burden for those who live in sparsely populated countries .
A long journey is a long way to go .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate Mrs Lucas on the report that is the basis for our debate today .
As we are all aware , the environmental consequences of air transport have recently attracted a great deal of interest .
At local level , the debates surrounding airport development are increasingly determined by environmental considerations relating to noise abatement and air quality improvement in areas surrounding airports .
Many citizens living in these areas believe that much more could be done to improve their situation and that is what they are demanding .
Furthermore , the long-term impact of gases from air transport on climate change is undoubtedly a cause of concern in the world today , as is the impact of other types of emissions .
The air transport system must therefore be handled globally and coherently , from an environmental point of view , that is , we must also take account of aspects relating to the activity of air transport .
We must try to reconcile interests that are not always easy to reconcile as air transport undoubtedly involves economic interests that are characterised by high investment costs which require a long life span before they are paid off .
For example , an aircraft requires a much longer life span than other types of investment in order to be adequately paid off .
This requires a stable operating environment with no ups and downs or modifications that change the rules of the game and may have disastrous economic consequences for the functioning of aviation companies .
A sector based on extremely expensive technology , with a rapid rate of growth , has an immediate effect on employment in ancillary sectors , such as research , industry and tourism .
In my opinion , trying to safeguard the environment by simply slowing down growth in the aeronautical sector and the air industry is not a valid option .
But there is no doubt that the public , not only people in the surrounding area who suffer most directly from certain types of pollution such as noise or even emissions , but the public in general , who want sustainable development and quality of life , has a right to demand action from us to guarantee this type of growth that should be the European model .
In its communication on air transport and the environment , the Commission maintains that the aviation industry needs to increase its efforts to improve the environmental quality of new aircraft being built .
If the current rate of growth is maintained , the improvements needed to compensate for the anticipated environmental impact of the increase in air traffic will not be made .
I know this message is not well received in many parts of the sector but , without a doubt , in the medium and long term there is no solution but to look for an alternative unless we want air transport to become a victim of its own success .
The Commission , however , is aware that the air transport sector is correct in saying that before carrying out environmental measures , a serious in-depth study must be done on the economic and social repercussions that these measures will have .
I have the impression that today , those most concerned by the environment are accepting , little by little , but more and more , the fact that in order to develop a definite environmental policy , account must be taken of the balance between the cost and effectiveness of the measures proposed .
The report we have before us considers these fundamental issues and takes account of both the need to reinforce environmental protection beyond routine efforts and the profitability analysis factor .
I would like to thank Mrs Lucas for the efforts made to achieve flexibility , as it is clear from her amendments that this is not exactly what she would like as a report , but she is looking for a compromise that makes parliamentary approval possible .
For example , what she says on kerosene seems to me to be a reasonable way of presenting this problem , which undoubtedly cannot be solved at European level , but at world-wide level and by the ICAO .
For it is in aviation , ladies and gentlemen , the industry in which globalisation is more evident than in any other , that these issues must be resolved .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the support she gives the Commission in the report , and say that we find ourselves at a difficult stage of the debate on new noise standards and on legislation which gradually eliminates the noisiest aircraft , within the framework of the ICAO .
On many occasions , we have indicated our preference for an international solution to these problems , and the Commission has noted with satisfaction the positive development of the United States ' stance in relation to the standardisation process that is taking place in the ICAO .
I have to say that the legislation on the so-called " hushkits " , with regard to the noisiest aircraft , adopted in its day by Parliament , the Council and the Commission , was based precisely on the fact that the United States had adopted unilateral measures outside the ICAO .
There is no doubt that it is within the ICAO that this work needs to be done .
We shall coordinate the actions of the various Member States within the CAEP , given that it is the Member States that are the signatories of the ICAO , and I hope that Parliament will support initiatives such as the single sky , to which Mr Ojeda referred , which , naturally , will also have consequences for kerosene saving , if it can be implemented , and the improvement in the allocation and general management of slots .
Mr President , once again I thank everyone for the work carried out in trying to obtain a realistic and flexible text that is acceptable to the various parties .
We await Parliament 's vote , to which the Commission will pay great attention .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Tyres for motor vehicles and trailers
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0218 / 00 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 92 / 23 / EEC relating to tyres for motor vehicles and their trailers and to their fitting [ C5-0220 / 2000 - 1997 / 0348 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr De Roo ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am here to talk about noise generated by car tyres .
Noise is an environmental and health problem which is underestimated .
Tyres cause a nuisance to one third of the citizens in Europe who complain about it , compared to one quarter of the citizens ten years ago .
The problem of noise is therefore escalating , especially road and aircraft noise .
At first reading , the European Parliament was wrong not to react to the feeble proposals from the European Commission .
For example , the European Commission ' s proposal did not contain a review clause .
All environmental proposals made by the European Commission contain a review clause , but not this one .
This is hardly surprising given the fact that this proposal was drafted by the DG for Industry .
In the Council , this environmental matter was wrongly dealt with by the Ministers for Economic Affairs and the Internal Market .
It should have been dealt with in the Council of Ministers for the Environment .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has tabled 4 amendments with 32 votes against 10 votes .
With regard to ordinary passenger cars , we suggest that the limit is reduced by 2 decibels .
The German independent inspection body , TÜV , has tested numerous existing car tyres .
They all meet the ineffective noise limits proposed by the Council .
A reduction of 2 decibels is technically possible without jeopardising safety .
This has also been confirmed by experts of the Swedish institute for roads and traffic .
With regard to vans and lorries , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection also suggests reducing the noise level by 2 decibels .
Vans and lorries produce more noise than ordinary cars . This is why it is important to make the necessary changes here too , and I hope that a number of the Christian-Democrat MEPs will be able to vote in favour of this .
The tyre industry has been given until October 2005 to meet stricter noise limits .
This seems ample time to me .
More is required , of course , in order to reduce the noise from road traffic .
The noise level from ' fluisterasfalt ' [ silent asphalt ] , as it is termed by our Flemish friends , or ' ZOAB , zeer open asfaltbeton ' [ very open asphalt concrete ] , as we like to refer to it in the Netherlands , is probably 20 decibels lower than that from cobblestone roads .
Our motorways are no longer paved with cobblestones , but a reduction of 3 to 5 decibels is possible by introducing this type of asphalt everywhere .
We will be returning to the problems of noise when we deal with the directive on noise .
Silent asphalt and a change of tyre could help reduce the noise level by 6 decibels , which may not seem a great deal , but one should remember that decibels are a logarithmic table .
This means that the noise level can be cut by more than half without reducing the volume of traffic .
Cars inherently cause a large number of environmental problems .
More than 10 years ago , the European Parliament introduced the first generation of catalytic converters and , two years ago , the second generation of catalytic converters appeared in the Langen / Hautala report on the motor oil programme .
As a result , air pollution caused by cars and lorries will drop by 70 % to 90 % in 2005 and 2007 .
Similarly , we found a sound solution to the recycling of end-of-life vehicles in the Florenz report .
There are now two major environmental issues left to tackle at European level .
The first one is noise , which I have dealt with extensively , and the second one is the CO2 or the greenhouse problem .
With regard to CO2 , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has suggested that the European Commission submit a legislative proposal to reduce the rolling resistance of tyres by 5 % .
This means that 5 % less fuel will be used and that the emission of CO2 will also fall by the same amount .
I would welcome a positive reaction from the European Commission .
Mr President , Commissioner , the general lines along which this Directive is discussed are of little concern to me .
I am no lawyer and am not in a position to judge .
What is true is that insufficient account has so far been taken of environmental interests .
Just in the last three days , the car and tyre industries have indicated in this Chamber that their options may well be open when it comes specifically to car tyres .
My group is not at present overly concerned about whether the figure is to be 1 , 3 or 4 decibels , but we should like to make it clear that we want positively to force the tyre industry to act and do more of what is required of them in this area .
The motor oil , car and recycling industries have made a lot of things possible where road use by individuals is concerned .
In contrast , the tyre industry has largely refrained from taking action .
It is in this area that we want them to do some catching up .
We shall doubtless at some stage also have to talk about alternative road surfaces in Europe .
I believe that this is a positive way of forcing the tyre industry to act .
I should therefore like straight away to forestall some of my fellow MEPs who now and again stand up jokingly and say that Mr Florenz wants a reduction of two decibels where possible but is accepting a 10 metres longer braking distance in return .
Obviously , we want to maintain standards .
We expect innovation .
We expect the tyre industry to employ young engineers of both sexes and finally to go some way towards meeting people ' s justified demands to be exposed to less noise in their homes .
That is a task we have set ourselves , and I hope that the Commission will be prepared to cooperate .
It is possible , as we shall see in one or two years ' time , that the industry will be able to achieve these objectives of ours by the year 2005 .
If that were not possible , I am the very first to concede that we need to broaden our field of operations somewhat .
But the industry must be forced to act , and that is what we shall be campaigning for at the present time .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is a well-known fact that you are not entirely averse to cars yourselves and also enjoy driving .
It would therefore be a jolly good idea if , merely by being fitted with new tyres , our own cars were to cause 40 % less noise and , at the same time , use 5 % less fuel and also emit less CO2 .
This is the road we should be going down .
There are already tyres whose specifications are well below the values proposed in the common position when it comes both to tyre noise and to the rolling resistance which is responsible for petrol consumption and CO2 emissions .
There are even tyres to which the Federal Republic of Germany awards a Blue Angel as a sign of environmental friendliness because they are a model of quiet operation and give rise to low petrol consumption .
Now , these tyres are not particularly unsafe .
On the contrary .
Michelin and Dunlop tyres even make for shorter braking distances while remaining quiet and preserving fuel economy .
I am therefore wondering why this Parliament cannot summon up the courage to say that whatever is now already state of the art technology is what we demand by 2005 for all tyres , particularly those fitted to private cars .
I should therefore like strongly to request that we adopt Amendment No 1 , through which we call for limit values not only for tyre noise but also for rolling resistance , and that we adopt , in particular , Amendment No 2 in connection with quieter tyres .
I would ask you to consider that this does not yet mean the end of the negotiations .
We are entering into the negotiations in the Conciliation Committee with the Council , and we shall then see what emerges .
However , we must also have room for manoeuvre .
Mr President , before I start on the subject of tyre noise , may I make a more general point to the Commission .
They are bringing forward far too much legislation and , with legislation , quality is usually in inverse proportion to quantity .
We talk of doing less and doing it better .
In fact we do more , and we do it worse .
Now turning to tyres .
I little thought when I came to this House that I would end up defending the Commission 's position - and yet the Commission has done its homework .
It has consulted with the industry .
It has come up with a proposal that sets challenging , but achievable , targets which protect the environment whilst also recognising the interests of road users and tyre makers .
Some of our colleagues are seeking to sabotage this careful work by demanding arbitrary and ill-considered decibel reductions .
In some cases their figures are achievable , in others not .
But they have forgotten that changes in the production specifications of tyres affect not only noise , but also grip , safety , fuel economy , cost and durability .
They may end up with quieter tyres that are expensive , that wear out quickly and that allow cars to slide off the road and crash into trees !
Let me speak plainly .
More road users will die if Mr de Roo 's amendments are passed .
The electors I represent will not thank us .
We are being far too prescriptive .
It is our job to set a broad legislative framework in the public interest .
Instead , we seek to micro-manage a highly technical and complex industrial development programme , a task for which we have neither the time nor the skills .
I call on colleagues to reject the amendments and support the Commission proposal .
Mr President , I welcome this proposal .
It is long overdue .
Certainly the amendments to it by my colleagues Mr de Roo and Mr Lange are moving in the right direction .
Since the first publication of this directive back in 1997 the manufacturers have moved to meet the Commission standards .
I understand the desire of my colleague , Mr de Roo , to take the standards further .
However , I have to sound a note of caution .
Firstly , tyre standards are not the only problem .
The nature of the road surface is just as important and in particular circumstances like noise hotspots in urban areas perhaps more important than trying to change the tyre standards .
In many cases a better solution is to change the road surface and not the tyre standards .
Secondly - and in my opinion of paramount importance - is the need to balance the problem of tyre noise and tyre safety .
Whilst we are tonight seeking to adopt new tyre standards to reduce tyre noise we are not making any progress at all on tyre standards for the grip or adhesion of tyres on the road .
Despite good and serious proposals being put on the table some considerable time ago by the UK , they have not yet been agreed or seriously considered .
Our failure to agree tyre safety standards creates an unacceptable level of uncertainty with regard to this vital question .
For that reason I am particularly concerned about the potential effects of Amendments Nos 3 and 4 and their impact upon tyre safety , especially for vehicles such as buses and trucks .
In the circumstances I feel bound to say that I personally cannot give my support to Mr de Roo 's Amendments Nos 3 and 4 .
I suggest to him that they are premature and I would ask the Commission to reject them .
Mr President , Commissioner , my thanks go to Mr de Roo for the work he has done .
The reduction of any kind of noise is important both for people ' s health and their comfort .
For that reason , I feel very positive about the Council ' s common position with regard to tyre noise .
I am by no means acting as spokesman here for the tyre industry , but , having watched that industry very closely , I nevertheless wish to express my concern about the effect the amendments will have .
The tyre industry is a very fiercely competitive industry , and one that is competitive on a global scale . It is responsible for some very thorough development work and , owing to the nature of tyre technology , it is progressing slowly but surely .
The situation will become untenable , however , if there is an attempt to bring in changes too fast , as would seem to be the case on this occasion .
If things move too quickly it will mean immense technical problems for the industry , with unnecessary extra costs , which will be reflected in the prices of the products .
The consumer is always the one that has to pay .
An adequate transition period , however , will guarantee that the new requirements are taken account of at the development stage .
Any other course of action would be a waste of resources , because it would take on average three to four years to develop a new tyre model .
The issue becomes especially problematic when we consider that a tyre is a very delicate product in terms of balancing its individual properties .
It is not really just black and round , as the layman thinks .
When one property of the tyre is improved , it affects the others adversely , so tyre design is really a question of optimising compromises .
For example , a broad tyre holds well on asphalt , but tends to start skimming over water easily .
On the other hand , a narrow tyre works well on snow .
If a tyre ' s noise properties were to be essentially improved it would above all impair its ability to hold the road in wet conditions .
I want my fellowmen to drive on safe tyres , above all .
I wish the tyre industry and the EU legislators would get together and draw up a realistic timetable for the excellent objectives outlined in this report .
Mr President , the aim of this proposal for a directive is to limit tyre / road noise without sacrificing grip and therefore road-holding and braking safety .
In preparing the proposal , the Commission consulted several bodies independent from the manufacturers , who worked with experts from the Member States for a long time in order to find the appropriate level of strictness on decibels for the various categories of tyres for cars , vans and lorries .
As a result of this extensive prior consultation of experts , the Member States have unanimously approved the level of strictness chosen in the proposal as a common position .
The European Parliament itself showed its satisfaction with the level of strictness of the proposal and did not table any amendments .
First of all , it should be noted that the quality of the road surface is , to a great extent , up to 6 decibels , responsible for the noise generated by tyre contact .
It should also be made clear that the Commission is continuing with the measures launched two years ago to combat the various sources of noise , covering every sector of activity of the European Union .
Now , at the second reading , 4 amendments have been tabled .
Amendment Nos 2 , 3 and 4 propose the reduction of noise thresholds by 2 decibels .
If this reduction of 2 decibels were implemented today , more than 70 % of tyres currently on the market would not pass the test .
Manufacturers would therefore be obliged to urgently modify the structure of the tyre and the hardness of the rubber by reducing the grip .
Until grip requirements are applied , these three amendments are therefore unacceptable .
This correlation between noise and rolling , tyre grip and fuel consumption is rightly at the centre of the concern expressed in Amendment No 1 .
This concern is currently the subject of the search for a consensus in a working party for the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe , a working party monitored by the staff of the European Commission .
This matter is also the subject of discussion in the Transatlantic Business Dialogue to promote the emergence of a Global Type Standard GTS 2000 .
The European Commission is following this work with the intention of transposing the results into Directive 92 / 23 / EEC in order to determine the correct balance between safety , noise and resistance .
Unfortunately , however , the proposed timetable is too strict .
The wide range of products covered and the problem in all its complexity must be considered .
It is for these reasons that Article 3 , as worded in the common position , stipulates that the requirements on grip and on rolling resistance shall be integrated with the noise requirements in the extended timetable of 24 and 36 months respectively , following the entry into force of this directive .
Amendment No 1 , which proposes to legislate again on two occasions within a period of one year after the entry into force of this directive , is not acceptable .
Due to the complexity of the methods of measuring grip on dry and wet surfaces and rolling resistance and due to the wide range of products , the results of the experts ' work will not be available before 2002 .
The Commission will then be able to amend this directive in order to include grip on dry and wet surfaces and rolling resistance for all categories of tyre .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Dangerous substances and preparations ( azocolourants )
The next item is the report ( A5-0168 / 2000 ) by Mr Bakopoulos , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending for the nineteenth time Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( azocolourants ) [ COM ( 1999 ) 620 - C5-0312 / 1999 - 1999 / 0269 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive which we are debating today is designed to restrict the marketing and use of azocolourants used in fabric dyes and leather goods .
The reason for the restriction is that there is good cause to believe that these substances are carcinogenic .
The annex to the directive contains a list of fabric and leather products in which the use of these suspect substances is banned .
Several countries have already introduced similar bans in their legislation and most companies established in the European Union fall into precisely this category .
However , we need a directive in order to harmonise the internal market and prevent such unilateral regulations .
Finally , as is only to be expected , the directive also contains an analytical method for detecting banned azocolourants .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy accepts the principle on which this directive is based .
The amendments , which were adopted unanimously , therefore represent an improvement .
I should like to refer to just two of them .
The Committee on the Environment takes the view that the list of products in which the use of azocolourants is banned , as contained in the annex to the directive , should not be open .
It should be a complete , closed , precise list of named products .
This will avoid arbitrary interpretation of the directive and , as a result , a wide variety of applications , which would run counter to the principle of the single market , which this directive has been introduced to protect .
That is the purpose of Amendment No 3 .
The second amendment to which I should like to refer is Amendment No 2 , which introduces recital 7a , exempting hand-made oriental carpets from the directive .
The reason for the exemption is that , because these carpets are hand-made , spot checks are , by definition , impossible , while separate testing of each carpet would seriously damage the product .
Especially in cases - and they are not infrequent - of hand-made artefacts and / or works of art .
Importers are , however , advised to develop a quality mark .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mrs Müller tabled Amendment No 6 , on time , rewording the previous recital 7a and proposing that the exemption from the scope of the directive for oriental carpets should expire on 1 January 2006 .
I think this proposal is sensible and propose that it be accepted .
Finally , Mr Ferrer tabled Amendment No 7 , again on time , proposing that the list of 21 azocolourants in the annex should include another substance , in addition to the two inserted in Amendment No 4 .
However , the substance which Mr Ferrer proposes is already included in the annex .
Obviously , this is an oversight and I do not therefore propose that it be accepted .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is a small and modest report , an amendment to a directive that I , however , believe is an important and significant example of the great success of the awareness and information policies and of the fact that the regulation often comes after society has sorted itself out .
The fact that practically all manufacturers and producers in all the Member States have removed the products we are now trying to remove indicates that there are now many mature areas in which ideally we would not have to establish legislation , and would not find ourselves in situations like this .
I would therefore like to emphasise , so that it may be taken down in the Minutes , that we must work to this formula where possible in a mature society and a mature industry .
I think the exclusion of oriental carpets is marvellous , as I believe it is good that flexibility in favour of art and beauty is entering into the spirit of a legislative machine that often forgets small details .
Furthermore , as far as I know , people do not normally tend to eat carpets , and therefore this level of risk could be avoided .
I repeat , I believe it is positive for us to work towards progress , for society to be one step ahead of us and that all we have to do is ratify what has already been recognised .
Mr President , in response to the rapporteur ' s intervention , I should like to clear up one small point . The amendments to this report were tabled by myself .
I just want to straighten that out because Mrs Roth-Behrendt ' s name was mentioned .
Azocolourants are dyes which release cancer-causing aromatic amines if they come into contact with human skin or with the mouth cavity .
That was also the reason why a number of Member States issued interim regulations to protect consumers , as well as the reason for the Commission ' s initiative , which we are discussing this evening , whereby azocolourants are now to be prohibited throughout the EU and a ban placed on imports of these substances from third countries .
The draft we have from the Commission nonetheless has some gaps in it which compromise safety and which , in my opinion , need to be closed .
That is the purpose of my amendments , to which a large majority of the committee agreed .
We are mainly concerned with adding two further amines to the banned list because they have since been categorised as carcinogenic .
Moreover , the general description of the area of application that has been given is too vague .
We want an exhaustive , clearly defined list for the purpose of creating clarity and legal certainty .
By means of the voluntary stamp of quality and the interim deadline of 1 January 2006 , we have also succeeded in taking account of the special problems presented by the oriental carpets industry and , in spite of these problems , in also including hand-made oriental carpets in the directive in the medium term .
We have also provided for an option whereby , until such time as new testing methods have been validated , two methods can be applied which take account of the differing demands which materials make upon the testing method .
With the adoption of these amendments , which have been decided upon by a large majority of the committee , any vagueness and lack of clarity in the directive would , all in all , be removed .
In this way , the directive would do justice to the demands which will have to be made upon it in view of the risk of actual damage to public health .
Mr President , I would like to thank Members for their interest in this subject and especially Mr Bakopoulos , the rapporteur , for his constructive work .
Certain azocolourants used in textile and leather pose the risk of cancer for consumers and workers , as has been said .
Following an opinion of the Scientific Committee on Toxicity , Ecotoxicity and the Environment confirming such risks , the Commission proposed in December of last year a directive restricting marketing and use of certain azocolourants which could pose a risk of cancer if they come into close contact with the skin .
The Commission proposal for a directive would introduce a ban on the use of certain azocolourants in textile and leather articles that come into close contact with the skin .
The colourants concerned are xylidines which may release any of the 21 cancer-causing amines listed in the proposed directive .
Furthermore , textile or leather articles dyed with these same xylidines may not be placed on the market .
The test methods to be used to show compliance with the provisions are specified in the proposed directive .
The proposal provides not only for the protection of consumers ' and workers ' health .
It also addresses an internal market issue .
At the present time , the internal market is fragmented , as some Member States are already applying national bans .
The proposed directive would harmonise the rules of Member States .
I would stress that the proposal is based on the results of independent studies on the risks of azocolourants and of the costs , benefits and trade effects of the proposed restrictions .
It also takes account of the opinion of the competent Scientific Committee on Risks .
I believe it is a proportionate measure .
The Commission is unable to accept those Parliament amendments which would extend this ban by replacing the proposed list of examples of product categories covered by an exhaustive list by covering articles other than those made of textiles and leather and by including other amides .
Amendments Nos. 3 , 4 and 7 of the Committee on the Environment are the ones I refer to .
The Commission feels this could not be justified on the basis of the current knowledge about the risks .
Nor is the Commission able to accept amendments that would introduce a second testing method to show compliance with the provisions .
This applies to Amendment No 5 of the Committee on the Environment .
These would make it more difficult for suppliers , especially in the Third World , to show compliance as the method proposed by the Commission is the method most widely accepted and used .
However , the Commission can accept that when available a more reliable standardised testing method could be introduced .
The Commission can accept in principle an exemption for handmade oriental carpets from the example list of product categories covered by the proposed directive as the risk from such carpets is likely to be low .
However , the Commission cannot accept that the exemption is only temporary .
To summarise our point of view , we can accept Amendment No 1 of the Committee on the Environment .
We must reject six amendments , namely Nos. 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 7 of the Committee on the Environment . However , the Commission can in principle support parts of Amendment No 3 .
We wish to carry on the dialogue with Parliament .
I am convinced that we can reach a constructive solution .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Undeclared work
The next item is the report ( A5-0220 / 2000 ) by Mrs Glase , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication on undeclared work [ COM ( 1998 ) 219 - C4-0566 / 1998 - 1998 / 2082 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , the report before us is a position adopted by Parliament in response to a communication from the Commission on the problems associated with undeclared or illicit work .
This problem is being dealt with at European level because it relates not just to one particular country but to all Member States .
What is the heart of the problem ?
Major economic and socio-political damage is being caused in the Member States through work not being declared .
Health insurances , pensions systems and the Treasury together lose billions every year .
Workers are in no way insured or otherwise safeguarded .
Thoughts of a modern slave trade with fatal consequences for those involved spring clearly and inevitably to mind .
Those who are rewarded in some way for undeclared work have no right to claim compensation at all and no other consumer rights .
The people concerned believe that they are at an advantage but are in fact harming only themselves and society .
The fact is that , by definition and by its very nature , undeclared work is difficult to get to grips with in any country .
On the basis of estimates and long-term investigations , it may be assumed that a total of 28 million people engage in undeclared work .
The volume of undeclared work now corresponds to 15 % of gross domestic product in the EU .
The sector as a whole is growing three times as fast as the official economy .
In the communication before this House , the Commission has problems with the analysis , as well as with the steps that need to be taken to stem the tide of undeclared work .
Parliament has been working flat out on these problems for a long time and produced a list of causes which produce combined and many-sided effects .
Almost all investigations list unduly high taxes and social security contributions as a cause .
However , the Committee lists further causes such as poverty , frivolous bidding procedures , giveaway prices for subcontractors , inflexible employment legislation and poor administrative practice , as well as a clear decline in the perception of undeclared work as something illegal and illicit .
In drawing its conclusions , the Committee has , however , come up with a variety of positions derived from the very different evaluations of the various causes .
I nonetheless believe that we are united as to our goal . It is only the path about which we disagree .
The conclusions adopted by the Committee at its last sitting call for as precise as possible an assessment to be made of the sectors affected and of the most significant groups of people involved , as well as for the social partners to be involved in active measures to combat undeclared work and for the issue to be tackled in national employment programmes . They also call for surveillance and for sanctions to be imposed when undeclared work is detected .
However , a majority of the Committee considers a reduction in tax and social security contributions to be crucial as a preventive measure , as well as a reduction in value added tax in the case of labour-intensive services , as already provided for by the Council ' s decision of 28 February of this year and as also already practised in new countries .
It is also important to find solutions in hitherto unsatisfactory areas , for example in connection with the directive on the posting of workers and with the paid domestic work largely performed by women .
In the five minutes granted to me , I can present only a number of important points in the report .
The problem is complex and needs to be tackled at a variety of levels .
The Committee therefore calls upon the Commission and the individual Member States , each according to its powers but above all with firm determination , to take up Parliament ' s proposals and to become active in this matter .
I hope that we can demonstrate to you our substantial agreement with the report , together with Parliament ' s active resolve .
I would thank all my fellow MEPs for their splendid cooperation but , above all , the shadow rapporteur , Karin Jöns , for her constant readiness to engage in discussion .
Finally , I would draw your attention to a printing error .
In Article 25 of the conclusions , the Committee has clearly formulated the right to a class action .
This needs to be revised in the latest text we have before us .
The words ' appeals to the courts ' must therefore be deleted and replaced with the words ' a class action ' .
The words then correctly correspond to the will of the Committee , as agreed .
Many thanks for your attention .
Mr President , this is a most useful report on a very important issue .
There are some parts I do not like , such as for instance paragraph 13 which promotes tax coordination .
I am proposing to table an amendment on that because , as the rapporteur knows , this is a subject particularly dear to the heart of UK Conservatives .
But the overall thrust of the report is very good .
There is another report out today which was an annual report from the Commission , referred to in today 's Financial Times under the wonderful heading " Brussels demands labour reform " .
To quote briefly from the article , " In its assessment of countries , the Commission will tell France that , like Germany , it must reduce ' fiscal pressure ' on labour and reduce the ' administrative burden on companies ' . "
Certainly anything that promotes labour flexibility , liberates enterprise and reduces burdens on business must be good for the economies of those countries and for employment .
But it also addresses this problem of undeclared work .
The higher the tax , the more the red tape , the greater the incentive not to declare work .
I should like to make one further suggestion .
Countries with the highest undeclared work may well be recording the highest official unemployment figures , thereby attracting the highest offsetting regional funds .
This is perverse and it is in all our interests to address the problem .
Reducing tax and red tape would be a splendid start .
I urge Member States to follow the Commission advice and also to note the Glase report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a clear need for action on the issue of undeclared work in all the Member States , for there have not so far been many successes in combating it .
All the more reason , then , for me to welcome the Commission ' s communication on undeclared work because it gets the discussion going at European level .
In this way , I now come to a core demand of this really excellent report by Mrs Glase .
We must unreservedly include the fight against undeclared work in European employment strategy .
With problems of this complexity , we need to exchange views , learn from each other and , in accordance with the tried and tested motto for our employment strategy , always seek best practice .
We must take a close look at the issue of undeclared work in order to be able to combat its various causes efficiently .
I would warn against over-simplification , three forms of which I would also at this point immediately oppose on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
The first point concerns the repeatedly made assertion according to which undeclared work is in the first place traceable to unduly high taxes and social security contributions .
I would say to my fellow MEPs in the conservative camp that things are really not that simple .
Let us take Austria and Italy , for example .
In Austria , taxes are significantly higher than in Italy .
In spite of that , there is very much more undeclared work in Italy .
High taxes and social charges are therefore only one reason among many .
Or look at Scandinavia .
There , taxes and social charges are somewhat higher still .
On the other hand , the amount of undeclared work is comparatively small .
This no doubt also means that the quantity of undeclared work also has something to do with social acceptability , that is to say with a society ' s social coherence .
Undeclared work must no longer remain a mere peccadillo .
Secondly , I should like to reject the argument that making the labour market more flexible would reduce the amount of undeclared work .
This would-be panacea does not in fact work .
The Thatcher era in Britain taught us that .
The amount of undeclared work rose then , despite the fact that the labour market was made more flexible and social charges were reduced .
Making the labour market more flexible is something which no doubt only works if correspondingly high social standards can be maintained .
Thirdly , undeclared work is not primarily the result of illegal immigration from third countries .
On the contrary , the majority of those who engage in undeclared work are our own citizens .
As Mrs Glase ' s report shows , we need a sensible policy mix at national and European levels .
As a part of this , public authorities throughout the EU must also be jointly liable for ensuring that no contracts at all are awarded to companies whose quotations can quite clearly be traced back to the existence of undeclared work .
In the same way , companies need to be jointly and severally liable towards their sub-contractors .
However , we also want a right of class action which could help the trade unions , in particular , to take proceedings against those suspected of not declaring their employees or only partially declaring them .
Mr President , I would like to take the opportunity to thank Mrs Glase for her report , which is extremely efficient .
It is a very complex report which I described in committee as cautious in parts : cautious for reasons of necessity , if we consider that employment policy concerns the Member States , and therefore does not afford the European Parliament , or , by extension , Europe , genuine , practical competence in this matter .
So we are faced with a real , substantial difficulty to overcome .
As Mrs Jöns has just said , what we now need to do is develop a new strategy which looks at the entire question of work and employment from a global viewpoint , and calls upon the Member States first of all to make their situation public with regard to employment and undeclared work .
So far , we do not have detailed documentation for all the States ; that is , we do not know the extent of the problem in all the Member States .
We do not know the extent of the problem in the States which are hoping to join the European Union either .

It is a complex issue : the percentage is increasing every year in line with the gross domestic product ; we have a remarkably high average of 15 % across the countries of the European Union . This figure should make us think .
In any case , for all of us , illegal and undeclared work constitutes , by definition , an abuse of those who need to work , not least in terms of the tax burden which should ensure solidarity .
This is , therefore , a crime against society , which we as legislators must address , within the limits of our direct competence in this field .
However , there are specific recommendations in the report , for example specific procedures which could be implemented in order to fight the scourge of illegal or undeclared work .
I tabled some amendments , which have already been accepted by the rapporteur , and I will therefore not dwell on them .
I would just like to use the rest of the time available to mention an amendment which is particularly important to me and which I believe people found difficult to assess objectively : the amendment on illegal child labour , which I will summarise now .
It is claimed that child labour does not exist in Europe , but that it might exist - as has been stated - in Italy and southern countries .
This is not true !
Child labour exists everywhere : among immigrants or third-country nationals , among all those young people who drop out of education before they reach the age of majority , who are exploited , underpaid and untrained , thereby constituting a serious problem of exploitation and undeclared work because they do not have a qualification which can be used to ensure that they are adequately paid .
Lastly , the issue of illegal work also concerns children under 15 years old !
So let us not pretend that this problem does not exist in Europe , because it does exist , and Parliament should speak out resolutely on this matter too , in order to confirm the social , democratic and political maturity of this House .
Mr President , when we talk about undeclared work , let us not forget that we are talking about construction workers , who more exposed than anyone to bad weather and accidents at work , and that our discussions concern the outcasts working in sweatshops , deprived of any social status , often including the right to residence .
To these people we must also add workers in the new economy , whose working hours , time between shifts , and salaries are subject to the hazards of excessive insecurity and flexibility .
In short , we are talking about a form of exploitation in the workplace , which admittedly is detrimental to public finances due to lost revenue from tax and social contributions , but we must never forget that we are talking about the exclusion to which , according to the Commission , between 10 and 28 million citizens of the European Union are reduced .
Far from stigmatising these victims , we should be concerning ourselves with a specific type of employer criminality .
Lumping together those offering this type of work and those accepting it is inappropriate , even shocking .
The report that has been submitted to us is not entirely free from reproach in this respect , and nor , what is more , is the Commission 's communication .
What should we do ?
Integrate undeclared work into the labour market or adapt the job market to the existence of these excessively flexible types of work ?
I fear that proposals consisting of reducing taxes and contributions and increasing the flexibility of the job market will only lead to even greater deregulation of the labour market , at the risk of these precursors of excessive flexibility eventually becoming legitimate .
As the report that has been submitted to us indicates , poverty fosters the prosperity of the black economy , obliging employees and the self-employed to accept it .
Staunchly fighting for the creation of quality activities and jobs , paying attention to working conditions and limiting insecurity are the surest methods of reducing the attractiveness of undeclared work in all sectors .
Measures also need to be taken to prevent certain conditions for sub-contracting and the award of public contracts from leading small businesses or the self-employed to seek illegal ways of achieving the profit margins forbidden to them by contractors .
We do not need to regulate less , but rather to give greater resources to the authorities responsible for monitoring work .
In some States , the Labour Code stipulates that every illegal contract must be re-classed as a full-time , permanent contract .
That would certainly be a very active policy and a strong incentive for the employers concerned to regularise the situation .
Mr President , there are different types of undeclared work .
It can be difficult drawing the line between undeclared and properly declared work .
Sometimes , the blame has to be placed upon individuals who do undeclared work in order to dodge paying tax .
The serious cases of undeclared work are those that are organised as such .
More often than not , many workers are involved , and the reason is that there are employers who organise , lead and distribute work that will go undeclared in order to keep wage costs down and reduce taxes for themselves .
That is the heart of the matter .
In many quarters , organised undeclared work is well-known , both among the local population and the authorities .
In those cases where no action is taken against such work , this may be because unemployment is high and poor people have no alternative to being exploited by employers who do not declare their employees .
There is also a tax argument which plays a big part in Mrs Glase ' s thinking .
This subject has already been taken up in the debate .
Mrs Jöns observed quite correctly that in those regions and countries where the level of tax is fairly - or even very - high , where the labour market is well organised and where workers have strong unions , there is almost no undeclared work at all , at least not in any organised form .
If Mrs Glase and her group want to reduce tax in order to make undeclared work less profitable , this is as good as saying that they want to legalise the economic calculations behind undeclared work and make them the general rule .
It is like increasing the speed limit on the roads to reduce the number of drivers who break the law by driving too fast , or like legalising the drugs trade to reduce the amount of illegal drug dealing .
I was quite shocked to read the rapporteur ' s original report in which she proposed that all employees in European workplaces should be forced to carry electronic cards so as constantly to be monitored by the authorities .
I believe it is the employers who organise production and take on workers .
If anyone is to be compelled to carry electronic cards , it is therefore these employers , who are responsible for the work that is done .
My group and I believe that fighting unemployment and poverty is the best , and in fact the only , way of properly combating organised undeclared work .
Improved wages are a much better remedy than lower taxes and other concessions to irresponsible employers .
Mr President , I think we should begin by congratulating ourselves not only on the quality of Mrs Glase 's work , but also on the fact that this subject has come before Parliament .
We are living in a Europe that is increasingly closer to its citizens and therefore we cannot omit to concern ourselves with employment , as employment , together with health , is one of the main concerns of the citizens and , I dare say , especially of those who are unemployed because they have lost their job or perhaps never had one .
We should ask the question whether those who are working in the hidden economy , working on the black market or , to use the most common term , carrying out undeclared work , really have an adequate job ?
I do not think this is the right time to detail the harm done by undeclared work to the public funds and those carrying it out , due to their own position of insecurity , and to other employers , competitors or otherwise , and society in general .
The economic causes of undeclared work , increased income for workers , the opportunity to save on tax and social contributions or the reduction in costs for the company , are not unrelated to its existence and a significantly higher rate of growth than that of the legal or official economy .
To refer briefly to the sectors or groups in which undeclared work has the most scope for expansion , we need to include multi-job situations where the income obtained from this illegal work is supplementary ; economically inactive people who have greater flexibility in terms of time and the case of the unemployed who want an additional income , often turning down offers of legal work .
We must also consider the situation of illegal immigrants who cannot carry out other forms of work .
In addition to these easily visible situations , it is assumed that there are also many cases of production decentralisation , outsourcing or subcontracting which , in a less direct , less visible way , can lead to undeclared work .
A situation which must be prevented and which I would like to consider is that of the new type of work via the Internet , teleworking , part-time work , which can be an easy breeding-ground for undeclared work .
Mr President , we must anticipate this , as Europe must opt for secure , stable , quality work , and undeclared work is neither stable nor secure and nor , of course , does it demonstrate solidarity .
Mr President , we must welcome the Commission ' s decision to address the problem of undeclared work and I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur on managing to clarify certain aspects of such a complex issue .
It is precisely because this is such a crucial issue that I should like to make two comments .
It is true that this is not just some sub-issue ; it is a central issue which impacts on the efficiency of individual policies in the taxation , insurance and employment sectors .
With the rapid spread of undeclared work in industrialised countries , this phenomenon has ceased to be a typical feature of third world countries , for which the International Labour Organisation several decades ago coined the term " informal sector " , which is not the same as " black " or illicit work .
That is a mistake which I would ask the Commission to take into account .
What we are witnessing , in fact , is the emergence of two productive systems and two social models .
One in which producers operate by analysing the responsibilities and costs imposed by the system and another in which they operate to the detriment of the former and society as a whole .
What we must understand is that the future success of European initiatives in the employment , insurance and tax sectors depends on the way in which this issue is resolved ; in other words , this issue is of equal importance to employers , workers and the rest of society .
Secondly , I think that the general reference to undeclared work or to certain general categories is the weak link in the approach to the problem : we all know that undeclared work cannot be dealt with as a single phenomenon and needs a policy which is differentiated by sector and sub-sector , depending on the people supplying it and the nature of the individual problem .
The various categories of people which supply it , such as immigrants , minorities , children , women , moonlighters etc. cannot all be dealt with in the same way .
There is a thriving undeclared sector and there are instances which only partially constitute undeclared work .
Then there is the matter of bogus self-employment and certain new forms of employment .
All these problems require innovative solutions ; bans are not enough .
Mr President , the good news is that Europe has not run out of work .
The bad news is that , more and more often , work goes undeclared .
Failing to declare work is no mere peccadillo .
The wide-boy in the local pub who brags about ripping off the State should no longer be indulged .
In Germany , for example , work is being lost due to illegal employment and , for every ten thousand jobs , DM 240 million is lost in taxes and social security contributions .
In her splendid and balanced report , Anne Glase estimates the volume of undeclared work in the EU at between 10 and 20 per cent of GNP .
People who engage in undeclared work are to be found not only among the unemployed and among those who have entered the country illegally and have to suffer at the hands of those who profiteer from unemployment .
They are also to be found among part-time workers who , in addition , are working at night and in the evenings on their computers , as well as among the self-employed who do additional work they do not declare .
Those affected by this are small and medium-sized businesses which , unlike competitors who operate illegally , obey the law .
Jobs cannot be safeguarded in this way . Nor can new ones be created .
What is to be done ?
Firstly , abuse of the rules governing work must be punished , with fines for those who engage in undeclared work and for those who employ others to do such work .
Those who hire workers who do not have work permits should be excluded from being awarded public contracts .
Moreover , they should expect to receive custodial sentences .
Secondly , thorough checks , including cross-border checks , by the relevant authorities are necessary .
Town clerks ' offices must cooperate with factory inspectorates , and tax offices with immigration authorities , preferably in task forces .
Thirdly , incentives to abuse the system must be reduced .
Taxes and social charges payable by companies must be significantly reduced , as must VAT on labour-intensive services .
Fourthly , it is particularly important that there should be more awareness-raising campaigns in order to convince all relevant target groups that undeclared work needs to be combated .
It is extremely damaging both socially and economically .
Acting illegally is anti-social .
I should like to thank Mrs Glase for her excellent report .
The Commission has opened the debate with its communication on undeclared work in the spring of 1998 .
We are pleased to say that it has stimulated debate both with the European institutions and within Member States .
The time has come to bring together the fruits of this debate .
Therefore I especially welcome Parliament 's initiative in taking up this issue now .
The Commission 's communication focused on the policy strategy to tackle this important problem .
It has highlighted the need for an integrated approach to combating undeclared work , involving both preventive measures and sanctions .
These deal with the two dimensions of undeclared work : it can be viewed as an issue of individuals taking advantage of the system and undermining solidarity in the process or as the outcome of greater flexibility in the labour market and slow adaptation of existing legislation .
I am pleased to see that Parliament has agreed with the Commission 's analysis .
Parliament also seems to share the view that the main action has to be taken at the level of Member States .
Indeed it is the mix of the situation in the labour market , the tax and social security mix , as well as the social acceptance , that determine the level of undeclared work .
For that reason , the action that can be taken at Community level can only be minimal and has to be clearly targeted in those fields where the Community can have an impact .
The Commission is also convinced that undeclared work should be dealt with within the framework of the Luxembourg process .
We believe that undeclared work should be actively taken into account in the national action plans for employment .
We are working with the Member States to ensure that this is so .
We welcome Parliament 's support in this .
However , the Commission can have an impact in developing a standard methodology to describe and record the extent of undeclared work and to assess its impact on the economy and on social solidarity .
This we have done with the Communication in 1998 and we will continue to do so .
Indeed the Commission is now carrying out a study on different measures used to combat undeclared work in selected Member States in order to identify good policy mixes .
Results of this study will be presented in a conference at the end of the year .
However , to have annual monitoring and reporting on this problem would be heavy procedurally while not adding much new .
We must not forget that undeclared work is a deeply rooted phenomenon .
Changes take time .
To keep this item on the agenda and to ensure that progress is reported we would suggest a triennial reporting exercise .
The Commission agrees with the analysis of Parliament that women , while not the majority of undeclared workers , often operate in situations of greater insecurity and exploitation .
Within its possibilities the Commission will continue to monitor the situation and report on it within the framework of existing reports on the principle of equal treatment .
That is very important to the need to maintain momentum in introducing and reinforcing equal opportunities for women and men .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Mr President , on a point of order . Questions to the Council are no longer being answered in the time stipulated .
Despite being warned on two occasions , the Council has not answered European Parliament questions .
Would you please ensure that the Council fulfils its obligations in this area as well ?
Thank you , Mr Rübig .
Your request and your comment will be dealt with appropriately .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Regarding the questions that will shortly be put to the Commission and the Council , you will be aware that the French Government , confronted by the fuel crisis that has gripped France along with the rest of Europe , took a number of measures yesterday which will drastically alter the conditions of competition and the basis of the fight against the greenhouse effect , and which will , therefore , have an immediate and serious impact on Europe .
Mrs Loyola de Palacio had an extremely interesting article published in the French press this morning on this European crisis .
Would it be possible for her and / or the Commissioner for Competition to speak during this part-sitting in order to tell us how the Commission intends to react to the fuel crisis , and how the Commission and the Council intend to prevent an outbreak of fiscal dumping in Europe and prepare Europe to deal with this crisis ?
Of course , Mr Lipietz , the point that you have raised is very topical and very urgent , but the agenda has already been fixed , and therefore , I think it will be quite difficult to satisfy your request , although the President will do everything possible to deal with it .
Mr President , the honourable Member 's request concerns a matter of importance .
The President has very clearly ruled out the possibility of a debate this morning .
I shall tell Mrs de Palacio and Mr Monti that Parliament would like to hear them and , together with the Presidency , we shall decide on a suitable time .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for making yourself available .
Sport
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Council statement on doping in sport and sport in society ;
the Commission statement on football player transfers ;
the report ( A5-0203 / 2000 ) by Mrs Zabell , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : Community support plan to combat doping in sport [ COM ( 1999 ) 643 - C5-0087 / 2000 - 2000 / 2056 ( COS ) ] ] ;
the report ( A5-0208 / 2000 ) by Mr Mennea , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the report from the Commission to the European Council : With a view to safeguarding current sports structures and maintaining the social function of sport within the Community framework - The Helsinki report on sport [ COM ( 1999 ) 644 - C5-0088 / 2000 - 2000 / 2055 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking you for devoting this morning to sport .
In eight days ' time , the Olympic Games will be opening in Sydney . Athletes will be gathered there from all over the planet .
The results of the various competitions are not yet known ; they are not predestined ; in sport , anything can happen .
The champions who are preparing to enter this field of dreams have their own schedules .
Many are familiar with the world of professional sport , but , as you well know , all of them have at least two things in common .
Firstly , their selection is the climax of several years of effort and of meticulous training , with volunteers , coaches and public and private resources all mobilised on their behalf . Secondly , and most importantly , they all began their sporting careers in an amateur club or at a school .
In order to promote sport , we must also - at the same time and as part of the same effort - promote local amateur clubs alongside top-level amateur and professional sport .
Sport at the highest level is the stuff of dreams ; it contributes to the development of mass sports and , through them , to social education .
Elite sport , be it amateur or professional , receives global media coverage today .
More and more men and women , whatever their age and their circumstances , are taking part in a sport .
Sport has permeated the whole of society .
So , nobody here will be surprised to see how this human activity can sometimes be perverted by acts of violence or racism , or engender greed .
Far be it for me to demonise the economic aspect of sport .
Sport needs resources , and the public purse cannot provide all the necessary funding .
It is not a matter of distinguishing between a pure form of sport which is untainted by money and a sponsored form of sport which is corrupt .
No , the real question is a different one and may be expressed as follows : will the sporting community have the means to preserve the ethics of sport by harnessing the funds that flow into sport and ensuring that money does not rule sport ?
Let us not beat about the bush .
This problem is not one that will arise in twenty years ' time ; it is already a problem today .
Sporting events have become so attractive that financial interests seek to use them as a source of profits , even if it means sacrificing the ethics of sport and treating sportspeople as marketable commodities .
Who has not witnessed the sale and purchase of sportsmen , some of whom are still very young ?
Who has not been shocked by the amounts that are paid for broadcasting rights or by the size of certain transfer fees ?
Who has not been alarmed at the sight of increasingly overcrowded sporting calendars ?
Who has not been concerned at the plans of certain private groups to create their own sports competitions , outside the jurisdiction of the national and international federations and on the basis of a single criterion , namely the size of the participating clubs ' budgets , as we have recently seen in association football and , subsequently , in basketball too ?
What kind of sport do we want for the twenty-first century ?
The reply to this all-embracing , fundamental question depends on our response to the present situation .
There are two options : having identified these excesses , we could consider that sport no longer depends on anything but the market or sportspeople on anything but their added value .
In that case , we must apply the rules of competition and compound the present follies with a dose of deregulation , accepting , in the name of freedom of movement , the sale and purchase of youngsters aged between 18 and 20 .
The other option is to decide , on the basis of the European sporting tradition that has been developed in modern times , with its humanist values and voluntary structures , and in the light of the present situation , with all its economic and social implications , that we should re-equip the sporting community with the legal and political instruments it requires to protect the entire range of sporting activities within the framework of their respective federations .
This second option , which is supported by the French Presidency , does not mean adhering to the status quo , but actually requires innovative proposals from the sporting community itself - and I am gratified to see that these have been forthcoming on the question of transfers - and from governments with a view to combating the excesses that are affecting the sporting world and to developing practices designed to protect the associations and , hence , the cohesion of each sport .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has already devoted a huge volume of work to this option , and we are starting to move forward within the Council too .
In June 1997 , the sports ministers met at the Stade de France in Paris , and this was followed by meetings in Germany , Finland and Portugal .
There have been the annex to the Treaty of Amsterdam , the conclusions of the Vienna Council and , last December , the Helsinki report on the subject of sport .
Then , at Feira in Portugal , on the occasion of the Council meeting in June 2000 , a clear call was made for the specific characteristics of sport to be taken into account in the application of Community policies .
It is the wish of the French Presidency that we should succeed in defining precisely what these specific characteristics are and what their recognition implies .
To be absolutely precise , it is a matter of recognising that sport is rooted in the everyday practice of millions of men , women and children , in the commitment of hundreds of thousands of volunteers ; that it is an irreplaceable instrument of informal education , of social inclusion , of access to citizenship ; that sport is , above all , a means by which the individual can grow and flourish and can encounter other people in a spirit of mutual respect .
Sport forms a whole .
We need cohesion throughout the Union .
I am delighted that this is emphasised in the report prepared by Mr Mennea and adopted by the Commission .
This approach is the basis on which my counterparts in the other fourteen Member States and I have been working , in close collaboration with Commissioner Viviane Reding .
After two meetings of the working parties established by the Portuguese Presidency , a meeting of the Troika , and a great many bilateral contacts with my counterparts from the other Member States , here are some of the objectives that seem to have attracted the broadest consensus within the Council .
The first question concerns the protection of under-age sportspeople .
We must be able to put an end to commercial transactions involving minors .
Specific measures should be taken to protect the health of young athletes , especially to prevent any recourse to performance-enhancing drugs , and to ensure that they complete their education and vocational training .
To that end , the subject has been placed on the agenda of the Council of Youth Ministers for its meeting on 9 November .
I am very hopeful that , having regard to the 1994 Directive on the protection of young people at work , we shall be able to offer the prospect of precise recommendations on this point .
Secondly , I also wish to see measures taken to maintain the development policies of sports clubs .
Sports federations and governments should be able , if they so wish , to take appropriate measures to protect the clubs that develop young talent .
It must be possible to insert provisions such as a clause requiring young players to sign their first professional contract with the club where they have received youth training , perhaps with compensation proportionate to the cost of their training to indemnify the latter club if such a player is transferred .
At the same time , the international sports authorities have a responsibility to take action to control club management in order to avoid excesses , especially in relation to transfers .
Thirdly , in the wider context , it seems to me that there is an urgent need to recognise the unique central role played by the federations .
I believe it is necessary to acknowledge the key role of the sports federations in organising sports competitions , in formulating the rules of their respective sports and in awarding titles .
This does not mean that I advocate vesting these rights in the federations without demanding anything from them in return .
That is why I envisage that the recognition of these exclusive rights should be accompanied by the imposition on sports federations of precise duties and responsibilities relating to their obligation to serve the public interest and to redistribute their commercial revenue equitably .
Identifying the specific features of sport is an enormously complex undertaking .
Significant progress in this direction is a matter of urgency .
I believe we are caught up in a race against the clock . France has decided to make this a priority of its presidency .
I have great faith in the contribution that will come from your Parliament .
I have taken note , by the way , of your call for the inclusion of an article in the Treaty and see it as a manifestation of your will to ensure that due consideration is given to these concerns .
Let me turn now to the fight against doping , which is an absolute priority issue .
I am also aware that the European Parliament shares this concern , as your reports and resolutions show .
You know that it is a long and arduous struggle , one which has to be waged relentlessly for the sake of public health and the sporting ethic .
Recent events show that we still have a long way to go .
Be that as it may , I refuse to join the defeatists who want us to throw in the towel on the grounds that drugs are endemic in sport today .
We need to enlist the support of the sporting community , but there is an equal need to enlist the support of governments and the European Union .
The World Anti-Doping Agency that has now been created owes its existence to the will of the European Union .
The International Olympic Committee has established the objectives of its fight against the use of drugs at the Olympic Games in Sydney .
Nevertheless , as you know , a debate is raging across the Member States of the European Union on the expediency of direct EU membership of the organs of the World Anti-Doping Agency and , hence , on whether the EU should help to fund the agency .
I wish to lay particular emphasis on this point , because it has emerged from our exchanges with the European Commission that the latter will not commit itself to the participation of the European Union as such unless it receives a strong and unanimous political signal in favour of participation .
I , for my part , believe that we have the legal basis for participation .
Doping is unquestionably a matter of public health .
One need only consider the increase in the consumption of performance-enhancing drugs by young amateur sportspeople .
It also has to do with the fight against trafficking and , thus , with police and customs cooperation .
Lastly , the struggle against doping also relates to the development of research .
As is proposed in the report prepared by Mrs Zabell and adopted by the parliamentary committee , the aim would be for the European Union to be able to speak positively , with one voice , in order to guarantee the effectiveness of the Agency .
While we await the resolution of the legal questions regarding the involvement of the European Union in the Agency , my Troika colleagues and I have established a liaison committee , which will be very useful .
There will also be a need to ensure that the Agency grows in stature so that it has the power to act in every country .
Public opinion , sportswomen , sportsmen and everyone who is interested in these Games expect these decisions to be taken .
The credibility of the anti-doping effort depends on it .
Ladies and gentlemen , European sport is at the crossroads .
I hope it will continue to be a field of dreams , just as I hope that it will keep giving young people the educational and integrative framework they need - in short , that it will remain a school of life for our children .
But the greed that it arouses and the threat that emanates from such greed must be taken seriously .
I am convinced that the clear positions you are preparing to adopt through these two reports will be a great asset in this debate .
I wish to thank you for that and to tell you how fervently I hope that we shall be able to continue this work together .
Mr President , Parliament has asked me to make a statement on the transfer system and on the whole panic which has gripped the world of sport and which the press has been echoing .
I have naturally taken note of Mrs Buffet 's statements .
Let me also convey to her my sincere thanks for the work that the French Presidency has been doing in the interests of sport and for the solidarity it has demonstrated with the Commission and with Parliament .
It is my fervent hope that these efforts by the French Presidency will be rewarded with a very favourable outcome for sport at the European level .
Mr President , I shall respond to the report on doping in sport and sport in society at the end of the debate , if I may .
For the moment I shall confine myself to a statement on the transfer issue .
The approach that the Commission has adopted with regard to sport is defined in its Helsinki report .
We want sport to have a social function .
This report invites the sporting community , the Member States and the European Union to pool their efforts in order to ensure that sport , in its new economic environment , will continue to act as an instrument of education and integration on the basis of its values of fair play , equal opportunities and the pursuit of merit .
It goes without saying that the provisions of Community law , especially those based on the principles of non-discrimination and free movement of persons , as well as the rules of competition , are applicable to sport .
It is equally self-evident that , as the declaration annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam emphasises , the European Community recognises the social impact of sport and the importance of dialogue with the sporting community .
This is the context , ladies and gentlemen , in which the Commission , under the direct responsibility of my colleague Mario Monti , has been examining several aspects of competition as they relate to sport .
The Commission recognises that the sporting community is free to determine the rules that will ensure the proper administration of their respective sports .
The Commission recognises the specific nature of sport in the sense that some degree of equality is needed in competition between players and clubs so as to guarantee the uncertainty of results , which is the very essence of sport , as the Minister has just emphasised .
The Commission is investigating only those aspects of sport with a Community dimension and an economic dimension .
Regarding the matter of current FIFA rules governing transfers , I must remind you that , back in 1998 , following a number of complaints , the Commission questioned the compatibility of the FIFA transfer rules with the rules of competition and sent FIFA a list of grievances .
The Commission believes that the FIFA rules on transfers unfairly obstruct freedom of movement .
This is especially true of the rules which lay down conditions of transfer on expiry of a player 's contract , even though the contract has been duly terminated in accordance with national employment legislation and with its own terms and the contractually agreed financial indemnity has been determined and paid .
Contrary to what some press articles have been suggesting , the Commission has no intention of simply abolishing the transfer system or of creating a situation in which players would be able to terminate their contracts on a sudden impulse .
The Commission , as the Guardian of the Treaties , wishes FIFA to apply a transfer system which complies with the principles of Community law as well as respecting the unique nature of sport .
The present system , however , satisfies neither of these criteria .
It obstructs competition between clubs as well as players ' freedom of movement , it has done nothing to prevent the over-commercialisation of sport or the widening of the gulf between the rich clubs and those with limited financial resources , nor has it prevented players - especially the youngest players - from becoming targets of financial speculation .
For many years , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has been waiting ' patiently ' for FIFA to present a formula that could replace the present system , to offer a basis on which we could work together in search of a universally satisfactory and equitable solution .
Mario Monti and I have established contacts with the footballing world .
We have made the point that , under national codes of employment legislation , some form of compensation is warranted when a player breaks his contract with one club in order to join another .
We have emphasised that , in order to avoid distorting championship competitions , we are naturally disposed to accept rules limiting transfers to particular fixed periods and , above all , we have stressed that efforts made to develop young talent must be encouraged , which means that we can accept a compensation mechanism designed to reflect the expense incurred by a club in the development of young players , provided that such a mechanism does not put young players in a position of undue dependence on their clubs .
For a number of years , and until a few days ago , we had received no reply .
The Commission certainly cannot wait indefinitely , which is why Mario Monti and I have been declaring very plainly over the past few months that FIFA must propose other solutions or run the risk of having its rules banned in the EU - something that no one would wish to happen .
Mario Monti and I are pleased to learn that our plea seems to have been heeded this time .
Last week FIFA admitted that its transfer rules do not conform to Community legislation , and it announced its intention of establishing a new system .
Since the details of that system have yet to be finalised , I cannot comment on them at the present time .
We have , however , received an initial outline of the proposals . This afternoon I shall be meeting with FIFA officials and a delegation from the national leagues .
They too will be making proposals . Mario Monti 's departments are ready to examine these , within the shortest possible time , with the aid of my departments and those of Anna Diamantopoulou .
Our doors are always open to any debate or any negotiations that will help us to arrive at a consensus .
Allow me to conclude by underlining the commitment of the Commission to the European model of sport and its values .
The European Parliament has affirmed on many occasions - for which I am deeply grateful to it - that it shares this commitment .
I believe you will reaffirm this by adopting the parliamentary report devoted to the Helsinki report .
The French Presidency , as I said at the start of my speech , has testified to this same attachment to sport and its values on behalf of the Council .
So , if I am not mistaken , we are all on the same wavelength .
The Commission is acting in the interests of sport to preserve the beautiful game , and I am convinced that , if we all pull our weight , a satisfactory solution will soon be in sight for the good of sport , for the good of football and for the good of Europe .
Mr President , doping is not a new problem . It did not even start this century , but comes from the last century .
In fact , the first death from doping took place in 1896 , when a cyclist took drugs .
The first measures against doping , however , began to be taken after the first Helsinki Olympic games in 1952 , but it was in the Tour de France of 1998 that the problem became too big and the serious fight against it began .
In fact , we have already heard this morning that it is a priority for the French Presidency , the Council and also for the Commission .
We have to assess why this problem exists and why doping has increased so much in recent years .
On the one hand , it is worth mentioning the over-commercialisation that is affecting sport , as well as the saturation of sporting calendars and greater demands on sportsmen and women , both physical and mental .
Before , the motto of sport was that of Pierre de Coubertin , ' the important thing is taking part ' .
Now , however , it seems that whoever comes first wins , whoever comes second loses , and the rest just take part .
On the other hand , we should not forget that , these days , an increasing number of tests are being done , many of them outside competitions , and this also means that , logically , more cases of doping are being discovered .
However , it is very important to distinguish between the two types of doping : on the one hand , there is intentional or planned doping , that is , a team plans which substances the sportsman or woman needs to take , and when , in order to improve his or her physical performance .
Logically , this is more common in sports with greater financial resources .
On the other hand , there is accidental doping , which often does not even improve the sportsman or woman ' s physical performance .
This tends to be more common in sports which have few resources , so that often public opinion does not even realise what has happened .
Obviously , we have to fight both types of doping , although each one should be approached in a very different manner .
Combating intentional or planned doping is much more difficult .
Police cooperation plays a very important role , because we should not forget that the trafficking of doping substances is worth EUR 1 billion per year .
It is also important to listen to sportsmen and women when drawing up sporting calendars or planning a competition or trial . Sometimes , we ask them to do more than is physically possible without turning to external help .
Overall , we need to fight doping globally .
It is not an isolated problem for one Member State and therefore the presence of the European Union in the World Anti-Doping Agency is absolutely essential .
Combating accidental doping is much easier .
It is mainly due to the lack of information among sportsmen and women , and the report therefore proposes that there should be an indicator on the boxes of pharmaceutical products , consisting of five Olympic rings and a traffic light .
Thus , when buying a drug , sportsmen and women will be able to clearly see the red traffic light indicating the risk of testing positive , or the green light which indicates that there is no risk , or the amber light indicating that there may be a risk and that they should contact their doctor or a specialist for advice .
This is very important , because we now have fifteen Member States with fifteen lists of prohibited substances , and in each country there can be a different brand name for the same drug .
For this purpose , we ask for the intervention of the European Medicines Evaluation Agency .
However , even though the types of doping are different , sportsmen and women receive the same treatment and from the moment that they have a positive result they are considered to be guilty , with no right to prove their innocence and without an assessment of whether the doping was intentional or not , as occurs with other things in life .
We also call on the European Commission to request that the Fifth Framework Programme carry out research into doping substances and their impact on the health of sportsmen and women , detection methods and the natural limits of hormones that can be produced by the human body .
With regard to laboratories , it is very important that they comply with ISO standards on uniform methods for collecting and analysing samples , and also that there should be protection and confidentiality , both in collection and in dealing with the case , in order to preserve sportsmen and women ' s right to honour and privacy .
Finally , I will mention penalties .
When a person other than the sportsman or woman has taken part , such as a club , an association , a federation , a doctor , a coach , etc . , that person should also be subject to a penalty , exactly equal to that given to the sportsman or woman , because we should not forget that the person with the shortest working life will always be the sportsman or woman .
Mr President , the European Union must act to ensure that sport is given its rightful place and due attention and that it is regulated by clear , precise rules .
The system of sport which the European Union must aspire to must make the right to sport for all citizens a practical reality and aim to preserve the social function and traditional values of sport , while taking into account its economic and legal development .
This is why the declaration on sport in the Treaty of Amsterdam annex is no longer sufficient to ensure that the predetermined objectives are met .
Sport needs a new definition : indeed , it should be considered as an activity that is an integral part of the education and training of young people , free time and the integration of socially excluded and disabled people .
In short , sport must be an essential factor in promoting the education and integration of all social classes .
Moreover , it must be able to adapt to the new business context , within which it must evolve without losing its autonomy .
Some changes are needed so that the European Union can help with the developments in the world of sport .
The central committee has stated several times that it can no longer guarantee the pyramid structure on the basis of which sporting organisations and the social function of sport are currently organised .
A legal basis is therefore essential since , without one , there is a danger that the objectives that have been reached so far will come to nothing .
Europe must be more forceful in the fight against doping , a phenomenon which , unfortunately , is growing very rapidly and is no longer confined to the world of sport : the spread of this scourge has led to an increase in highly lucrative illegal activities , in which many criminal organisations have been involved , and we need to recognise that entrusting the fight against doping solely to sporting organisations has been a complete failure .
Europe should therefore look into the possibility of promulgating Community criminal legislation which would be valid in all the Member States , and should consider setting up an independent , transparent , European anti-doping agency .
Moreover , all sports-related economic activities must be subject to the rules of the EC Treaty .
The monopolistic activity of sporting organisations has caused numerous problems and must therefore be subject to strict checks and possibly reduced .
We need to encourage sporting associations , provided that aims are established to support amateur sport and to show solidarity with less-advantaged people , particularly the disabled .
We need to try to improve the role played by sport and the role of the teaching of physical education in the curricula of schools .
Furthermore , the work and status of sportspersons should be properly appreciated and safeguarded by the Member States .
I feel that it is the European Union ' s duty to help reintegrate into the labour market athletes who have made no provision for their futures once their sporting activity comes to an end .
Europe must also call for sportspersons ' professional qualifications to be recognised at European level and for their vocational training to be promoted .
There must be a firm , determined fight against the trade in young sportspersons , calling for the entry of young people into professional sport and their membership to take place as late as possible .
Moreover , we need to ensure that the statutes of national and international sporting federations lay down mission statements and contain clear , precise rules .
We need to combat the violence which takes place at sporting events and ensure that our citizens are protected .
Furthermore , we need to eliminate the permanent sporting contract currently used in many sporting federations , as this violates the most basic principles of the Member States ' constitutions .
In conclusion , until a legal basis is established for ' sport ' , Europe will not be able to do much in this area and will therefore have to consider the possibility of taking on a certain amount of autonomy in the sector , not in order to take it away from other bodies , but so that it can make an essential contribution to safeguarding the values and functions of sport .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was first and foremost concerned that the treaty provisions put into concrete terms by the Bosman judgment should also be observed in future European Union policy .
We are therefore grateful to the committee responsible that it has incorporated the requests to this effect into its report .
We also unreservedly support the Commission 's position on this issue .
This is necessary because of competition law and freedom of movement for workers .
Mrs Reding has already made this point very well .
I therefore regret all the more that it has become evident over the last few days that many people in positions of authority in football and other sporting associations are unable to learn lessons and enter into a dialogue .
Judging by the statements made over the last few days , you cannot help feeling that the assumption that a lot of footballers ' talents lie more in their legs than between their ears is quite justified .
So , when we now hear calls for Heads of Government to get involved and turn European law on its head , as it were , then I feel bound to say that this demonstrates that people clearly have no idea what the legal position is .
This has got nothing to do with Heads of State and Government at all .
It is the European Commission that is responsible for ensuring that the Treaties are respected . And the Commission is exercising precisely that remit .
I would like to say , once again , that I unreservedly support the position being taken by the Commission on this issue .
Mr President , ten days before the start of the Olympic Games , the spectre of doping is hovering over Sidney .
The International Olympic Committee cannot be serious with its talk of ' clean ' Olympic Games when we all know that 1,000 syringes of erythropoietin were stolen from a Sidney hospital a month ago and when one legend of the Olympic spirit after another now openly maintains that there are anti-doping tests for every banned substance only the International Olympic Committee prefers to bow to pressure from big business than to apply them .
Minister Buffet , who has addressed us so eloquently here today , stated in Le Monde on 4 August that the basic ingredient missing in the fight against doping was strong political will .
But it would appear to be difficult to exercise this will when there is the pressure of commercialisation and the pressure , encapsulated in the thoughtless and superficial motto of the Olympic Games , to be ' faster , higher , stronger ' .
It is even more difficult to exercise this political will when the supply of banned substances is much more in demand , with a turnover , as we have heard , of a billion euros , although this turnover is much higher - much , much higher - if we include the mild doping which is spreading through gyms , beauty centres and God knows where else .
We need to bring our political clout to bear as quickly as possible , we need to harmonise lists of dangerous substances , methods of testing for the new substances which industry is constantly producing , we need to apply sanctions , we need to find out who is responsible and apply sanctions .
Of course , the European Union needs to take a more active role in the World Anti-Doping Agency , precisely as the President of the Council described , and I agree with him .
I should like to finish by saying that this World Anti-Doping Agency is quite simply an observer in Sidney today .
And , as long as we are just observers , nothing will be done in the fight against doping .
Mr President , sport is a popular activity .
We have just had Euro 2000 , the Olympic Games are about to start , and , what is more , there are an increasing number of people who enjoy sports as a leisure activity .
It is healthy and brings people together from all walks of life , irrespective of age or race .
This is , of course , extremely important in a society which increasingly focuses on the individual .
At the same time , as has already been pointed out , there is also a downside to sport , namely violence around the pitches , the use of doping , an increase in the use of performance-enhancing substances - also increasingly so in amateur sport - and the huge pressure on sportsmen and women due to the major economic interests involved .
This is why we welcome with open arms the fact that the European Commission has taken it upon itself to highlight the social aspect of sport and to examine how the economic dimension of sport can be reconciled with the educational and other roles that sport fulfils . The PPE-DE is entirely behind this objective and has tabled amendments to give this initiative a boost .
It has , more specifically , submitted proposals to step up the support given to sports organisations , in order to invest in people , in team spirit and to improve the legal framework underpinning sport , as all we have at the moment is the declaration to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
With regard to a few specific problems which sport is having to contend with , I would like to say the following on the issue of transfers . The Bosman ruling has mainly hit the smaller clubs , as the Commissioner has already pointed out , especially in the smaller countries , such as the Netherlands where I am from .
These clubs invariably need to make major investments in training and education without sufficient backing or compensation .
We therefore hope that the Commission , in tandem with the sports organisations , will produce proposals which will make amends in the short term .
The sports federations , such as UEFA and FIFA , have also submitted proposals to this effect .
Doping is a huge , international problem , as already pointed out by the rapporteur , who has drafted an excellent report , and it is therefore vital for there to be international cooperation in this respect .
We will need to agree internationally on what we take doping to mean and will need to refer to the World Anti-Doping Agency .
It would be useful if pharmaceutical products could be labelled with a ' doping-safe ' logo and a warning , and we would also welcome a more pro-active preventive policy .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , the Group of the Party of European Socialists asked the Commission to make a statement on the topical subject of football transfers and for it to be added to this joint debate .
I welcome the statement made by the Commissioner , which has our support .
I recommend that , in future , she should come to Parliament before so many leaks occur from the Commission administration , which forced the Commissioner to face the press with great courage and determination , not afraid to tell them the truth .
It would be better if they came to Parliament first and had our support .
The subject of transfers is perhaps an example that sums up the current situation of sport .
There are two reports , the Zabell report and the Mennea report , drawn up by Olympic champions .
On the eve of the Sydney Olympics , I would like to recall that the first , and perhaps the best , contribution to peace made by Europe , that is , by ancient Greece , was precisely the Olympic Games .
They talk of sport as a citizen ' s right , with a social and cultural function .
There is a component of transfer fees that is justified in terms of the contribution that is made to training and preparing sportsmen .
This makes sense and needs to be regulated , and we need to support young people and small clubs so that they can promote themselves .
Another dimension is the big business involved , which in many countries is becoming the second largest sector in the economy .
We are dealing with uncontrolled , unsustainable long-term speculation .
A major club in my native city made the biggest transfer in football history - EUR 70 million .
The person involved has said that it is absurd , and the chairman of the club has said that it is in a very grave economic situation .
If we were applying the rules of economics , we would have to act differently .
Therefore , I think that the Commission should act .
It has managed to make FIFA begin to see sense .
My group and I would like to show our support for the Commission and we maintain that action has to continue that will really express and guarantee this right of Europeans .
Finally , I would like to point out that there has been talk of the collapse of the world of football .
In the United States in the 1940s , under anti-trust legislation , the same measures were applied in Hollywood as those that the Commission is proposing .
But Hollywood did not go under . Quite the opposite .
We now have a considerable economic problem in coping with the clout of the American film industry .
Therefore , keep going , Commissioner .
I welcome the fact that the Zabell report tries to address the problem of intentional doping and proceeds from the presumption of innocence based on the charter of human rights .
Unfortunately , UK athletes - Linford Christie , Dougie Walker and Gary Cadogan - were not presumed to be innocent by the International Athletics Association .
Despite evidence , based on research by Aberdeen University , that nandrolene could be produced by a combination of dietary supplements and vigorous training , Mark Richardson is still waiting , eight days before the Olympics , in the Olympic village not knowing whether he is going to compete or not .
Linford Christie has campaigned throughout his career against doping in sport .
He would not do anything now to jeopardise that .
These cases demonstrate the need for the World Anti-Doping Agency to harmonise disciplinary procedure that would safeguard the rights of athletes but , at the same time , swiftly punish those who knowingly take drugs and are guilty of taking drugs .
Mr President , I would first like to support what Mr Mennea has said , and then to ask this question : do we see the social significance of sport as the old ' bread and circuses ' or ' bread and sport ' , or do we see it as a means of improving health and building moral fibre ?
It has never been clear what social significance we should attribute to it .
By and large , I have to say that the top-level sport we are generally talking about here is not necessarily a healthy pursuit , any more than the extreme sports that I go in for , or used to do .
Only the gods on Mount Olympus can say whether top-level sport is healthy or not - we certainly cannot .
Let me turn to the facts now .
Because of globalisation , our consumer society has become ever more hungry for stars , sensations and records .
So , officials and businessmen have turned ' bread and sport ' into a branch of show business that is now one of the biggest in the world , and the process of commercialisation , is of course , continuing .
And the systematic doping that this commercialisation encourages is simply intensifying this process.Those are the facts of the matter .
There is no way we can change those facts unless we create greater transparency , and unless we set up an independent anti-doping agency which is accessible to everyone and which everyone understands .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is one point that I should like to emphasise , a point which is perhaps common to both reports . It revolves around the legitimacy of the specific status of sport , which I should like us to stress today .
The specific status of sport derives primarily from the sports system , from the social pyramid which is reflected in the structure of small clubs in our towns and rural areas as well as in major sporting events .
This pyramid must be respected in a number of ways . It must be respected by recognising the sole right of federations to govern their respective sports and by promoting the role that the sports federations can and do play in bonding communities and society at large .
In so doing , we must , of course , ensure that money is distributed fairly throughout the entire pyramid formed by the clubs and their federations and that what we might call the sporting ethic is applied to all sporting events .
Let us not forget that it is possible to confuse those who stage events with those who provide the spectacle .
I believe that an effort has to be made there in the way sport is structured , a point that was raised in Mr Mennea 's report , so that there can be no possible confusion between those who stage the event and those who provide us with the information , the spectacle , the entertainment , the pleasure and the dreams .
There is the system , and then there is the individual too .
And , of course , there is the issue of doping - and I thank Mrs Zabell here for her magnificent report ; all of these are relevant to the health aspect of sport .
There is the training of sportspeople .
But what happens to the individual outside the arena ?
We have been reminded that sportsmen and sportswomen are not commodities , that they are not goods and chattels .
They must be able to move freely in Europe , but they are not products . They are individuals .
So what happens when the competition is over ?
As far as the system and its focal point , the sportsperson , are concerned , what the reports are calling for is the rationalisation of the specific nature of sport in our European Union .
Considerations of time - the calendar of events and the course of sportspeople 's lives - have been highlighted in both reports , and I thank the two rapporteurs for emphasising the need to live before , during and after sport and throughout the whole year .
So you will understand why we in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport are asking for sport to be enshrined in Article 151 of the Treaty in such a way that its specific character is legitimised and that we no longer have to dip into the provisions on health , on education and on employment in order to assemble a case for the preservation of this specific character of sporting activity .
Mr President , doping is symptomatic of the inverted values of our societies , in which the end has come to justify the means .
It is primarily a form of cheating , with individuals cheating themselves as well as cheating others .
That is why there is a need to establish a vast education programme to reinstate the true values of sport and to make it , once again , a school of life and an example for our youngest generations .
At every level , including the very highest , sport should be an opportunity to teach the virtues of endeavour , courage , team spirit and respect for others .
The Commission was right to remind us that one of the first causes of the increased prevalence of doping lies in the commercial implications of modern sport .
That is why our reflections should focus more sharply on the possibility of imposing stiffer penalties on the various economic operators who encourage doping or profit from it .
Finally , the reason why sport has assumed an important and indeed a central place in our contemporary societies is perhaps because it has become the only means open to a nation to demonstrate its greatness .
Perhaps the nations ought to rediscover other ways of projecting their greatness and their pride on the world stage , and I cannot help thinking at this moment of national currencies , which are an essential attribute of a country 's sovereignty and grandeur .
Today , as the euro , the currency of the Euro-optimists , plummets , it is an urgent necessity that all nations should be able to keep their own currency , just as they keep their national sports teams , of which they are so proud , with no need of artificial stimulants .
Mr President , on the eve of the Sydney Games , what remains of the Olympic ideal and the exalted principles of Pierre de Coubertin ?
Not much , apparently , since some athletes - a minority , I am glad to say - are refusing to stay in the Olympic village , considering it to be below their station .
Others , especially the sprinters , are proclaiming loud and long that they are only running to promote their particular brand of footwear .
While it is worrying that top athletes are more motivated by the lure of financial gain than by the sporting ethic , mass sport , by contrast , is a guarantor of good physical and mental health and constitutes a veritable school of life , developing team spirit , tolerance and solidarity and presenting young people with exemplary role models .
An instrument of education and of social integration and cohesion , sport helps to combat racism , exclusion and violence , but sport , sadly , is being increasingly contaminated by doping , all in the name of business .
Professional sport has undoubtedly become a business in its own right , subject to the dictates of profitability .
Some football clubs are already listed on the stock market .
But as more and more money is invested in sport , the financial rewards gradually come to take precedence over the game itself .
This creates pressure to win by fair means or foul and particularly by means of doping , which is becoming ever harder to detect .
How can the sporting ethic be restored ?
First of all , the fight against doping must be globalised .
Doping seriously damages athletes ' health as well as the essential virtues of sport , namely honesty , fair play , respect for one 's opponent , friendship , etc .
In that respect , the creation of a World Anti-Doping Agency by the International Olympic Committee in 1999 has to be welcomed .
Let us hope that it remains independent and that it will become operational very soon .
It is our job to give it the tools it needs to accomplish its mission .
Doping is not only a European problem ; it is indubitably a problem of global dimensions .
As far as regulation is concerned , it is not up to Europe to make the rules .
Europe must show its trust in the voluntary bodies by accepting the proposals from the federations and from other Olympic committees .
The Bosman decision , for example , which was taken in the name of high principles , has destabilised professional clubs and has exacerbated the impact of money on European football .
The latest transfer record , set when Figo moved to Real Madrid , is a case in point .
Clubs in certain countries now build their teams almost exclusively with foreign players .
This is particularly true of Barcelona , where they are able to field a team without a single Spanish player , which effectively makes it impossible for young nationals to play at the highest level in their country .
The plundering of young players from the clubs that have developed their skills is another consequence .
Transfer targets are becoming younger and younger : a player becomes transferable at the age of 15 .
Europe is now trying to legislate on the rules governing transfers , as you , Commissioner , have told us .
If the scheme under consideration is implemented , which I hope it will not be , the result will be total deregulation of the system , which will benefit the richest clubs still further and despoil the clubs that develop young talent , condemning them to eventual closure .
The cure is worse than the disease .
It is therefore essential that we do our utmost to develop mass sport , village clubs , so that everyone can take part in sport and so that every sportsperson who enjoys competing can progress and strive for a place among the elite in healthy and fair competition .
This is an important debate , and I want to endorse the ideas coming out of the two reports , particularly those of Mrs Zabell on doping and also Mrs Lynne 's remarks about the presumption of innocence , because that is important .
We all recognise nowadays that sport is big business .
This is particularly clear in football with its enormous transfer fees , often ridiculously high salary levels , and stock market deals , but it is not just football .
Other sports have a lot of money sloshing around .
Formula 1 is a good example .
In , the UK they even had a million pounds to spare for the Labour Party .
Sport has a lot of money and it cannot expect to be exempt from free market rules .
I do , however , disagree with the reports when they call for a Treaty clause on sport .
Jacques Santer was absolutely right when he said Europe must do less but do it better .
So let us try to operate within our means .
Let us try to operate within the powers that we already have .
What is needed regarding transfer fees is a healthy dose of pragmatism and common sense .
I endorse the Commissioner 's remarks this morning .
I have absolute confidence in her abilities and attitude and wish her well in her forthcoming discussions .
I would , however , say that there is no rush .
FIFA has certainly been very slow to act and should be criticised for that , but the Commissioner must also be prepared to listen to the small clubs , the players ' organisations , and spectators .
Let us work for a good solution that we can defend rather than working for a solution this afternoon , or this week , or this month .
It is something that needs to be sorted out so that the people of Europe will understand .
Europe needs friends , not enemies .
Let us not add football spectators to those people who do not understand what Europe is about .
Come up with a good solution and you will have the backing of this House and the backing of football supporters across Europe .
Mr President , I also thank Mr Mennea and Mrs Zabell for highlighting the crucial role that sport is now playing in all of our lives , I have to start by saying that sport 's importance as an industry is well known , but for sport to become just another industry would be a mistake and a great loss to our society .
We are all living longer , and sport is occupying a greater part of our time .
It is there not just to revitalise our bodies but also our minds and our souls , and we have to recognise the importance of that fact in European legislation .
I therefore support the call for a legal basis that will put our powers on a par with those of the very important international sports organisations .
Europeans share a love of watching and participating in football , from Newcastle through Dortmund to Barcelona , but it is important that local people should be inspired to join their clubs .
I would therefore say that the most enduring teams should be built up from scratch and not simply bought up .
The system needs well-run machinery consisting of clubs of all shapes and sizes and degrees of professionalism and we need to take the opportunity to reform it .
I support , therefore , Commission statements and the Commissioner 's action on this matter .
Sport has a huge potential .
It has shown that it can build understanding and fight racism .
Let us do more work in sport to bring our communities together .
It has shown that it has the power to encourage disabled athletes to succeed .
Let us show that we share their pride and build joint events for them and able-bodied people .
Violence on the field has been the bad side of sport .
Let us work to ensure that sport is violence-free .
Doping , finally , is a symptom of the over-commercialisation of sport .
As our teams head off to Sydney they are under more pressure than ever .
We have to set up facilities that fight doping on an international basis because , as we have seen , one false accusation can ruin a career or cast a shadow over an exemplary career , such as that of Linford Christie .
Therefore , we support these reports and hope that they will provide the foundation for us to move forward into the next phase of European sport , a community spirit to build the industry and the potential of sport in Europe .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Mennea , for this extremely valuable report .
Sport fulfils a major social role in our society ; that much is clear .
Professional sport fulfils this role too and has great social significance .
I have tabled an amendment to Mr Mennea ' s report , naturally with his consent , proposing a possible alternative to the transfer system .
I happen to believe that the performance on the pitch which we are discussing , in other words the job performance , is no longer proportionate to current remuneration levels .
For this reason , I believe it is merely a commercial activity which should be distributed evenly .
I would like to know whether you have a response to this .
Secondly , on behalf of a large number of fellow MEPs , I have requested the final decision with regard to reforming the transfer system to be postponed .
You commented on it yourself a moment ago . The reason being that UEFA , together with a large number of national football federations , is organising a meeting during the next part-session in October and I would ask you to attend , together with Mr Monti .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , no sportsman or woman takes drugs unless he or she has a financial interest in doing so .
There is no doubt that doping is changing sport and that sport will be changed due to doping , which means it will become absolutely ludicrous if we do nothing to prevent it .
The combination of enormous and disproportionate financial , media and sponsoring interests surrounding sportsmen and women puts so much pressure on them , and the intensity of sport is so great , that in order to maintain their level of competitiveness and the pace imposed on them by sporting calendars , sportsmen and women tend to use prohibited substances .
Without limiting the length of competitions and without having obligatory rest time , it will be very difficult to eradicate doping .
However , we should not forget that sportsmen and women are also human beings who can fall ill or injure themselves , and will therefore need drugs and additional help to combat the stress under which they place their bodies , which is why false positive tests are the order of the day and will brand the sportsman or woman concerned forever .
What we need to do is to harmonise criteria , have a single list of prohibited substances , homogenise tests , have warnings on drugs and do more research .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need to reinvent sport , because as it is at the moment there is a battle for glory , but also for money and sponsorship .
In order for it not to disappear , we need to go back to the traditional values of sport , in which people compete for one reward only - a medal .
NGL ) . ( EL ) Mr President , we live in an era in which Europe is moving towards federalisation .
We might say that sport has got there first , that sport built structures before we were able to do so at political , economic or other levels .
Why ?
Because sport had its roots in ancient Greek Olympia , sport had prophets such as de Coubertin , and sport allowed peoples to meet in peace .
Europe was at war but , at the same time , it had common sporting structures and common sporting rules .
Today the tables have turned : we are preparing to review the Treaty , we are increasing the number of common rules and common principles and our works and structures , while sport is falling apart .
Why ?
Because big business calls the shots , because major financiers are involved , because the mass media are backed by strong centres of power and because , in my view , intervention by the European Union is inadequate and misguided .
By intervening in sporting issues solely from the point of view of competition , the European Union has , in essence , strengthened this trend and this attitude .
I think we are at a turning point .
Thank goodness we have President Buffet and the French Presidency which , I think , has taken up and taken a leading role in the matter of unifying and developing and strengthening our sporting structures .
I think that Mrs Reding also has a positive part to play on behalf of the Commission in changing the way in which the Commission intervenes .
In this sense , I think that we can avert what is happening in the basketball federation today and what we can see will happen in all the other sports tomorrow , and maintain the unity of sport and its contact with society .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their work , which I fully support .
I think we all agree on the role and importance of sport which , at both competitive and amateur level , is an excellent tool for the education and social integration of both players and spectators .
Of course , sport is also an extremely important economic phenomenon and , as such , it must follow and comply with certain market rules , as indicated in the famous Bosman judgment .
However , as has already been pointed out this morning , sport must preserve its unique features , which are primarily of a social and cultural nature .
Precisely to avoid sport being reduced to nothing more than a business , we must call , loud and clear , upon the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference at Nice to expressly insert a significant reference to the institutional recognition of sport into Article 151 of the Treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have three closely connected items on our agenda today .
But the problem is that media interest will focus not so much on the Mennea and Zabell reports as on the Commissioner 's announcement .
I think that is a pity .
We are now more worried about the apple of Germany 's eye , football , than about what is really at stake today .
I have no hesitation in supporting the two Commissioners whose task it is to implement the Bosman judgment .
If FIFA had done its job , the Commission would not have needed to get involved in this .
I hope that FIFA recognises that and will now finally come up with something that the Commission can include in its proposals , as long as they do not run counter to the Bosman judgment .
So I think that everyone has a job to do here .
As regards the reports , I would like to say that , in view of the big business sport has become , the social and educational importance of popular sport needs to be highlighted .
There is a danger that sport as a whole will sooner or later be badly hit by rules on competition .
We would like to prevent that , which is why the Mennea report quite rightly calls for a reference to sport in Article 151 of the Treaty as an aspect of culture .
I , myself , called for this in my report back in 1996 .
That resulted in a declaration at Amsterdam , which was by no means enough .
That is why I am supporting the fact that this is finally being introduced now .
That report also called for the Commission to declare a European Year of Sport .
A European Year of Sport would be an important stimulus , and I hope that the new Commissioner will now take this up .
I am delighted that Mrs Zabell has covered some broader ground in her report on doping and that she has also stressed the abuse of young sportsmen and women , and has given an impetus to jointly tackling doping .
I would like to congratulate the Commission on having joined this Anti-Doping Agency now , so that it can genuinely give an impetus to a harmonised approach towards combating doping on behalf of the Community of Fifteen .
I wish it every luck .
Mr President , Commissioner , sport is , of course , being discussed by a wide range of people and social groups right now , as the Olympic Games begin in Sydney .
The reports we have before us also provide a basis for debate .
The question that inevitably comes to mind is this : what has happened to the idealistic image of sport which is still being portrayed ?
It is all too easy to be complacent and attribute a very important social and unifying role to sport , where fair play is held up as a model for our interaction with each other , be it at work , in politics or whatever .
However , both reports show very clearly that sport has become a powerful and extremely tough economic force , and sportsmen and women are its tools .
They are programmed to achieve peak performances on particular days and during particular weeks , with ever shorter gaps in between , and they have to function like machines .
In order to overcome human weaknesses , which cannot always be calculated , and to achieve perfect functioning , people resort to doping substances , and it is now becoming harder and harder to detect their use .
In this way , young sportsmen and women cause damage to themselves , to their health , to their personal development and , last but not least , to sport as an ideal .
Top sportsmen and women are a role model for thousands of young people and thus have a very strong impact on popular sport , which , as I see it , is the level of sport that most needs to be encouraged .
A sense of fair play and social interaction are still easy to find at this level . But bad examples such as violent incidents , doping scandals , million-dollar contracts and bankruptcies are also destructive at this level .
We need to create legal bases to stem these negative trends .
I welcome the fact that the WADA is now active , and that it is there to combat the worldwide problem of doping .
Measures are needed against violence and racism in sport , in order to guarantee that sportsmen and women and sports fans are protected against rampaging hordes of hooligans and racists .
There is also scope for top sportsmen and women to do more on their part and to make it clearer than they have until now that they want nothing to do with ' fans ' like these .
It should be our job to give sport a new role in a changed society , with new and modern technical and medical facilities , and in this way to preserve its values .
I believe that a European Year of Sport could stimulate this debate and make a substantial contribution here .
Mr President , after congratulating our colleagues Mrs Zabell and Mr Mennea on their reports and the suggestions they contain , of which I very largely approve , I shall make do with two observations .
Firstly , I should like to stress the need for Community participation in the World Anti-Doping Agency , which would enable the European Union to make a vigorous and coherent contribution to the struggle against doping .
Secondly , as I did yesterday , I plead again today for the inclusion in the Treaty of a legal basis relating specifically to sport .
I am thinking here of a compatibility clause of the sort that exists in the cultural and environmental domains , a clause that would make it possible to take due account - and I stress the word ' due ' - of the specific nature of sport in the formulation of the general policy or specific policies of the Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , the reason why the Commission submitted its proposal is to stop players being treated like a commodity , which can be bought by clubs because they are good players and , more to the point , because they can be sold on to other clubs for a great deal more money . I welcome this proposal with open arms .
Needless to say , this will cause problems , certainly in the short term , for smaller clubs in smaller footballing nations , such as the Netherlands .
But holding on to the current system would not solve the problem either .
A more structural solution would be if the media millions were better distributed .
I therefore hope with all my heart that the large clubs will realise that ultimately , without the small clubs , their future will be bleak too .
I would like to say the following on the transfer system . I back the Commission proposal but I do hope that it will make provision for recovering training expenses for players between the ages of 18 and 24 , as , for example , is being proposed at the moment by FIFA , the international football association , and FIFPRO , the organisation for players .
I very much hope that UEFA , the European football union , will go along with this request and will stop being the last , self-appointed defender of a system which has created such absurd situations in the first place .
Mr President , sport , like culture , education and health , is gradually being hijacked by commercialisation and the so-called law of the market .
Three million people dancing attendance at major sporting events and huge profits for business have eclipsed the athletic ideal .
Fitness training and sport as a daily exercise and popular sport are in dire straits .
As long as the winners see ' sport plc ' thriving , doping will increase , transfer fees will increase - another form of human trafficking in a modern capitalist society - and the problem of violence at football stadiums and various other signs of degeneration will increase .
Despite acknowledging that the main reason for the increase in doping is excessive commercialisation , the Commission is doing nothing to combat it .
How could it , when the entire structure of the European Union is built on the principle of ' there is nothing which cannot be bought or sold ' ?
It confines itself to half measures . Studies , codes of conduct with passing references to controls .
If they intended , and really wanted , to combat doping , they would have already done so .
But it is not in the interests of the International Olympic Committee , the international federations , the sponsors who invest in sport or the pharmaceutical industry .
The two reports do contain positive elements , but they go so far , in the Zabell report , as to state that the pharmaceutical industry cares about the health of athletes and , in the Mennea report , as to suggest that Member States adopt practical measures in their legislation to encourage private investment in sport .
Unless we crack down on commercialisation , unless we erect barriers to speculation by big business , unless we introduce basic and efficient controls , nothing will change in sport .
We do not expect the European Union to take any such action , so we are struggling to develop a popular movement which will fight for modern sport to rediscover the principle of ' a healthy mind in a healthy body ' .
Mr President , the over-commercialisation of sport has clearly led to the exploitation of many young athletes .
Proven cases of doping in sporting competitions have diminished the reputation of many sports in the eyes of the public .
At last , the International Olympic Committee has faced up to its obligations to combat the widespread use of drugs in sport .
Up to 2500 drug tests will be carried out during the Sydney games .
I welcome the IOC 's announcement that heavy penalties will be imposed on sportsmen and women caught using drugs in Sydney this month and in the future .
The way to stop the use of drugs in sport should be coordinated on a worldwide basis .
The Union must continue to work through the World Anti-Doping Agency to ensure that uniform and structured guidelines are implemented for all sporting activities .
In conclusion , we should recall that the Treaty of Amsterdam emphasises the social significance of sport , but the European Union has no powers under the Treaty to take action on sport .
That is an issue that should be addressed in the ongoing discussions on the reform of Union policies and initiatives .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this debate and the reports are both a step in the right direction .
Our 700 000 sports clubs are pillars of Europe 's civil society .
The Council Presidency has said that sport is education for life .
Sport is a part of youth work , a part of education policy , a part of leisure activity , a part of health policy , a part of international understanding , a part of the information industry , and a part of economic affairs and of competition .
Let me stress that I am saying a part .
To reduce sport to an economic and competitive level is to deny its wider social significance .
It has to be said that , up to now , Community law has been applied to sport in a very indiscriminate way , because it primarily treats sport as an economic activity .
This means that insufficient account has been taken of the special hallmarks of sport and its 700 000 clubs , and of voluntary work done in areas like youth work and training for children and young people .
Unless we can work successfully with children and young people , and unless Europe has an effective system of sports clubs , we cannot make our aspirations for popular sport a reality .
Doris Pack has already referred several times to the consequent need to root sport in the EU Treaties and have it influence the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The importance of sport was also mentioned in the conclusions of the Feira Summit .
It is therefore both a logical and desirable consequence of all this that sport should be given a legal basis in the Treaty .
We do not want to interfere in the affairs of Member States .
Sport comes under the principle of subsidiarity .
We simply want the overall social importance of sport to be recognised by the Commission and in European law , perhaps giving it its own budget heading so that it does not just have to be promoted through pilot projects .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone acknowledges that sport is a means of personal development and a special opportunity to meet other people .
But does everyone see and recognise the different purposes of participation in sport ?
For some , it may be a question of keeping fit .
For others , it may be part of their personal education process , while for others it is the presentation of a spectacle or a quest for victory at all costs .
We all know that sport is a tremendous instrument of national cohesion and of social integration .
However , we are also aware that sport can sometimes be accompanied by horrific acts of violence , abominable racist outbursts and unacceptable strident nationalism .
And for all of these reasons , we cannot accept the idea that sport should be considered in its economic dimension alone .
Voluntary organisations and individual volunteers are every bit a part of the sporting world , and it is surely thanks to them that sport is alive in our countries and that mass sport will be able to survive in future .
Not every human act can be priced with a pocket calculator .
The effect of that approach on human relations is too dangerous for us to remain silent .
Where there is no money to be won and no obligation to show a profit , there may quite simply be the desire to share these special opportunities , and sport undoubtedly has its place - indeed its foremost place - in such encounters .
This quest for human bonds in an increasingly commercial society contains the seeds of resistance to the commercialisation of the world and of human relations .
We cannot accept this excessive striving for profits to the detriment of human development .
The protection of young sportspeople is a priority of the French Presidency .
It is our priority , and we must demand the prohibition of commercial transactions relating to these young people .
We must also , of course , provide for the introduction of sport into the Treaty - if not in the short term , then at least in the medium term .
It is certainly a challenge , but we must accept it for the sake of coming generations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , both rapporteurs speak from experience , as is evident from their first-rate reports .
As far as Mr Mennea ' s report is concerned , I have attempted to highlight three points in the amendments which I tabled , and which have fortunately been adopted in the final motion for a resolution .
One is the importance of sport as a mental activity in order to learn a number of social skills .
Secondly , sport helps us appreciate activities in forma pauperis which involve minority groups that deserve more support , also at European level .
My third point serves as a warning against the yawning gap which can arise between top sport and smaller sports associations on the one hand and professional and amateur sport on the other .
In both cases , one very much relies on the other .
As to the question of whether sport should be dealt with at European level , I certainly believe it should .
Therefore , this report does not mark the end of the game , quite the reverse .
The role and impact sport has in society have become so enormous , and the entire sports scene is undergoing such change , that as far as the social debate is concerned , we are only just in the first heats , if at all .
The European Parliament needs to ensure that it is not left on the sidelines in this debate , but plays an active part so that we can help decide the shape of the game .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , action has to be taken in three directions .
First and foremost , we must wage a relentless fight against doping .
The financial and political commitment of all the countries of the European Union to the World Anti-Doping Agency is imperative , but it is not enough .
The most important thing is that governments should arm themselves with proper structures to combat doping .
France has marked out the path , and I should be interested to know how the President of the Council sees the interaction between the Agency and national initiatives .
We must also combat the excesses of the transfer system , especially the trade in young professional sportsmen .
Finally , we must strengthen the real driving forces of sport , namely the federations and sport at school .
I support the efforts to secure recognition of the key role of sports federations and to protect them from the depredations of financial and media giants .
Young people must be the main target in the rehabilitation of sport .
I support the call made by Mr Mennea in his report for sport to be accorded a higher status in the school curriculum as well as his plea that the specific nature of sport be enshrined in the Treaties , otherwise we shall tend to see sport as little more than another domain of free economic competition .
Is humanity regressing towards the decadence of ancient Rome ?
Is competitive sport once again becoming a gladiatorial conflict , waged now by robotic humans armed with the latest bio- and cybertechnology and funded by politico-financial interests ?
The time has come for politicians and sporting authorities to exercise their responsibility .
Mr President , Commissioner , Madam Minister , I am speaking on the Zabell and Mennea reports today in my dual role as a Member of the European Parliament and as president of a professional basketball club which takes part in the major European competitions .
I wish , first of all , to express my thanks and congratulations to the two rapporteurs for their excellent work , and I should also like to highlight the action of our colleague Doris Pack , who paved the way for the negotiation of the protocol on sport which is annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Doping is a scourge from which sport has to protect itself .
It undermines both fair play and genuine competition , and endangers the sportspeople who indulge in it .
I am personally shocked by the ease with which young sportsmen and women can supply themselves with performance-enhancing drugs , without being checked at all , through the Internet or in certain countries of the European Union .
Mrs Buffet has been tackling this issue in France , and I congratulate her for it .
Nevertheless , this evil can only be rooted out if it is combated at European and global levels , and I encourage the Union to work with the World Agency to that end .
The European Union must also rise to the challenge of the modernisation of sport .
The European Commission is questioning the system of transfers between clubs , believing it to be contrary to players ' freedom of movement .
But the Commission is totally ignoring the distortion of competition between Member States , the social and fiscal disparity among professional sportsmen , which encourages the best of them to migrate to certain countries .
We in France should know , because out of our pool of 22 players for Euro 2000 , no fewer than 20 have gone off to play in other countries of the Union .
This phenomenon falls under the heading of social and fiscal dumping , but the Commission , for all its high principles , does nothing to combat it .
Professional sportspeople are also preyed upon by numerous agents who have exclusive rights to negotiate their employment contracts .
Not only do the agents charge the players ; they are also paid by the clubs , from which they extract commission , and I have first-hand knowledge of this .
These agents hand over their protégés to the highest bidder , like common merchandise , after having whipped up competition for the players ' signatures in order to raise the bidding .
The abolition of transfers will induce agents to break their clients ' contracts several times in the course of a year in order to earn new commission each time a new contract is signed .
The system of agents must be brought under control by the Union , or perhaps even scrapped .
I shall conclude by adding that sport must be brought within the scope of the Treaty Establishing the European Community .
I therefore appeal to all those who govern us , particularly to the French Government , which is currently guiding the work of the European Union , to ensure that the Intergovernmental Conference to be held at Nice in December confers a share of responsibility for this matter upon the European Union and involves Parliament in the implementation of this initiative through the codecision procedure .
Mr President , sport has become a magnificent form of international entertainment .
It is a source of inspiration for millions and huge sums of money are involved in it .
Thousands of Finnish people travel to Hungary to see Mika Häkkinen drive , while a Vietnamese hotel receptionist asks the right way to pronounce the name Jari Litmanen .
The importance of sport and exercise both for societies and for individuals must not , however , get buried under professionalism and commercialism .
Exercise is educationally important and vital for health .
Sports societies bring people together to do self-sacrificing voluntary work .
Along with the positive aspects , we have to remember the flip side of the coin - drugs , violence at sports events and the negative elements associated with player transfers .
To prevent these we need joint action on the part of the Union and a legal base for sport .
As we shape sports policy we have to take account of sport ' s various structures .
For that reason , we must ensure that we continue to listen to sport ' s NGOs at the Olympics in the wake of the sports conference held in 1999 .
Finally , I would like to turn your attention to the need to improve levels of gender equality in sport and exercise .
The European Woman and Sport network conference held in June in Helsinki made recommendations which I hope will be taken into consideration at both national and Union level .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their exhaustive work , and I want to express my heartfelt thanks , too , to the President-in-Office of the Council and the Member of the Commission for their excellent speeches at the start of this sitting .
Mr President , the powerful role of sport in economic , social , and cultural terms and in terms of health cannot be denied .
It is incomprehensible why sport lacks a legal base in the European Union .
The European Parliament must frankly force the Commission and the Council to look at themselves in the mirror .
The status of sport must have a watertight definition produced for it at the next intergovernmental conference so that sports organisations can participate in decision-making on sport themselves .
As huge sums of money are involved in major sports , common rules and regulations should be drawn up to take account of the system ' s basic pillars , sportsmen and the organisers of sporting events .
The interests of team-game players must be safeguarded , all the while honouring the principle of the free movement of labour , not forgetting financial reward for the so-called trainer associations .
We have to find a balance in the question of televising the most important sports events , one between the economic power of the organisers on the one hand , and the so-called public service principle on the other .
When we talk about drugs we have to make a clear distinction , as we do when it comes to any other discussion on sport , between keep-fit exercise and major sporting events .
The ethical problems associated with the latter are known to all .
Too little attention has been paid to the spread of the use of drugs among ordinary people who do sports , proof of which lies , for example , in the trade in banned substances which is rife in gyms generally .
The problem can be considered on a par with the narcotics problem , especially the use of synthetic drugs , so , simply out of concern for public health , the EU must do its bit to beat the problem .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after this very fruitful debate , I shall simply make a few observations .
Because we are all concerned about the excesses that occur in sport , it is very understandable that we have been focusing on those excesses , but it must also be stressed that the vast majority of the men and women who are involved in sport - participants and voluntary officials in local sports clubs and in sports associations - are men and women with a high regard for the values of sport , advocates of the sporting ethic who want sport to be a means of individual and collective development .
I refute the charges of universal drug-taking , I refute the idea put forward a moment ago that footballers ' brains are all in their feet and that they are incapable of thinking .
Sportswomen and sportsmen are citizens of our countries .
Perhaps we should give them more of a hearing so that they themselves can express their hopes and their fears .
Setting aside the excesses , we should also be aware that , in the world of association football for example , only one per cent of all players registered with the International Federation of Football Associations are professionals .
So what we must try to defend is the whole of sporting activity , not just one aspect of it .
I believe that this is extremely important .
With regard to doping , I entirely agree with the idea that its underlying causes have to be tackled .
We have heard talk of sporting calendars . Let me also mention the dependence of some sportspeople on results and on sponsorship .
Similarly , there is a need to speak about the pressures from the media giants , which invariably try to raise the stakes in any competition .
So , the underlying causes have to be tackled , and without delay ; I believe the accent must be placed on controls , on sporting sanctions and on action against the supply chains .
Not enough action is being taken at the level of the European Union to dismantle the chains through which these stimulants are made available within sporting circles .
Concerning the specific question that was asked , I believe it is absolutely essential that each Member State and the European Union as a whole should work on a sort of convention which would be signed between the States and WADA , the World Anti-Doping Agency , to facilitate the work of WADA in all countries , whatever their current legislation .
On the question of transfers , allow me to give my position and the position of the French Presidency .
I am not in favour of maintaining the status quo , because we are familiar with the huge excesses which it has created and which have no economic , social or sporting justification .
Nor do I wish the transfer system to disappear completely , because that would bring about an even more anarchic free-for-all than the one we are experiencing today , and the essential focus of inter-club rivalry would be the ability to offer the fattest pay packets .
In the past 48 hours , FIFA has made some extremely constructive and interesting proposals , which , if adopted , would serve to protect the youth-development system and individual rights , as well as satisfying the clubs ' need to build and train teams .
This should be an interesting basis for discussion with the Commission , as Mrs Reding was explaining a short while ago .
So there is the possibility of innovative proposals in this domain .
It is vital , however , that some of the major clubs which seek complete deregulation , so that they can organise private competitions , do not try to sabotage the discussion process on which FIFA and the Commission are about to embark .
Someone spoke of the ' social role of sport ' and asked whether it meant that sport was the opium of the people .
No , I believe that the social role of sport simply consists of enabling individuals to find themselves through an activity , to blossom , to meet other individuals and to engage together in something of benefit to them in their lives .
Finally , you may rest assured that the French Presidency , having listened to you , will proceed with great determination towards the establishment of a solid basis for the recognition of the specific status of sport and in the fight against doping .
Thank you Commissioner .
With regard to what has just happened , I am sorry , but , as you could see , it is very hard to make a speech when the Members are in the Chamber to vote .
I am sorry , but many Members did , however , listen attentively to you .
Some of them even gestured to me to resort to an Olympic sport - gavel-throwing - in order to silence certain other Members who were making too much noise .
Unfortunately though , I only have one gavel : I would have needed 80 or 100 to throw at all the Members who were not listening to your speech .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Mr President , in West Timor , or rather the Indonesian part of the island of Timor , at least three United Nations officials from the UNHCR were violently beaten and killed yesterday .
The European Parliament must denounce this barbarous and despicable act , which according to some eyewitness reports took place with the complicity or connivance of the Indonesian military authorities .
Secondly , this act occurred on the same day that the majority of Heads of State and Government were meeting in New York at the Millennium Summit organised by the United Nations itself , which demonstrates the weakness of this organisation and of the instruments at its disposal to protect men and women far from their own countries who were simply endeavouring to defend human rights and the rights of refugees .
Mr President , I would like you to convey a message of solidarity to the United Nations . I would also like you to inform the Indonesian authorities of the outrage felt by the Members of the European Parliament and to stress our wish that people whose sole objective is to defend peace , human rights and the dignity of the Timorese people , be they in Indonesia or in Timor Lorosae , should be respected .
I am sure the President would be prepared to convey her views to the appropriate authorities in the manner which you indicated .
The Heads of State and Government , meeting in the UN , observed a minute of silence in honour of the peacekeepers who died and I think it would be appropriate if this House did the same .
( The house rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Mr President , I wish to support the sentiments expressed by Mr Seguro and to draw the Commission 's attention to this issue .
On various occasions throughout this year I have emphasised the potentially premature nature of the new policy being adopted by the European Union towards Indonesia , given that it is particularly clear that there is a degree of uncertainty .
This has unfortunately become clear in recent weeks .
I have addressed various questions to the Commission on this subject , and the seriousness of yesterday 's events , together with other facts such as the infiltration of militias into East Timor , clearly demonstrate that the situation is not yet safe .
The European Union must , once more , make its views known to the Indonesian Government as forcefully as possible , in particular through the channel of the European Commission .
We understand the difficulty of the situation in Indonesia , but it is essential to demand that the Indonesian Government should exercise its authority on its own territory .
We will only be able to change our attitude towards that country once democracy is effectively ensured in Indonesia and self-determination and peace are guaranteed on Timor .
Mr President , I very rarely rise on a point of order and particularly now when we have extremely important votes to conduct , I only do so on what I consider to be an extremely important point .
Your predecessor in the chair has just apologised to Commissioner Reding and I think that the whole House would wish to endorse that verbal apology .
This week we have demonstrated here in Parliament that when we want to call the Commission to order , we can do so and the Commission responds in the appropriate manner .
But when a Commissioner is making an extremely important speech which demonstrates the amount of work and effort that she has put into a subject , which perhaps generates as much interest in the people we represent as anything else , there is complete chaos and a shambles in the Chamber .
I do not accept what your predecessor said , that it was difficult to call the house to order ; that can always be done and it should be done .
My request is that an apology to Commissioner Reding be now made in writing on behalf of Parliament and I hope this is not an experience we see repeated .
I know that Viviane Reding is a very robust parliamentarian , as well as now a Commissioner and I am sure she managed to cope with it , but I take the point .
It is perfectly appropriate to make her an apology in writing .
Vote
Mr President , normal practice would have been that I should have led the debate last night , but unfortunately due to a scheduling problem that was not possible .
I would like to commend this result of the conciliation to the House .
It was probably the most difficult conciliation and overall framework directive that this House has had to handle .
The way in which Mrs Lienemann conducted the whole matter of taking all the political groups the whole way through was really something to be admired .
I congratulate her most comprehensively for the way she did it .
We now have before us a legally binding directive which Parliament can be fully proud of .
That was not the position with the original directive .
We now have a legally enforceable directive which means that the environment of the Community over the next twenty years really has the opportunity of improving .
My only complaint , and this is why I took the floor , was that during the conciliation process non-governmental organisations were trying to influence Parliament beyond the stage that Parliament had agreed in its second reading .
Documents were very often available to those organisations before they were available to members of the Conciliation Committee .
This is not tolerable .
In conciliation , where we need to build trust between the Council of Ministers and Parliament , we need confidentiality .
This is something that we have to address seriously in the future .
I congratulate the Portuguese Presidency for the way they conducted the conciliation , but I hope that Parliament will be able to improve this situation internally for the future .
( Applause )
( Parliament approved the joint text )
Report ( A5-0212 / 2000 ) by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the European Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on end-of-life vehicles ( C5-0258 / 2000 - 1997 / 0194 ( COD ) )
( Parliament approved the joint text )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0218 / 00 ) by Mr de Roo , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 92 / 23 / EEC relating to tyres for motor vehicles and their trailers and to their fitting ( 5347 / 2 / 00 - C5-0220 / 2000 - 1997 / 0348 ( COD ) )
This report has some positive aspects , in particular the restatement of the binding nature of the proposed measures to protect water quality .
But by granting deadlines , in particular a 20-year time-limit for banning discharges of hazardous substances , the report makes a nonsense of its own resolution .
That time-limit is equivalent to authorising undertakings to discharge their toxic substances for another 20 years .
Moreover , it is not made sufficiently clear that it is up to polluting undertakings to pay for any damage they have caused .
As for charging for water , the only decision that would be in the interests of the public would be a ban on all private profit-making from the supply and distribution of water , but that is not even mentioned in this report , which , in pillorying Ireland for its practice of publicly financing water provision , is instead at pains to stress the commercial nature of this vital substance .
That is why we abstained .
Although I support the report , I wish to make known certain reservations pertaining to same .
Ireland 's derogation for domestic water charges is not as strong as I would want it to be .
The key provisions - Art. 9 , paragraph 4 - state that a Member State " shall not be in breach of this Directive " if a decision not to introduce domestic water charges based on " established practice does not compromise the purposes and the achievement of the objectives of this Directive " .
It follows from this paragraph that a decision not to impose water charges would be in breach of the Directive if it can be linked to the Irish Government 's failure to meet the new standards .
I have no confidence , given the Irish Government 's failure to date , that they will reach the standards set .
. I support the Conciliation Agreement which has been agreed by the European Parliament and the European Council on the Framework Directive on Water .
This Directive provides a framework for consolidating legislation which has been in existence at national and European level concerning the whole area of the safety of surface water and ground water .
The core elements of this Directive ensure the protection of surface water , coastal water , internal waste and ground water now and into the future .
The European Council , which represents the fifteen Governments of the EU , originally did not include any provisions relating to the elimination of hazardous substances in this new Water Directive .
I am supporting this Conciliation Agreement , which guarantees that the elimination of hazardous substances will now feature in this Directive and addresses this imbalance .
From an Irish perspective , we make the working assumption that the elimination of hazardous substances includes the prohibition on discharging radioactive substances as well .
Water pricing was always going to be a sensitive aspect to this Directive .
This Directive now calls on Member States to take account of the principle of the recovery of the cost of water services , including environmental and resource costs , in accordance with the polluter-pays principle .
Member States must ensure by 2010 that water pricing policies will provide an adequate incentive for users to use water resources efficiently .
Member States will be allowed on an exceptional basis to opt out of the obligation of cost recovery if this is based on established national practices .
Water pricing policy is also a taxation issue .
Under existing EU Treaties such tax changes require the unanimous support of all EU Governments .
It is only right and proper that this matter of taxation is left in the domain of Member States , which must have the final say as to what taxation policies , at local or national level , it wishes to pursue .
As a result of the implementation of this Directive , the safety of water quality standards in Europe will substantially improve .
. ( DE ) With its communication " Pricing policies for enhancing the sustainability of water resources " , the European Commission is seeking to harmonise and give practical form to the economic provisions of the EC framework directive on water resources .
The Commission 's proposal to monitor observance of the break-even principle by means of price surveillance is aimed at those EU Member States that still heavily subsidise their water industries .
In contrast , in Germany the break-even principle is already being implemented , as is monitoring of unfair practices by the cartel office and by local authorities .
Against this background , the framework directive on water resources and the Commission proposal on water pricing should not be used to create further layers of bureaucratic supervision in Germany .
Furthermore , the provisions on the charging of environmental and resource costs associated with water use are aimed at those Member States that still make excessive use of and pollute their water resources , and therefore not at Germany , where exceptional efforts are already being made in this respect .
The provisions of the framework directive on this point do not , therefore , provide any grounds for introducing a universal water or sewage tax in Germany , for example .
In view of the non-binding nature of the economic provisions of the framework directive on water resources and the Commission communication , there is a danger that there will be a considerable delay in implementing these provisions in the countries actually being targeted , if they are , in fact , implemented there at all .
If , as has already been the case with the transposition of other directives , Germany , the ' model pupil ' , goes its own way , this would heighten the distortions in competition between the national water industries in the EU still further , thus running counter to the aim of the directive , which is to create a uniform framework for Europe 's water industry .
Germany has to learn to implement EU provisions in accordance with the objectives of the directive , not as individual Länder would like .
With the EU framework directive on water resources we will once again see individual countries going their own way .
The framework directive on water has finally been adopted - very welcome news .
Ever since 1997 the European Parliament has been calling for the piecemeal nature of water legislation in Europe to be brought to an end .
After nearly four years , these rationalisation attempts have finally borne fruit .
The conciliation between Parliament and the Council of Ministers , the final stage in the legislative procedure , has enabled what I consider a balanced and satisfactory compromise to be reached .
The discussions were difficult , but I am happy that the Council finally agreed to make the main objectives of these new rules binding .
Our Parliament could not have endorsed a text which was nothing more than a statement of intent .
The PPE / DE Group has always taken an ambitious and realistic stance .
In my view , it was essential for this new framework directive to guarantee , in the future and for the sake of future generations , improvements in European water quality .
Henceforth , water management in Europe will be based on the principle of a hydrographical district , a body that goes beyond the administrative boundaries of Member States and takes account of the real water situation in Europe .
The objective is gradually to eliminate discharges of hazardous substances , within 20 years of their identification .
That is a realistic compromise between , on the one hand , Mrs Lienemann ' s initial position in favour of a zero level of discharges into water and , on the other , the position of the Council , which was opposed to any binding objective .
A list of what are called ' priority ' substances will be submitted to the European Parliament in the near future .
That will be a vital step and I hope our Parliament will be able to follow the same line as today .
Under the polluter-pays principle , the Member States will have to incorporate environmental costs in water pricing .
That is real progress .
Water is a vulnerable and invaluable natural resource .
Public health and long-term supplies are at stake just as much as biological diversity and landscape conservation .
For all these reasons , I voted for this text .
Nevertheless , I am sorry that we could not keep the article allowing Member States to transfer water in the form in which we had adopted it at second reading .
That kind of project complies with the principle of regional cohesion and solidarity that we have always upheld .
In that sense , it deserves strong EU support , in the context of promoting trans-European networks and regional policy .
All proposals aimed at improving the environment in Europe are to be welcomed .
Trying to incorporate piecemeal water policies in one framework directive represents a considerable challenge .
The binding commitment the European Union has made to its Member States to eliminate discharges of hazardous substances into water within 20 years is certainly a step forward , even if 3 years are enough for certain chemical products .
Although we welcome the introduction of water management plans based on hydrographic basins , we must remain vigilant when applying these policies ; here I am thinking particularly of the project to divert water from the Rhone basin towards Spain .
In that specific case , priority should be given to water management and the water savings that can be made , before massive projects to transfer water from one hydrographic basin to another are proposed .
The European Union now also needs to consider water pricing .
It is unacceptable for multinationals alone to fix water prices , on the pretext that they are providing a technical water management service .
This directive represents a step in the right direction , but there will have to be more precise rules to reduce water pollution upstream .
Florenz report ( A5-0212 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted in favour of the Conciliation Committee ' s definitive decision on the directive on end-of-life vehicles .
I voted in favour , not just because pensioners and elderly people who have reached a certain age feel that their fate is similar to that of cars , but , above all , because it is right and proper that , at last , thanks to Europe ' s initiative , a solution has been found to the problem of where to put cars when they do not work any more .
I would , however , suggest improving on our decision , by providing for the payment of a deposit when a new car is purchased , to be returned when the old car is brought back .
I welcome the agreement which has been secured between the European Parliament and the European Council which represents the fifteen Governments of the European Union on this specific directive .
We know that each year within the EU there are up to nine million vehicles that are scrapped on an annual basis .
This directive , which will now be enacted uniformly across the European Union , will ensure that cars will be disposed of in the future in a more environmentally friendly manner .
All vehicles within the European Union must now be fully recyclable by the year 2015 .
This is only right and proper because the European Union has both national and international obligations to implement more environmentally friendly legislation .
Up to 75 % of all metallic components in new vehicles can be recycled as metal scrap .
This process should and must continue in an effort to promote higher environmental standards .
This directive aims to increase the scope for vehicle recycling and to encourage the re-use of car components .
This can be achieved by improving the construction of various commercial motor vehicles and by setting up dismantling facilities throughout the European Union .
The common position established the right for the last owner to return a vehicle to a treatment facility free of charge .
There is an obligation on manufacturers to bear the whole or a large part of the cost of implementing these measures and for them to take back end-of-life vehicles at no charge to the last owner .
It was agreed at conciliation between the European Parliament and the fifteen Governments of the EU that this provision should now apply from 1 January 2007 .
However , any Member State within the EU is free to implement this specific provision of this directive earlier than this date .
Car manufacturers , the suppliers of materials and equipment manufacturers must make an effort to limit the use of hazardous substances .
We must all ensure that recycled materials can be used in the manufacture of cars at the design stage .
The European Parliament and the European Council at conciliation have also agreed that all vehicles placed on the market after 1 July 2003 should not contain any heavy metals such as cadmium or lead .
Car manufacturers must also provide information on the rate of re-use , recycling and recovery of used cars which will be achieved within the coming years .
In conclusion , I have had much representation in Ireland on the need to take cognisance of the special vintage car industry in Europe .
At the request of the European Parliament , collector 's vehicles will now be expressly excluded from the scope of this directive .
This is very important in light of the key social and economic role the vintage car sector plays in promoting tourism across the length and breadth of Europe .
We conservatives seldom vote against conciliations .
We cannot , however , support the compromise reached in the conciliation group concerning the way in which end-of-life vehicles are to be dealt with .
The compromise contains retroactive measures , and we cannot back a legislative text which alters the rules retrospectively .
Retroactive legislation affects competition and is unacceptable from a legal point of view .
. ( FR ) I have spoken several times previously on this complex subject involving quite considerable economic interests , but also , and above all , the protection of the environment .
The proposal for a directive on end-of-life vehicles , submitted in 1997 , is aimed at preventing the creation of scrap from vehicles and promoting the re-use , recycling and recovery of vehicles and their components , so as to reduce the amount of scrap produced by end-of-life vehicles that are dumped or incinerated without any energy recovery .
The European Commission ' s strategy is based on measures such as increasing the percentage of re-usable components , ensuring an adequate number of collection points for end-of-life vehicles , achieving a number of objectives regarding the re-use and recovery of end-of-life vehicles , checks on the use of certain heavy metals in vehicle manufacture and ensuring that the cost of disposing of end-of-life vehicles is not borne by the last owner .
The negotiations came up against stumbling blocks on several points . The difficulties focused on producer liability and the treatment of heavy metals .
After several hours of conciliation , the negotiators managed to reach agreement .
On the question of producer liability , the directive stipulated that the last owner would be able to return an end-of-life vehicle free of charge and required producers to bear a substantial part of the cost of treating end-of-life vehicles .
The compromise provides that for new vehicles , i.e. for those put on the market after 1 July 2002 , producers should be liable from that date .
For existing vehicles , i.e. vehicles put on the market before 1 July 2002 , producer liability would begin in 2007 rather than 2006 .
The directive would also allow Member States to introduce these provisions before the dates specified .
On the question of heavy metals , the Council and Parliament have agreed that vehicles put on the market after 1 July 2003 should no longer contain heavy metals such as cadmium , lead or hexavalent chromium .
The two delegations reached agreement on the exceptions set out in Annex 2 of the directive .
Apart from that , I am glad that Parliament ' s call for vintage cars to be excluded from the scope of the directive was favourably received .
. ( FR ) The compromise that came out of the conciliation procedure , the final legislative stage , is the result of hard negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
Far from being satisfactory , I see it merely as a first step , although it does , in some respects , go in the right direction .
While I welcome the figured objectives that have been set ( by 2006 , 85 % of the weight of vehicles produced after 1980 is to be recycled , re-used or recovered , and 95 % by 2015 ) I regret the hypocrisy of some of the provisions advocated by the PSE and supported by the Socialist and Social-democratic Governments .
The Council of Ministers has , in fact , remained inflexible about allowing the owner to return his end-of-life vehicle free of charge .
That is a demagogic provision .
It may well be based on goodwill towards the consumer , but it is totally unrealistic .
In fact , the directive stipulates that the cost of treatment will be borne entirely by the producers .
The latter are bound to pass on at least part of these costs to the purchase price of new vehicles .
So , far from encouraging the purchase of a new generation of less polluting vehicles , this measure is a hidden bonus for those who own the most polluting old vehicles .
The Council of Ministers finally responded to the wishes of the MEPs , who had been calling since the first reading , for vintage vehicles to be expressly excluded from the scope of this directive .
The amendment I tabled and supported has , in fact , been fully incorporated into the final text .
In wider terms , this directive is not ambitious enough .
For example , it says nothing at all about the problem of the dumped cars that disfigure the landscape .
Despite the polluter-pays principle , it is the taxpayers who bear the cost of removing them .
It is a pity that neither this directive nor the directive on the disposal of waste has concerned itself with this problem , which , after all , has disastrous environmental effects in much of Europe .
De Roo report ( A5-0218 / 2000 )
Mr President , following this directive , tyres will be quieter : cars , lorries and road trains will make less noise as they drive along roads and motorways .
That is good news , because pensioners like peace and quiet .
Nevertheless , four weeks ago , Mr President , I was crossing the road near the Gare du Nord in Brussels , and a shiver went down my spine because it was night , you could have heard a pin drop , and I saw a tram pass behind me in complete silence .
Thankfully , God wanted me to be here so I could give my explanations of votes and I was not hurt .
But are we really sure that less noisy tyres are really in everyone ' s best interests ?
We can only congratulate our colleague , Mr de Roo , and support him in his efforts to include noise pollution in the context of protecting the environment .
Unfortunately , the impact of the increase in road traffic density is not limited to pollution from end-of-life vehicles and their recycling , something that has not yet been resolved in spite of its worldwide nature , or to the damage and harm this does to the air we breathe , or even to the serious resultant global warming .
Road traffic also produces considerable , incessant noise pollution , which millions of people living beside roads and motorways as well as the humble pedestrian have to suffer on a daily basis .
So , the purpose of Mr de Roo ' s proposals is to highlight a form of pollution that is generally overshadowed by others , and here we support him fully .
But let us not forget that we must also set out more general requirements in relation to pollution from cars , which are becoming increasingly prevalent in developed societies and in our towns , and let us put pressure on the Commission to introduce policies to shift traffic off the roads and onto the railways and public transport .
The Strasbourg tram is a clear illustration of this .
. ( NL ) For a long time now , the use of cars for transporting people and goods has been such a matter of course that we have given little thought to the effect this has had on many people and the environment .
We only saw the economic gain and how convenient it was for the car driver , not the drawbacks .
Exhaust fumes and the lack of traffic safety were accepted as part of the deal , as well as the noise cars generate .
Fortunately , over the past few years , this attitude has started to change .
Many cities give bicycles and trains more space and restrict the freedom of cars .
This does not end the problems caused by cars and lorries .
The number of cars is still on the increase , as is the proportion of freight transport by road , and with it , noise pollution .
Looking at it through the eyes of the car industry , it is evident that manufacturers will pass the buck .
They will look to the road owner - in general the Government - to increase safety and to reduce environmental pollution .
As long as the car industry succeeds in doing this , they , themselves , do not have to look into reducing pollution caused by cars , or incur any additional costs as a result .
In their opinion , noise pollution should be countered by using ' very open asphalt concrete ' , a road surface which , however , can turn unexpectedly slippery overnight when frosty .
What matters now is that a choice should be made between the interests of the car and the car-tyre industries on the one hand , and the interests of the public and the environment on the other .
Far too often , we see that the short-term interests of powerful industrial groups are given priority , whilst the majority of our electorate increasingly sets different requirements for political decision-making .
Protecting the quality of our life , rather than making a fast buck , is gaining in importance all the time .
This contrast was highlighted once again during the debate on car tyres .
Mr De Roo was right in demonstrating that the regulation proposed by the Commission will not sufficiently improve matters , and that it is technically possible to reduce pollution by a few decibels .
This simply requires the political will to put sufficient regulations in place , to monitor compliance with the regulations and not to allow too much leeway .
The Group of the European United Left has constantly backed Mr De Roo in this .
We regret that his reasonable and self-evident proposals cannot count on the general approval they deserve .
Mankind moves , and moves other objects .
Movement creates noise .
Our amazing age of movement , to which we also owe our sense of freedom , is a noisy one .
It is our freedom that creates noise .
The states , and also industry , are working to combat this noise pollution , which can cause illness .
The industry endorses the legislator ' s resolve to make transport , the movement of people and goods , which is a cornerstone of free movement , safer and less polluting .
We are aware of the progress made in road holding , in resistance to wear and tear , in reducing fuel consumption , but for known technical reasons the investments in research and technology do not yet allow all the rapporteur ' s demands to be reconciled .
Global performance is estimated according to a range of often conflicting criteria that are well-known to tyre-manufacturers .
Yet we chose not to support the rapporteur because the amendments he has proposed will adversely affect safety , our safety , the life span of tyres and their road-holding properties .
We condemn these amendments , which would lead to what I would also call a nonsense in industrial terms .
Yet again , the Union is putting the devil in the detail .
And I will never cease to be surprised at the areas the Commission pokes around in and finds reason to legislate on .
Noise in all its forms may well be a scourge in our town centres , around our airports , on our roads , yet surely we should put road safety first .
Anyway , what do we find most annoying on a day-to-day basis ?
Is it the muffled sound of tyres in contact with the road , or the sudden acceleration of vehicles and the roar of powerful motorcycles ?
It would be better to do some in-depth research on road surface noise and dangers .
Let us not lose our sense of priorities and , what I would term , legislative efficiency .
Bakopoulos report ( A5-0168 / 2000 )
Mr President , I also voted for the Bakopoulos report because it is certainly right to exercise a certain amount of caution when placing products on the market which could be harmful to us all .
But I would suggest that we are going too far with these directives , and that we are taking up too much of Parliament ' s time discussing such technical subjects , such technically important subjects .
Would it not be preferable to authorise the Commission to decide in a single directive which new harmful elements should be marketed , thereby avoiding spending so much time on each occasion that this comes up , going through the procedures to ban the placing on the market of new products yet again ?
AIDS :
We voted for the joint resolution on AIDS , because if it produced any effects , and there is no guarantee of this , it would mean progress .
Yet we do not always agree with the wording , in particular of the recital that implicates only the African Governments or cultural and religious traditions that obstruct the effective implementation of anti-AIDS measures .
That may be true , but at the same time it is a way of concealing the responsibility of an entire health system dominated by pharmaceutical trusts and the race for profit .
The reason people die in Africa , as in many poor countries , of malaria , bilharzia , tuberculosis or even just measles is not because of religious obstacles but because the people who are ill can afford neither medicines or care .
Telecommunications :
We voted against the joint resolution on mergers in the telecommunications sector .
This resolution , in fact , does away with any idea of public service in considering that this sector , like others , should be based on ' an open market economy with competition ' .
Moreover , the vague reference to the ' guarantee of growth and employment ' will certainly not protect workers against the likelihood of redundancies as a result of future mergers .
No binding rules are being envisaged to prevent companies from laying off workers on the pretext of restructuring , whereas the truth is that they are seeking to boost their profits .
Furthermore , obviously we do not propose to join in the ode to ' effective competition ' contained in this resolution .
Once again communication is being regarded purely as a commodity from which to derive the highest possible profit .
We reject that approach , which disregards people ' s social needs .
The ever-increasing influx of private capital into public operators that have become multinationals is now encouraging these operators to wage a ruthless economic war .
This means a way of sharing out the world markets that gives priority to the more profitable areas and leads to unfair pricing , quite apart from job losses and job insecurity for hundreds of thousands of workers .
The national and European political authorities must therefore impose public service constraints on all these operators , whatever their origin , for example :
for fixed telecommunications : lower charges for local calls , which in France make up 83 % of the average bill of private individuals ;
for mobile communications : in addition to lower charges , total coverage of the territory , even if it means using satellite links in inaccessible places ;
for rapid Internet access : in addition to a radical reduction in charges , a timetable for the complete coverage of the territory .
At a time of indecent , record profits , that is how to include communication among the fundamental rights respected by a quality public service .
Human cloning :
Mr President , the majority of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has voted in favour of this resolution .
In the debate in the Chamber yesterday on cloning , I heard a number of people more or less clearly defending cloning for the purposes of medical treatment , on the grounds that this would be quite different from cloning for reproductive purposes .
Unfortunately , there is a tendency now to engage in a new semantic debate or strategy of this kind which would lead to a watering down of the moral implications of cloning human beings .
Those who do not wish to permit any form of cloning would be viewed as immoral in the sense that we would be allowing people to suffer from diseases such as Parkinson ' s which would be curable if only the ban on gene technology were lifted .
This is a completely absurd assertion which I think ought to be withdrawn .
Researchers throughout the world have said that Parkinson ' s disease and other serious illnesses can perfectly well be cured by other methods .
We also heard Emma Bonino say that politicians must take risks , but we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance believe that it is our absolute duty as elected representatives to identify the risks and to be careful .
In this connection , I should also like to ask the Group of the Party of European Socialists why they have not called on Tony Blair to withdraw the whole proposal , but are content to request that a committee on biotechnology be set up .
We must observe the precautionary principle , in this case more so than ever .
We must ask ourselves the most important question of all . For what purpose should we clone human beings ?
I believe we must realise that there is a race going on in the field of genetic technology , which means that there is a great risk of overstepping the limits in a quite horrifying way .
The technology is developing incredibly fast now .
We cannot just content ourselves with this debate . Rather , we must push the debate further and speed it up , whilst also observing the precautionary principle .
I was one of the 237 MEPs who voted for the resolution tabled by the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats on human cloning .

Science has always had two sides to it : it has always been the case that discoveries can be used for our benefit or against us : the wheel can be used to move us around more quickly or to kill people ; revolvers can be used to defend or murder people ; atomic energy can improve our lives or make atomic bombs .
In the case of cloning research , I wonder whether , in actual fact , a decision has already been made to do something to harm humanity rather than waiting for unbiased research to generate scientific results and only then deciding how to use them .
It would have been better if Europe were able to decide and not just one Head of State .
Mr President , given the conflicting viewpoints on the therapeutic cloning of humans , we can imagine that a great deal of restraint will be needed when applying this new technique .
Commercial and industrial cloning , or cloning in order to create people with certain characteristics is unacceptable in everyone ' s book , and rightly so .
Nevertheless , we are today dealing with two conflicting points of view .
Within the GUE / NGL Group , it has been left up to the conscience of the individual members as to how they wish to vote .
In my opinion , the difference between the views of the Christian Democrats and the Greens on the one hand and the Social Democrats and Liberals on the other hand is that the former emphasise the penal implications for the medical profession , whilst the latter focus on the need for further research into the effects .
I myself endorse the latter .
A solution needs to be found for people who need a new heart , a new kidney or liver , as well as for people suffering from Parkinson ' s disease .
This too is a question of ethics .
My party , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , exercises utmost reserve with regard to cloning and genetic manipulation .
From this perspective , I have been able to support the alternative put forward by the Social Democrats and Liberals rather than that put forward by the Christian Democrats and Greens which goes for all-out rejection .
Moreover , it appears as though it will be possible , within the next couple of years , to use the recipients own brain stem cells to grow organs which are not rejected by their bodies .
I very much prefer this technique over and above the circuitous route developed in Great Britain , which is based on the reproductive technique .
Mr President , together with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities and the Union for a Europe of Nations Group , I voted in favour of all parts of the resolution from the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats .
I am extremely pleased about the decision taken .
At the same time , I am concerned about the narrow majority by which the resolution was adopted : 237 votes in favour , 230 votes against and 43 abstentions .
I presented a text concerning the unique , equal and inviolable dignity of human life when the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , which was adopted almost unanimously by this Parliament , was referred to us for consideration .
It is important that we be guided by the view of human life which has characterised this Europe of ours for more than a thousand years .
Civilisation and humanity show their character most clearly in the way in which they treat life when it is defenceless .
We must say no to the cloning of human beings .
Human beings are subjects , not objects .
Mr President , I think it is a great achievement in human rights terms that we have succeeded in giving a signal with this resolution - a signal that it is not acceptable for embryos to be deliberately created for research purposes .
And I think that this resolution makes it clear that human life must not become a kind of consumer item .
But I , too , am unhappy about the small majority in favour of this motion for a resolution .
I hope that this is just because of tactical games on the part of the Socialist Group .
I have to say that I think their behaviour here has been shameful .
There have been calls for a temporary committee without it being made clear that Tony Blair is delaying his decision until this committee comes to a conclusion .
This smacks of contradiction .
It is shameful , to say the least , to ditch all your principles out of loyalty to Blair .
I would like to stress once again that we have always said that this is about ' therapeutic cloning ' .
We have the alternative of using human stem cells to achieve the same result .
But I also hope that the Commission will now have the courage to act on the demands we have made in this resolution , by refusing to grant research funding to establishments which use these means directly or indirectly .
Mr President , this morning our group discussed our attitude to paragraph 5 of the motion for a resolution on cloning , which states that there can be no difference made between cloning for reproductive purposes and any other sort .
The matter is a controversial one and depends very much on one ' s chosen perspective .
There are two points of view , with no real great difference between them .
In the first place , technically speaking it is a question of the same sort of procedure .
Secondly , philosophically speaking , if the action is examined from the point of view of the foetus , there is no difference at all .
In either case it is being used as a tool , as something to use , and not as a living being with intrinsic value .
Everyone is touchingly unanimous in their opinion that cloning for purposes of reproduction is unethical .
My own profound concern relates to what grounds we have for preventing it , and I am someone who has studied philosophy .
Are our arguments later to be abandoned on the basis of the fact that we actually already clone anyway , technically speaking ?
Does our purpose matter in the end , if the deed is the same ?
I voted against Amendment No 5 today only because , in my opinion , it would have required justification .
However , I do not think that there are any grounds for making a distinction from the point of view of technical methods or the foetus .
For that reason , discrimination such as this cannot be approved without the proper kind of thorough discussion .
. ( EL ) My group , the European United Left , did not support either of the two motions .
We disagree with the proposal by the European People ' s Party because , behind its total opposition to human cloning , it is merely taking up its familiar stand against abortion .
On the other hand , we are not covered by the Socialists ' position because it does not take a stand against the decision by the British Government , which has paved the way for cloning for medical purposes , thus giving the American administration the green light to take similar action , as demanded by the biotechnological industry .
We believe that , without wasting any time , what we can do today on such a complicated and difficult issue is to set up a temporary parliamentary committee on bioethics to give us the basis for a substantiated , in-depth discussion of the problem of medical embryonic research resulting from human cloning .
Therapeutic cloning entails creating an embryo by cloning only to destroy it afterwards , in order to remove cells for medical research purposes and , later perhaps , with a view to curing currently fatal diseases .
So the intention cannot be said to be a bad one . The method , however , is highly questionable , for at least two reasons .
First , a life is created ( either by using a surplus embryo originally destined to create a new human being , or by using a cloned embryo ) , and then it is destroyed to save another one .
Do we have the right to create in this way categories of sub-humans that can be manipulated at will ?
Quite obviously , I think not .
Secondly , although everyone agrees that human cloning must be condemned in general , some people are trying to draw a distinction between ' reproductive cloning ' ( aimed at reproducing a complete human being ) , which would be banned , and ' therapeutic cloning ' , which could be authorised under supervision , subject to certain limits , and provided it is not carried out for commercial purposes .
But that is an artificial distinction , since it is based on the intention behind the cloning , whereas the act itself is identical in both cases : therapeutic cloning also essentially involves the reproduction of embryos by cloning .
All cloning is by definition reproductive .
The cloning of embryos for research purposes , or even the mere use of surplus embryos for these purposes , would amount to crossing an invisible boundary beyond which the exploitation of human life would become acceptable .
We would be entering a different society , one contrary to our values .
One solution to this dilemma would be to speed up research into the possibility of obtaining stem cells from adult organs , which could be clearly earmarked for therapeutic purposes , as called for in the resolution tabled by our fellow Members , Elisabeth Montfort and Nicole Thomas-Mauro .
That kind of procedure would be acceptable , since it is comparable to organ donation .
Looking ahead , that suggests that perhaps our current questions concern only a transitional stage in the research .
At any rate , we hope so .
Unfortunately , the working party , which has dubbed itself a ' Convention ' , responsible for preparing the first draft of a Charter of Fundamental Human Rights is about to take a wrong turning here .
Article 3 of the draft , as it stands , confines itself to prohibiting ' the reproductive cloning of human beings ' , i.e. it perpetuates the false distinction that we reject .
I tabled an amendment on this point , together with a few other Members , but although it was worded in very moderate terms , it has not , to date , been accepted .
Really , from whatever angle we look at this Charter , it is impossible to find any virtue in it whatsoever .
Throughout the ages , mankind has had to consider how to guide scientific developments so as to bring them in line with ethical and social choices .
This issue is all the more sensitive when it concerns human beings and genetic foundations .
We must , therefore , be extremely cautious , without going so far as to be obscurantist .
Given the present state of our knowledge and of the ethical debate , and in view of the UK Government ' s unacceptable authorisation of human cloning , the first thing we must seek is a total and absolute moratorium on all experiments in human cloning .
The second , after hearing the opinion of the European Committee on Ethics , is to define clear guidelines that guarantee human dignity .
As they stand at present , I do not like any of the resolutions submitted by the groups .
The Socialist Group is not calling strongly enough for an immediate stop to all human cloning .
The PPE Group seems to be making a final judgment on such sensitive points of discussion as the distinction between reproductive and other cloning .
In my opinion , however , I think it would be useful to obtain an analysis from the European Committee on Ethics on these points , in order to clarify the issues .
The urgent nature of the subject should have demanded an effective approach :
an immediate and absolute moratorium ;
in-depth reflection and a very wide-ranging basic debate prior to a directive laying down the rules to be adopted .
That is not the case with the resolutions put to the vote today .
I will therefore abstain on these motions for resolution .
There are some issues on which political differences should be set aside , not to make it appear as though a consensus could be reached but because they face everyone right across the board .
And if there were to be only one such issue , without doubt it would be the defence and promotion of human life and dignity .
Over the past few decades , scientific research has made enormous strides and given hope to those suffering from illness or disabilities and to their families .
Yet at the same time , some of this research and some of the scientists involved in it seem to have lost sight of what I would call a just and sound scale of values .
It is therefore up to those responsible for the common good , especially in the moral and political field , to put right certain abuses .
This applies to the British and American decisions to permit , respectively , cloning and the use of what are called unplanned ' supernumerary ' embryos , in both cases for therapeutic purposes .
This raises a great many , closely related , problems .
There are not two kinds of cloning , reproductive and therapeutic . We must continue to prohibit the creation of human embryos endowed with the same genetic make-up as another human being , for whatever purpose .
Indeed , no human law that is not criminal can ever deny the fact that the embryo represents the beginning of life .
So it is unjustifiable to destroy an embryo under any circumstances , even to cure someone who is ill , for how could anyone decently justify destroying one human being in order to cure another ?
Similarly , and more generally , life is an indivisible whole , it is present from the moment of conception and as such , is no longer subject to any human wishes .
Does the recognition of life depend on whether it is planned ?
Certainly , as responsible individuals , the potential parents have to give some thought , before conception , to having a child ; but once conceived , that child exists and any manipulation of it , let alone planning its destruction for whatever reason , is an infringement of its fundamental rights and , in the worst case , a crime .
It was a good thing that our Parliament took a clear stance on these abuses and thus , even if against the wishes of some of its Members , opted for life .
- ( DE ) I abstained in the vote on the PPE / Greens / EFA motion for a resolution on human cloning .
I think it is right to take a stand against the decision taken by the British Parliament .
It has been stressed that the European Parliament is standing by its decision to ban cloning , and consequently also to withhold all funding for clone research .
However , I regard paragraphs 6 and 8 in particular as very dangerous , because the medical claims being made for biotechnology are taken at face value here , although the results so far have at best been contradictory .
By calling for further research into gene therapy and other forms of genetic engineering , the European Parliament is treading on very thin ice , particularly as there is not a word about the risks or about unsuccessful experiments , nor are they subjected to any kind of political assessment , all of which would cast some doubt on the unreservedly positive claims being made .
This expression of the European Parliament ' s views on the cloning of embryos may represent a success in the short term .
However , I fear that totally uncritical calls for more medical genetic engineering could in the long term completely undermine this success and even reverse the situation completely .
They could open the door wider for technology whose implications are completely unknown .
The recent decision by the Governments of the United Kingdom and the United States of America to allow the cloning of human embryos , in order to create ' spare part stores ' for bones and vital organs , raises huge questions and problems .
This decision was taken before giving due consideration to numerous crucial medical , moral and social issues .
No one disputes the fact that rapid developments in genetic and molecular biology have opened up new paths for science , reduced the gulf between the impossible and the feasible and given us hope that we can combat the diseases and illnesses which are the scourge of mankind .
At the same time , however , and precisely because biomedical science has incalculable potential and a tremendous ability to penetrate every aspect of human life and development , turning dreams to nightmares , both the scientific community and society as a whole at all levels need to address the urgent and vital question of who should have control of this new , highly powerful scientific ' weapon ' and why ?
Where capitalism in its most unadulterated and depressing form and the unbridled market economy rule , there is a fine , indiscernible line between the scientific motives and speculative madness of the multinational pharmaceutical monopolies .
It is criminal for issues which impinge on human existence itself , on life and death , to be commercialised beyond the bounds of any social or political control .
The rapid rate of advance in this area , with crucial questions unanswered and matters of capital importance pending , is fraught with danger , given the huge economic interests hiding behind this endeavour .
The ' therapeutic cloning ' plan will be the spark that kindles the fire since no one can guarantee that limited and specific use will be made of cloning .
The cloning of embryos could become the ' Trojan horse ' which rekindles attempts to clone or ' counterfeit ' human beings , with unpredictable and possibly dramatic consequences for the human race , and it must be averted .
The biggest risk is not inherent in the power of science but in the erroneous and uncontrolled exploitation and application of science .
And when these activities are conducted in the context of the profit motive and its obscure interests , then we must be especially attentive and constantly vigilant .
Lucas report ( A5-0187 / 2000 )
Mr President , this is the second time today that we have talked about a report which will help us all to sleep , particularly the elderly .
How could we not support this report which aims to reduce the noise of aeroplanes which come and go from airports surrounded by the homes of many people , who are certainly disturbed at night but also during the day ?
However , allow me to put forward a proposal pertaining to this : that , in future , we try to build lots of small airports in isolated , uninhabited areas instead of a few enormous ones in state capitals .
I welcome the communication from the Commission , which underlines the fact that air transport is rapidly having an increasing impact on the environment at local , regional and global level .
Clearly we cannot allow this trend to continue and must rapidly adopt measures to reverse it .
What is at stake , indeed , is the protection of the environment , the quality of life and the health of Europeans .
We could make serious progress if we implemented the Commission ' s proposal to apply the principle of ' reward the best and punish the worst ' to air transport in Europe , drawing a clearer line of demarcation between the various activities on the basis of their quality in environmental terms .
Although the Commission ' s communication describes a number of possible instruments , such as economic incentives and more stringent standards , it does not set out any measurable objectives or timetables .
Nor are there enough practical measures to encourage aviation to pay more respect to the environment .
So it is essential to set objectives and to respect timetables , so that the aviation industry , the airlines and the users can adapt to the legislative measures in good time .
That is the exercise on which the European Parliament has embarked .
Its report tackles several of the problems caused by air transport .
In particular , it looks at the problem of noise , which is an increasing source of concern to the people of Europe .
According to a study conducted under the EU ' s fifth environmental action programme , 80 million people in Europe are exposed to noise levels that scientists regard as intolerable , while another 170 million are exposed to disturbing noise levels .
Recent studies also show that there is a link between aircraft noise and sleep disturbance , health and learning ability .
People who live close to airports are particularly affected by the noise of night flights .
The ICAO has initiated a process of revising noise levels .
The European Union must support that process and , if necessary , the Commission will have to take additional measures if the ICAO does not reach a satisfactory agreement .
There are two ways to reduce aircraft noise : at source , thanks to more stringent certification standards and plans for phasing out aircraft that do not comply with them , and by land-use planning measures near airports .
Then there is the problem of gas emissions .
It has been admitted that emissions from aviation account for about 3.5 % of the global warming produced by human activity .
According to forecasts , these emissions will rise by 3 % a year over the period 1992 to 2015 .
So it is both urgent and vital to take measures to reduce aircraft emissions .
The list of pollutants from air transport is a long one .
This alarming fact should encourage us to take measures very quickly .
That means the Member States must give the Commission a clear negotiating mandate so that at the time of the 33rd session of the ICAO Assembly in 2001 , it can vigorously pursue the environmental and transport policy objectives .
At a time when France has entered a conflict with the main users of diesel oil ( truckers , farmers , ambulance drivers ) , which risks spreading around Europe with the escalation in fuel prices , at a time when negotiations have begun in Lyon on implementing the Kyoto Protocol , with all its provisions that need to be adopted in The Hague to combat emissions of greenhouse gases , we can see how far we still have to go at all levels to shift away from modes of transport that pollute and damage the environment towards environmentally sustainable ones that make a real contribution to the fight against greenhouse gas emissions .
In that sense , Mrs Lucas ' report sets out the positive measures that will help reduce pollution in air transport including , in particular , the phasing out of the loudest aircraft .
At the same time , it raises practical and political problems , namely the obstacles of air transport policies and their adverse environmental impact .
Europe ' s measures to reduce greenhouse gases are being blocked by the fact that it has excluded air transport , a major CO2 producer , from the Kyoto Protocol and the plans to reduce pollutants .
A tax on kerosene , environmental charges , zero VAT rating of air tickets : these are all points that need to be considered in order to establish fair competition between the different modes of transport .
My group has just voted in favour of the Lucas report , because of the following considerations . A massive warming of the earth 's atmosphere in coming years because of emissions of carbon dioxide and other harmful gases was recently forecast , once again by the World Wide Fund For Nature .
This calls for an immediate response in the form of a rational policy and an economic system that is not solely geared towards short-term profit .
With an estimated share of 15 % , air transport is , of course , not the only cause of air pollution and by no means the most important . However , bearing in mind the forecast doubling of air traffic by 2015 within the EU alone , it is positively essential for the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament to take joint measures to limit the environmentally harmful impact of air traffic .
These measures need to cover the whole range of harmful impacts , including emissions , noise , and poor air traffic management and town and country planning , and to take account of the economic interests of airlines in a balanced way .
We support setting rigid limit values for emissions and noise pollution and the EU initiative being called for at the forthcoming 33rd ICAO Assembly .
And should the outcome of the ICAO Assembly be unsatisfactory , we are therefore also calling for the EU to set its own limits .
Measures of this kind can and must encourage the air transport industry to develop new technological solutions , and more efficient , cleaner and quieter jet turbines .
The twentieth century has witnessed some tremendous technological progress , especially in the field of transport and other long-distance communication .
This has created two holy cows : the car and the aircraft .
Those who seek material gain from cars or aircraft are prepared to subordinate everything to their freedom to use these modes of transport , and overlook the adverse effects on their fellow human beings and the environment .
Aviation and airports have now become a privileged sector .
They are largely exempt from taxes and environmental rules .
This is why they can offer their services comparatively cheaply , even if the airfares are high on journeys governed by a near-monopoly .
For this reason alone , aviation can win the unfair competitive battle against the railways , which have lost a large part of their share of international passenger transport to other modes of long-distance travel , especially aviation .
As a result , cross-border railways are having to rely increasingly on privatisation plans and major investments in the high-speed network .
These measures , however , have a number of detrimental effects on the public and the environment , effects which would not have emerged without the competition from aviation .
It is high time that aviation met normal environmental requirements of the kind that are in place for all other sectors , in order to protect the public and the environment against noise , emission of harmful substances and risks of accidents .
Should this render aviation companies less profitable or hinder the enormous growth in air transport , this would not be a disaster , but rather a necessity .
Mrs Lucas has made a few modest steps in the right direction and these are largely in line with what my party , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , endorses .
- ( SV ) We abstained from voting in the final vote on Mrs Lucas ' report .
We share most of the points of view presented in this about the need for a more vigorous policy to combat the negative effects of aircraft upon the environment . We cannot , however , support paragraphs 20 and 23 of the text .
These propose a direct right of taxation for the EU in this area , together with the standardisation of national legislation on country planning .
We are firm opponents of these proposals .
Immediate , radical measures are urgently needed in order to protect the environment from the adverse impact of the ever increasing use of air transport .
However , the Commission proposal approaches the problem from the angle of competition and the profits of the aviation industry and the airlines .
As a result , it fails to deal with immediate priorities and , more importantly , only addresses in vague and general terms the problem of permissible limits on emissions of greenhouse gases and the definition of new , or at least improved , standards and rules which need to be applied at local and regional level and promoted at international level .
Similarly , it only contains vague , unsatisfactory proposals on reducing permissible noise levels , especially in the vicinity of airports during the day and , more importantly , at night .
A whole series of basic issues , such as land use around airports , improving air traffic etc. has been ignored , issues which are important factors in dealing with the environmental impact of air transport .
The Commission proposal is mainly money-driven .
Instead of forcing aerospace companies to develop research and apply newer , more environmentally-friendly technologies , it backs measures to boost revenue by introducing new taxes on aircraft purchases or changing the VAT arrangements for airline companies or the tax on kerosene , all of which can easily be passed on to the final consumer .
Attempts to reduce the number and times of flights by increasing the price of tickets , in conjunction with constant efforts to erode labour costs and safety specifications , are merely ways of maintaining , if not increasing the profits of the aviation industry , not measures to reduce the adverse environmental impact of air transport .
Typically , no mention is made of liberalising the air transport market , which is exacerbating not only the environmental impact , due to restricted controls on old , inadequately maintained aeroplanes , but the very safety of flights and passengers .
Zabell report ( A5-0203 / 2000 )
Mr President , this report refers to the fight against doping in sport .
Unfortunately , the international sporting authorities have not been able to halt or even combat this extremely serious scourge .
Doping in sport is like a priest who sins or a tone-deaf musician .
It is unthinkable that in sport , which stands for honesty and competitiveness , there are athletes who win because they use drugs .
I therefore voted against this report because it does not go far enough in calling for a genuine change in the fight against doping .
We should set up a European anti-doping agency instead of waiting for a world-wide agency to do what an individual state cannot achieve .
How can so many countries be persuaded to agree ?
Mr President , with regard to the Zabell report , I would like to make it clear that I only voted for the amendments which require a legal basis , while I voted against the report as a whole .
Indeed , current events show that the policy adopted by the World Anti-Doping Agency is a failure , and Europe should not have associated itself with it since it is a policy made by others and for which we should not have to bear any responsibility .
It is a shame that Europe has not understood this , and that today and over the coming years it will find itself involved in a very tough fight , where it will have to use much more incisive , firm and hard-hitting means .
I have tried , drawing on my wealth of experience , to make the Members of the European Parliament understand this .
I am sorry that many of them have not fully grasped what I have been trying to make them understand throughout this part-session .
. ( NL ) Playing sports is good for us .
After all , playing is in our make-up and benefits our health and sense of well-being .
But unfortunately , the enjoyment we derive from sport has come under pressure over the past decades and has been marred by a persistent and one-sided focus on performance and ever greater commercial interests .
The use of doping in sport must be seen against this background .
In my opinion , the phenomenon of doping cannot be considered in isolation but forms part of the commercialisation of a leisure activity .
As a result , the discrepancy between amateur and professional sport has become far too pronounced .
Sport is high on the agenda in the Commission ' s Helsinki report .
In the resolution too , sport is commended as fulfilling a social and integrating role which brings people closer together .
It is regrettable that many major sports events show signs of the opposite .
Not for nothing did the Dutch chef de mission , Andre Bolhuis , nickname the Olympic Games in Atlanta the Olympic War , probably because these games involved thousands of police and because of the hostile atmosphere which the American public and their media created with regard to overseas sportspeople .
If we are to counter these expressions of hostility , which we also encounter during international sports events in our countries , sportsmanship needs to be placed at the top of the bill once again .
The focus on performance and commercial interests should disappear very much into the background .
This would at the same time create a much better climate for fighting the use of doping in the most effective way possible .
In the area of sport , the Treaty does not accord any direct powers to EU institutions .
Accordingly , the involvement of the Community in fighting the use of doping should be low-key .
The sports sector is organised in its own unique way and national federations and unions still play a key role in this .
Consequently , I do not agree with the request to include a reference to sport in Article 151 of the EU Treaty .
After all , pressing for a Community-wide sports policy runs counter to the subsidiarity principle .
Although the resolution we voted on a moment ago does contain positive elements , I cannot support it mainly for the aforementioned institutional reason .
I am very glad we were able to hold a discussion in this Chamber on the serious public health problem of doping in sport .
I must congratulate the European Commission on the action plan it has proposed , together with the rapporteur and Mrs Buffet , President-in-Office of the Council .
Under the terms of the Olympic Charter , sport must embody " a spirit of friendship , solidarity and fair play " .
Doping in sport runs totally counter to that ideal .
Yet doping products are widely used by professional sportsmen and women , but also by amateurs .
This scourge , whose true scale is difficult to measure , is a complex phenomenon that poses a serious risk to the physical and psychological health of the sportsmen and women .
It is also a form of cheating that is contrary to the sporting ethic .
Because of that , we must take stronger European Union action to combat this phenomenon .
I therefore support the inclusion of a legal basis in the Treaty that would allow for Community action in the field of sport .
I know that this issue is giving rise to much discussion , which will in fact help fuel the debate to be held in the European Sports Forum in Lille on 26 and 27 October .
I will , of course , take part in it and give my views .
Apart from that , I endorse the call for the Commission to step up research into the causes of doping in the various sports disciplines , even though we know that one of the main reasons for the spread of doping lies in the commercial profits that are now linked to sport .
Under the Fifth Framework Research Programme , the European Union will have to conduct more research on doping substances , on methods of detection and on the health impact of using doping products .
I think it is also vital to launch information campaigns on the risks associated with doping products .
These campaigns should be aimed primarily at young people and be conducted with the help of athletes with an established reputation .
Since doping must be combated at international level , the creation of the World Anti-Doping Agency ( WADA ) is without doubt a vital step forward .
This agency , set up in 1999 , is currently operating under transitional procedures that leave something to be desired in terms of transparency and independence .
I am glad to say that the French Presidency has undertaken to improve the way it operates .
Let us restore the true value of sport .
Above all , sport must be regarded as an educational and social activity that encourages team spirit , solidarity and loyalty and helps combat racism and xenophobia .
We are voting against recitals I , J and K and are abstaining from voting on paragraph 2 .
In different ways , these three recitals and this paragraph are urging the Commission to integrate sports policy into the texts of the Treaties .
Sports policy is a policy area characterised by its cultural context and framework and ought not therefore to be covered by the texts of the Treaties .
Sports policy is an area in which the Commission clearly ought not to have powers .
In our opinion , such powers are covered by the subsidiarity principle and ought to be exercised at national or lower levels of political decision-making .
We are abstaining from voting in the final vote .
Mr President , I voted for the Mennea report on sport because it contains a large number of positive elements and , in particular , because it highlights the importance of continuing the current practice of organising sporting events for disabled people .
I hope that this report will lead to the introduction of subsidised sporting events for the elderly .
If competitors were grouped according to age , in the same way that boxers are grouped according to weight , we could organise sporting events for people over 30 , 40 , 50 or 60 years of age .
Mr Mennea would certainly win another Olympic medal if we held events on the basis of age .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Members who voted for my report .
In my opinion , Europe has today taken a step forward in its approach to the world of sport .
Our task is still far from complete , for sport is continually changing and Europe cannot afford not to follow these changes .
I hope that the work which we have begun today , here in the European Parliament , will soon be completed .
I would like to make it clear that some of the points I had proposed were not approved , such as the status of sportspersons and the sporting contract etc .
I hope that Europe will soon become more mature from this point of view and take into consideration those points which were not included .
Mr President , I voted against Mr Mennea ' s report , which is no reflection upon Mr Mennea .
I remember his time as a great sprinter , and I was delighted that someone from a European country was able to end American dominance of the sport .
I voted against Mr Mennea ' s report because I am quite adamant that , in accordance with the subsidiarity principle , sport is not a matter for the European Parliament .
By turning sports issues into political issues , we do a disservice both to sport and to the idea of drawing the peoples of Europe closer together .
I believe it is downright harmful , as well as wrong , to try to create a legal basis in this area .
On the basis of the subsidiarity principle and given the sort of society I want to work for , I believe in sport ' s own ability to deal with these issues in national and international associations .
Let us unite behind this idea .
I also believe that the Bosman judgment has done very great harm to football and that the sporting community has every reason in the future to ask the European Parliament and the European Union to keep away from this area .
Let these issues be handled at national level and by the sporting community itself .
At a summit in Davos , Zbigniev Brzezinski , President Carter ' s adviser , spoke about the need to use sport , show business and entertainment as a pressure valve for the millions of marginalised people that unrestrained free trade produces every year in a general free market economy .
A word was even coined for this new version of ' bread and circus ' .
It is ' tittytainment ' , formed from the American slang for breasts and the word entertainment .
The lesson was learned and the idea of sport as an entertainment , as an industry and as the opium of the impoverished masses of the world , took off .
There is an endless succession of world cups , European cup finals , Grand Prix competitions , the Olympics of Helsinki and Sydney , football , tennis , races , car rallies and horse races .
All this is done in the name of the social function of sport , which produces healthy minds in healthy bodies , to the point that the Treaty of Amsterdam now includes a declaration on sport emphasising " its role in forging identity and bringing people together " .
Indeed , we all know that , thanks to sport and to the Olympic Games , the Peloponnesian War never happened , that Athens and Sparta truly loved one another and that the circus brought the gladiators together . From the evidence of the Heysel stadium , with its death toll , to the British hooligans at the UEFA Cup in Copenhagen and elsewhere , not forgetting the case of Nivel , the French policeman murdered by German supporters , let alone the Turkish ' tourists ' , the French PSG and others , it is quite obvious that sport makes people more sociable , tolerant and cooperative and fosters all those other qualities which have been promoted so well by the French suburbs and inner cities , since the World Cup , through the festive bonfires created by setting fire to cars .
Nor did high-level sport produce dozens of cases of rape and sexual attacks in the Olympic village in Atlanta ; and French tennis champion , Nathalie Tauziat , who wrote a book criticising the very emotionally charged atmosphere behind the scenes of the tennis courts , was obviously eliminated from the French team selection in Sydney in the name of the team spirit and significant social values fostered by sport , according to Mr Mennea , the rapporteur for the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
Once this balm and these nice sentiments have been applied to the galling wounds of real life , our rapporteur becomes well aware that sport is not a cultural phenomenon but a political and strategic instrument used to enslave the citizen , who is made to forget the loss of his civic powers through a form of televisual training developing age-old instincts .
Share-capital companies , sports-club factories , from Manchester United to AC Milan , not to mention the US basketball and golf circuits , doping , the industry of anabolic steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs , which have left Pankov ' s Germany and the Soviet Union to spread throughout the world , Adidas , Nike and other sponsors who want to see results , transfers to the tune of dollars beyond our wildest dreams , the EU Court of Justice ' s judgments , including the famous 1995 Bosman judgment that everyone criticised but that ensures the free movement of young sportsmen and women and sports merchandise , the huge commercialisation , the alleged re-broadcasting rights and the collusion between sport and business - that is the real face of the industrialised world of sport that comes under our Community legislation .
It is from that manipulated world that we must protect real sport , the amateur sport practised in thousands of clubs , which have limited resources and survive thanks only to the devotion , ability and generosity of a huge number of voluntary workers .
That is where we must put our public funding , instead of investing it for the benefit of the tin gods of world stadiums .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.36 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , I wanted to express my concern as some facts are liable to be misinterpreted .
With regard to the urgent debates , we argued in favour of the inclusion of the Temelín nuclear reactor because this is a topic which is very much in the spotlight at the moment .
However , I would ask you if we could move on to the debate on Iran as soon as possible .
This remains necessary due to the relentless violation of human rights - the execution of the death penalty by stoning springs to mind , as well as the constant disruption of international television programmes .
We voted in favour of Temelín but we believe that a debate on Iran is just as imperative .
Mrs Maes , Iran is to be covered in the debate on human rights , as is the Temelín nuclear power station .
I hope that this will meet your concerns .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Nuclear submarine accidents
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5 ­ 0704 / 2000 by Mr Sakellariou and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on nuclear submarines ;
B5 ­ 0707 / 2000 by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Europe of Democracies and Diversities Group , on the sinking of the Kursk submarine and the danger of nuclear pollution in the former Soviet Union ;
B5 ­ 0709 / 2000 by Mrs Thors and Mr Väyrynen , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the sinking of the Kursk submarine and the danger of nuclear pollution in the former Soviet Union ;
B5 ­ 0717 / 2000 by Mr Posselt and Mr Oostlander , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats , on the sinking of the Kursk submarine ;
B5 ­ 0725 / 2000 by Mrs Schroedter and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the danger of nuclear submarines ;
B5 ­ 0736 / 2000 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group , on accidents involving nuclear submarines ;
B5 ­ 0738 / 2000 by Mr Sjöstedt and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the sinking of nuclear submarines .
Mr President , together with those who submitted the joint resolution , I , too , would like to express my deepest sympathy to the relatives of the Kursk nuclear submarine crew who died .
May they find comfort and strength in God , who can only truly gauge their sorrow and will gladly relieve their suffering .
The dreadful humanitarian disaster involving the Kursk once again brought home to the Russian population and to us how dangerous the consequences of accidents involving nuclear-powered installations and craft can be , and how important it is to comply with nuclear safety regulations .
This awareness-raising process has been set in motion , not least thanks to - and I would like to stress this here - those directly involved : Russian citizens and social organisations with a sense of responsibility .
Their names are no secret .
Not only do they deserve our respect , but also all the European support we can provide .
How irresponsible , on the other hand , is the way the Russian authorities , fronted by the country ' s military apparatus , deal with atomic energy ?
And that for as long as we can remember .
The nuclear contamination of the village Muslyumovo , in the southern Ural , with plutonium - and this is as long ago as 1949 - is a poignant example of this utterly reprehensible behaviour .
According to a lady in the village , in the old days , mothers would contract leukaemia at the age of fifty .
The same fate would befall their daughters at the tender age of twenty ; nowadays , their grandchildren suffer from this deadly disease as young as two .
The joint resolution is absolutely right in highlighting the considerable nuclear risks which the dozens of scrapped nuclear submarines of the Russian northern fleet constitute .
For the city of Murmansk and direct surroundings , I would like to add one major danger to this huge , potential risk to both the public and the environment , namely the cargo ship Lepse .
Since the early sixties , this ship has served as a warehouse for atomic waste originating from nuclear-powered ice breakers .
Due to the Lepse ' s bad condition , its nuclear cargo should be transferred to and made safe in special containers ashore .
At least , that has been the plan for years .
Why has nothing been done about it ?
The answer is simple .
It is down to the irresponsible attitude of the authorities , which refuse to meet the financier of the project , i.e. the European Union , halfway on two essential points : signing the agreement whereby Russia shoulders the responsibility for the activities , and the tax-free import of the required equipment for the operation .
This is a striking example of Russia ' s official stance in urgent matters of nuclear safety .
The nuclear scandal in Moscow , which dates back to 1995 , is also salient in this respect .
At the time , the director of the scientific institute which developed nuclear , Chernobyl-like reactors , came up with an ' enlightened ' plan to increase the budget of his institute by providing heating for the houses in the vicinity by means of the institute ' s research reactor .
The neighbourhood was tipped off in time and the whole plan was called off .
In fact , the reactor was closed down .
And how did the director Jevgeni Adamov fare ?
He made it to Russia ' s Minister for Atomic Energy and is dreaming of another , far more profitable project , a real money-spinner : Russia as collection and processing point for foreign radioactive waste .
May this serve as a warning to Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is deeply touched by the recent disaster involving the Kursk submarine and shares in the grief of those left behind and the Russian people .
In addition , we are greatly concerned about the nuclear time bomb and ecological disaster waiting to happen in the Barents Sea , involving the Kursk , but also other ship wrecks which are still located there .
It is therefore of utmost importance for Russia to join forces with international organisations for nuclear safety , and I would ask the Commissioner to press Russia to take responsibility and inspect the still active nuclear submarines , adapting them to better safety requirements if necessary .
There are plenty of international experts who could help Russia take stock of the problems and dismantle the nuclear waste present in the submarines in the Barents Sea .
Needless to say , Russia must exercise complete openness and cooperate fully .
Russia is also financially responsible .
Could the Commission or Commissioner explain to me in what way the European Union can help Russia in the dismantling of shipwrecks and how it can stave off the nuclear radiation risk for our EU citizens ?
Mr President , our prayers and sympathy go to the 118 sailors and their families .
They deserve our solidarity .
But it must also be considered that we have a major concern in connection with the Kursk disaster , namely the situation in Russia .
We need to be quite clear that President Putin and the Russian authorities covered up a lot of the circumstances surrounding this accident .
Facts were suppressed , falsified or hushed up .
But in one interview he spoke the truth when he said that the Kursk accident was symptomatic of Russia 's condition as a whole .
This is a situation that we finally have to face up to .
We have to see the reality for what it is .
This is not just about nuclear safety and the nuclear submarine fleet , it is also about a mass of highly developed arms technologies for which there are no appropriate control and safety measures .
That is why it is of the utmost importance that we should do everything to ensure transparency finally reaches Russia .
It is only because of Mr Nikitin , and the independent media , which face increased repression , that we heard about the disaster at all , four days after the event.Thanks to international support , it was at least possible to avoid the very worst and I hope that it will also be possible to find a solution .
But that is not a satisfactory state of affairs .
That is why they need not only our help , but also frank talking .
What is called for is some plain speaking and an offer of cooperation that does not just mean reaching for our cheque book , but also includes developing the rule of law , democratic processes and independent media in Russia .
The most important point is to educate and support all democratic forces , all the independent media , the administration , the judiciary , and young politicians , especially those in local government , so that Russia becomes a partner with whom we can safely live together in Eurasia .
I do not want to go into other issues such as Chechnya and a host of others at this point .
Kursk by itself is symptomatic of how disasters in Russia can have a direct environmental and political impact on our part of Europe .
That is why it is very much in our interest to make sure that Russia gradually becomes a democratic state where the rule of law prevails .
What we are witnessing at present under President Putin is instead a retrograde trend which is a matter of great concern to us .
So we have an enormous responsibility here .
Mr President , as other Members have already said , the Kursk accident demonstrates that even ten years after the end of the Cold War , military objectives are still considered more important than human life .
I would also like to take this opportunity to express my deepest sympathy for the families who have been bereaved of their fathers and sons .
We know that it is not impossible that more people will yet be affected by this accident .
Everyone is aware of the dangers posed by two nuclear reactors lying on the sea bed .
However , no one knows how great the danger and the insidious impact on people 's health will be .
I therefore believe that we can only draw one conclusion from this accident : we have to finally admit that despite the end of the Cold War we - in both the East and the West - are still arming and rearming ourselves , and this is incredibly dangerous and will lead to people being killed .
So we must finally put an end to this .
There can only be one response to this accident , and that response is ' disarmament now ' .
This disarmament will only work if it is applied equally by the East and the West .
That also means that it has to be pursued jointly , in cooperation . It must not mean that people like Alexander Nikitin , who take part in this and thus help to fight the continuing dangers to humanity of the Cold War and of armament , are eliminated .
I call on the Commission to make it crystal clear to the Russian Government that we will not accept further legal judgments against Nikitin or tolerate his being put on trial again .
Mr President , our Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left entirely shares all the considerations and proposals regarding nuclear submarine accidents , which are a sad legacy from the Cold War .
In order to show that it is not all one-sided , I am bound to refer to the situation of the British submarine which broke down on 12 May in Sicily and has been in Gibraltar , the only British colony in the Mediterranean , since 19 May .
The situation is causing a great deal of alarm among the population , because , according to the Royal Navy ' s own regulations , within a radius of 10 kilometres there is danger , within 100 kilometres there is still potential danger , and the submarine may only be repaired in category ' X ' docks .
The docks in Gibraltar are type ' Z ' .
I find the neo-colonial behaviour on the part of the United Kingdom , which solved the problem by replacing a ' Z ' with an ' X ' on a piece of paper using correction fluid or an eraser , very strange .
I think that it is important that the Commission and the Council demand that this submarine goes back to the United Kingdom and that they ensure that safety standards are complied with .
Mr President , the sinking of the Kursk has - mainly as a result of Russia ' s inadequate response - brought home to us the disastrous heritage of 70 years of Soviet power .
The golden era of Communist nomenclature has generated a climate of such contempt towards people in the old Soviet Union , with so few standing a chance of survival in the present day , that this is why we are now facing this terrible disaster .
This is at the heart of our resolution .
In my opinion , the fact that the GUE Group is now tabling amendments which attempt to divert the attention away from this disaster by introducing a regional problem of a completely different nature displays very little taste indeed .
It is , in fact , downright impudent .
The European Union and European Parliament will need to put their foot down when it comes to the Kursk salvage operation .
We will need to be involved in these operations , partly on humanitarian grounds .
The recovery of the Kursk also highlights another problem , namely that of a large number of obsolete nuclear submarines in Russia , as well as the nuclear waste in the same northern region .
The European Union and European Parliament will need to make it clear that it is in Europe ' s general interest , and as such in that of Russia , to lay this matter to rest sooner rather than later , firstly on behalf of the relatives , whom we offer our deepest sympathy , and secondly for the benefit of the nuclear situation in Europe .
This is what our resolution is about .
Mr President , we are talking about the tragedy involving the Russian submarine Kursk and we do of course share all the considerations of this joint resolution on the subject .
However , we must add immediately that , in order to gain credibility , the European Parliament and the European Union in general cannot ignore the fact that within its own territory there is a situation of serious nuclear risk as the result of a submarine accident , even though it is not , of course , of the tragic nature of the case of the Kursk .
I am referring to the case mentioned previously by my colleague Mr Marset , the British submarine Tireless , which has been anchored in the port of Gibraltar since May , where the intention is to repair it .
It is a port which , has been pointed out , does not have the technical conditions or the location for repairing this type of vessel .
The port is only equipped for repairing merchant ships , not warships and much less nuclear submarines .
The problem cannot be solved by simply reclassifying it , because that reclassification could affect the technical conditions .
But the problem is that the safety standards include emergency plans and special action for the population within a radius of ten kilometres , which in this case means around 200 000 people .
That is something that cannot be improvised overnight , among other things because the population cannot be moved .
We must criticise the deplorable attitude of the British Government , but even more so the attitude of the Spanish Government , which maintained a deplorable and shameful silence on this issue until they were forced into a timid reaction by the protests from the inhabitants of the area .
I would like to conclude , Mr President , by saying that I am not in the habit of raising issues of domestic policy in this Parliament .
But this is not a matter of domestic policy , but one of European security , it is a matter of European decency and I am raising it here in order to provoke a reaction from this Parliament and from the authorities of the Union in general in order to remedy this intolerable situation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , and along with my colleague Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , we join others in offering our condolences to the victims of the Russian nuclear submarine , and in asking for greater cooperation between the European Union and the Russian authorities in order to prevent a further disaster .
Obviously , we believe that the European Union has sufficient arguments to ensure such cooperation .
We would also like to express our concern - as other speakers have done - because , unfortunately , the matter that we were to discuss , that of the very serious , terrible and fatal accident of the submarine Kursk has led us to deal with the problem of a nuclear submarine in Mediterranean waters , in European Union territory , in a British colony .
This is causing very serious and justified alarm , due to a serious breakdown in the nuclear reactor , and because , among other things , European Union directives are not being complied with .
We think that there is a need to take urgent action .
The European Union must intervene , and this nuclear submarine needs to be urgently transported to a British base to be repaired under the proper conditions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as has been said , a British nuclear submarine has been moored at its Gibraltar base since 19 May .
The smallest breakdown in the cooling system of a nuclear reactor can never be considered as insignificant , as it contains heavy water with radioactive isotopes .
Moreover , the United Kingdom has knowingly failed to comply with Community regulations in terms of radiation protection , exposing its citizens in Gibraltar and those in Algeciras Bay to a very high probability of contamination , as it is now , and not last May , that it is recognising the extent of the breakdown .
In this case , there has been a violation of Community law .
We complained that Russia took four days to inform the European Community about its accident .
We took two months .
I suppose that the booing that we received from some British Members when we criticised the situation in this House was also directed at the citizens of Gibraltar .
In this House we criticised the lack of information for the population in the area and of reliable and official news from the United Kingdom .
In the same way , we criticise something which is a reality : the United Kingdom , faced with considerable social pressures in the country , has decided to transfer its base for nuclear submarine operations and repairs to Algeciras Bay , without respecting its own standards , which do not allow it to have this type of base in highly populated areas .
Equally , we deplore the contemplative attitude of the Spanish Government , which only reacted when the pressure and concern reached a maximum .
For the above reasons , those of us from Andalusia ask this Parliament , and its President , far beyond the bilateral diplomatic interests of the Member States , to carry out the appropriate consultations and negotiations to make it possible to immediately transfer this submarine to bases that have sufficient security conditions to repair it and thus to put an end to the public alarm that has been created .
The Commission shares the deep regrets expressed in the resolutions on the accident involving the Russian submarine the Kursk in the Arctic Bering Sea on 12 August and the loss of the lives of 118 seamen .
We were particularly concerned about the policy of the Russian authorities in the first days after the accident on foreign assistance and information provided to the Russian population and the wider public .
Russia is ultimately responsible for devising and implementing a plan to manage its nuclear waste and spent fuel , and the resolutions , therefore , quite rightly call upon Russia to use all available resources , including its own specialists .
The Commission considers that the international community should offer the necessary assistance to Russia .
It has already launched a number of assistance projects under various Community programmes .
Improved radioactive waste management in north-west Russia is one of the explicit priorities included in the new TACIS regulation covering the next seven years .
The Commission welcomes any action that would increase the budget funding to be used to reduce the ideological threat in north-west Russia and in particular to enable laid-up nuclear submarines to be dismantled more quickly than 10 of the North Fleet 's 100 disused nuclear submarines moored at various based in north-west Russia have been dismantled so far .
Besides the submarines , spent fuel from a number of nuclear-powered icebreakers also adds to the ecological risk .
The lack of storage capacity for spent nuclear fuel remains one of the major bottlenecks in dismantling operations as a whole .
Community-backed activities are studies to design and cost a storage facility in north-west Russia or in the southern Urals .
In the light of these studies , the international community , perhaps including the European Community , might later finance the construction of such a storage facility .
To speed up dismantling , the Community is supporting the design , construction , and licensing of a transport and storage tank for damaged spent fuel produced in the operation of nuclear submarines and icebreakers and currently stored under primitive conditions .
The Commission is also involved in a number of studies aiming to improve radioactive-waste management in north-west Russia .
Before concluding , I would like to stress the importance of international coordination in this immense task .
To give two examples , the Commission is serving in the IAEA-sponsored contact expert group .
The group 's work might eventually make it possible to draw up a comprehensive strategy and key investment projects that should be supported by the international community and , together with a number of donor countries , the Commission is currently negotiating an agreement with the Russians .
This agreement , known as the ' Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Programme ' , is intended to overcome obstacles to international aid stemming , for instance , from tax exemptions and nuclear liability .
The Commission hopes that the Kursk accident will bring about real progress in these negotiations and , in particular , strengthen the resolve of the Russian authorities to conclude the agreement .
Mr President , I would like to know whether the Commissioner has anything to say on the issue , which also relates to nuclear submarines , of the Tireless in Gibraltar .
It has been raised by five Members in this House and he has not said anything about it .
I am concerned : is it that he is deaf ?
Is it that he does not know what to do ?
Mr President , we are talking about nuclear safety , and I repeat what was said by my colleague , Mr Marset Campos : we hope that the Commissioner will say something about our problem , a problem in the European Union that is affecting citizens from two Member States .
. I took the liberty , on behalf of the Commission , of responding to the issue that we have on the agenda .
I find that quite natural .
Discussion of other subjects would have to be covered by other means and under a different agenda item .
I will be suggesting to my colleagues that we answer your questions in writing .
Mr President , the subject for today is ' Nuclear submarine accidents ' .
The Conference of Presidents decided to also include the subject of the submarine in Gibraltar in the agenda .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 5.30 p.m.
Burundi
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5 ­ 0660 / 2000 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Burundi ;
B5 ­ 0711 / 2000 by Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the agreement on peace in Burundi signed in Arusha , Tanzania ;
B5 ­ 0718 / 2000 by Mr Johan Van Hecke , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats , on the situation in Burundi ;
B5 ­ 0726 / 2000 by Mrs Maes and Mr Rod , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the situation in Burundi ;
B5 ­ 0734 / 2000 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group , on Burundi ;
B5 ­ 0739 / 2000 by Mr Vinci , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the Arusha agreement and the transition to democracy in Burundi .
Mr President , why do so many Africans struggle when it comes to sharing power ?
If the principle ' the survival of the fittest ' applies , leaving the weakest with nothing , then there is something fundamentally wrong .
If , on top of this , the fittest constitute the minority , then conflicts are bound to ensue .
As long as ethnic groups exclude each other and refuse to cooperate , there is precious little hope .
Only national reconciliation can offer some hope and this is certainly true of Burundi .
Following Mandela ' s remarkable efforts , peace seemed to be on its way at last .
Unfortunately , the fighting has not stopped and some parties have refused to sign the peace accord .
Every effort must be made in order to ensure that the new negotiations are a success .
Maximum pressure must be brought to bear on Hutu rebels to take part in the peace process instead of following the destructive instructions issued by the likes of Mr Kaliba and Mr Mugabe .

In order to ensure that all parties are involved , it is of utmost importance for the political leaders to receive personal protection , and it is high time that the violence against innocent citizens , both on the part of the government and of the opposition , came to an end .
If the fight continues , human rights continue to be violated and parties fail to get involved , there can be no talk of fully resuming European aid .
Greater willingness on their part to make peace will lead to greater willingness on our part to help .
The mediators must bring about initiatives to demobilise the parties so that they can ultimately unite in one army .
As soon as the cease-fire is achieved , the Burundi refugees must be able to count on help from the international community to provide them with a safe shelter in Burundi .
On a final note , for lasting peace in Burundi , it is crucial that peace in the Congo region is established .
Only if Africans are willing to share power does this continent have a future .
Mr President , if we start from the principle ' better a deal that is flawed than no deal at all ' , then it is true that Arusha constitutes a step forward in the Burundi peace process .
All credit for this has to go to Mandela , who shuttled between the different parties for months in order to get them not only on speaking terms but also around the negotiating table .
But the accord is not perfect .
Indeed , there is still no cease-fire and the fights around the capital of Bujumbura simply continue .
The two main Hutu rebel movements in the army , which are responsible for the best part of the violence , were not involved in the negotiations .
As such , the next phase in Nairobi , the meeting between the armed troops on 20 September , is probably more crucial than Arusha .
It is regrettable that the accord does not look beyond the regional context .
The neighbouring countries Congo and Tanzania , from where the armed groups operate , must also be reminded of their responsibilities .
Indeed , the question arises as to whether Mandela has not analysed the Burundi conflict too much from his own South African context .
It is correct that some Tutsi parties have used the risk of annihilation of the minority as an excuse to maintain their supremacy .
But this does not take away the fact that this risk in Burundi is real .
This is why we need to demand sufficient safety guarantees to protect the minority and make sure that in the event of any elections , there is no incitement of ethnic hatred .
Finally , Mr President , I do believe that Europe should resume the provision of semi-structural aid , especially in the areas of education and health care .
Otherwise , there is a risk that we will be held partly responsible for the death of thousands of innocent citizens ; a thought to which I , as a Christian-Democrat , cannot reconcile myself .
Mr President , I fully subscribe to the entreaties of Mr Van den Bos and Mr Van Hecke .
With 200 000 fatalities in Burundi , Commissioner , there is clearly a need for a peace deal or a peace accord .
However , I fear that the peace accord has been brought about because it suited the Heads of State at the time .
Maybe they should have dragged the negotiations out a while longer in order to gather everybody around the table , because I am aware that as long as the key players , both on the Hutu side and Tutsi side , do not meet , there will be no real peace .
I do welcome the fact that some movements , which were at one time some of the most implacable , have now gathered around the table .
This is why I have good reason to believe this peace accord sets the tone for the future .
I now wonder how the European Union can best fulfil the desire for peace expressed by so many people in Burundi .
To start with , I believe we will need to step up the pressure in order to achieve overall peace in the Great Lakes region .
I cannot shake off the impression that various African leaders are still too self-seeking to be able to work steadily towards peace in Congo and the Great Lakes region .
A second point is the contentious resumption of aid .
I have always regretted the notorious boycott of Burundi , particularly as it was so selective .
I now hope that we can make some real headway by means of clearly-defined peace projects and development of democracy , which we can underpin with structural aid .
Mr President , as a militant supporter of the Lutte ouvrière party in a country that played and still plays a shameful role in Burundi and in Rwanda , as it does in the whole region of central Africa , I cannot remain silent in the face of a resolution that strings together phrases supposedly in support of the people of that region while , in fact , concealing the despicable role the major powers played in the massacres carried out by the armed bands of the two conflicting ethnic groups in that region , the Tutsis and the Hutus .
Without even going back to the responsibility of the former Belgian colonial power deliberately sustaining and exacerbating the hostilities between the two ethnic groups in the two countries , today the part that both French and British interests played in the civil war is public knowledge , just as it is public knowledge that the French army was directly responsible for mobilising and arming the Hutu extreme right , which was responsible for real genocide .
And successive French Governments , on the right as well as on the left , were not even willing to do what the Belgian Government did , namely acknowledge their responsibility for this situation , although obviously that in no way lessens the crushing weight of that responsibility .
I therefore want to register my opposition to the hypocrisy of the major powers and express my solidarity with the people of Burundi and Rwanda who , over and above their ethnic rifts , over and above the responsibility of their own leaders , have paid a heavy price for the large imperialist powers ' domination of Africa .
Mr President , over one hundred years ago , European colonial powers divided tribal lands in Africa to establish national boundaries .
African countries inherited the legacy of tribal conflict as major tribes sought to dominate national politics .
Some examples are the Afars and Issas in Djibouti , the Kikuyu and Luo in Kenya and the Hutu and Tutsi in Rwanda and Burundi .
I believe the EU has to focus on how the ruling elite , the Tutsis in Burundi , can be persuaded to reconcile and cooperate with the majority Hutu to achieve peace .
The EU must insist that neighbouring countries do not interfere in Burundi and EU aid to them should be conditional on their cooperation .
This Parliament and the European Commission can help Burundi and this resolution is a very good step in that direction .
Mr President , I am very happy to be speaking at the request and on behalf of Mrs Sauquillo . We would first of all like to thank Nelson Mandela , who once again truly deserves the Nobel Peace Prize which has been awarded him .
I would like to stress that the Arusha Agreement does not represent the end of the war , for peace has not yet been established , but the agreement does exist and requires an immediate initiative from the European Union .
The initiative must include the following elements : we must send a message to those who have signed the agreement to urge them to persist and keep going along the road they have chosen ; we must send a message to those who have not yet signed the agreement to remind them that there is no alternative to peace , that the only alternative to peace is to continue with the suffering caused by colonial inheritance , death and oppression ; we must also send a message to the neighbouring countries to request that they refrain from interfering in the domestic affairs of other countries and must contribute to and uphold the peace process .
The European Union 's initiative must include financial assistance , for genuine , stable peace processes need assistance if they are to evolve into stable democracies .
After last minute amendments and a nine-hour delay , the majority of the parties involved in the two years of talks signed a scaled-down peace agreement in Arusha on 28 August .
The Commission welcomes the signature of the peace accord as an important preliminary step in the long and difficult process of negotiations to end the conflict between Burundi 's majority Hutu and minority Tutsi population .
However , as has been said in this discussion , some very important questions are still open , such as that of the cease-fire , which is the main gap in the agreement , the amnesty , the composition of the national assembly , the duration of the agreement and the transitory government leadership - no minor issues .
In spite of the number and the importance of these questions , the signature does represent an important event which puts an end to the Arusha process but not to the negotiations as such .
These will continue , mainly in Bujumbura , hopefully ensuring a higher ownership of the process by the Burundians themselves .
This has been a problem in the long process on many occasions .
The refusal to sign the agreement by the extremist parties is of concern to the Commission and every effort should be pursued to urge them to do so .
Two Tutsi parties added their signature to the agreement on the following day .
Cease-fire talks are organised for 20 September in Nairobi .
The regional presidents Moi and Thabo Mbeki stress their importance .
Successful conclusion is seen as a prerequisite for the start of the implementation of the peace agreement , deployment of UN peacekeepers and full restoration of development cooperation .
The European Community , at this stage , is ready at the technical level to gradually resume a full-scale cooperation programme in coordination with other donors .
Beyond a EUR 48 million rehabilitation programme whose implementation has started , the EC is finalising the procedures for the release of EUR 50 million STABEX funds to relaunch the rural economy .
A strategy paper is being prepared by the Commission to support the peace agreement implementation concentrating on demobilisation , social and economic reconstruction of Burundi and state reform .
Finally , the Commission is going to hold an informal donor meeting at technical level in Brussels on 15 September .
Its purpose is to report on the programme implementation , to improve coordination between donors , to prepare a common strategy to contribute to the peace agreement implementation and to prepare a high level round table of parties and donors which should take place in Paris this autumn .
We are organised to step up the actual cooperation .
I can tell Parliament that we see this as a good case to try and demonstrate how to better manage the transition from the phase of humanitarian assistance to the building up and gradual introduction of forward-oriented long-term development cooperation .
We are giving all the signals we can to organisations like the UNHCR , and also to other donors , to try and get well organised , as you can hear from what I have said .
Coordination is extremely important because we are still in a situation where the right balance and the right kind of signals to the parties in the process in Burundi are as important as the euros we are mobilising .
This is a very focused effort , trying to do things right .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 5.30 p.m.
Human rights
Mr President , the resolution that we have before us today is not intended in any way to criticise the key actors namely the Bhutanese or Nepalese Governments in the process of finding a solution for the 96 000 Nepalese speaking Bhutanese refugees living in the camps .
There have been 17 000 children born in those camps over the last ten years .
This resolution seeks to encourage initiatives and action and ask the Commission to help perhaps with financial mechanisms to support the re-settlement of these people .
We welcome the fact that Japan has donated USD 1.3 million to the refugees , and that USD 1 million has been forthcoming from world food programmes .
But the people in those camps would prefer to be re-settled back in their homelands and not have that money .
They sent us this memorandum asking our support for action to solve their problem and to have justice .
In it they say " we pray at your end , honourable European Parliamentarians , that justice may prevail on us " .
That is what we are doing here today .
Let us hope that our resolution will bring some justice to these people , will help them re-settle in their homelands and achieve some results .
Mr President , earlier this year , I had the honour to be part of a delegation from the European Parliament to New Delhi and Nepal .
Arising from our visit and in particular our visit to the refugee camps in eastern Nepal , the delegation gave a commitment that they would do everything possible to raise the issue of the continuing plight of the Bhutanese refugees in Nepal .
I would like to assure the Members of the House that the refugees are fully aware of , and greatly value and appreciate , the earlier efforts of the European Parliament in drawing attention to their situation .
This was clearly demonstrated to us during our visit to the region , and our resolve to continue to encourage an agreement now between Bhutan and Nepal is as strong as ever .
The influx of Bhutanese refugees into Nepal began in late 1991 and the fear of diminishing international attention , therefore , is always present .
The refugees have been waiting for the last ten years for an amicable and permanent solution to the crisis .
As Ms McCarthy has said - very many of them want to go home .
There have been numerous bilateral talks but so far a final political settlement has not been secured .
In New York , the United Nations Millennium Summit is taking place as we speak and it offers the Prime Ministers of Bhutan and Nepal an opportunity to come together and to demonstrate their commitment to the ideas of peace and tolerance by agreeing to an early solution to the problem of Bhutanese refugees in Nepal .
This would be a fitting way to mark the UN 's Millennium Summit .
I hope they will be given every encouragement to do so .
One of the crucial issues to be decided is the definition of the family unit for verification purposes .
Nepal has accepted a compromise put forward by the UNHCR who has been playing an important role in seeking to help to resolve the impasse .
I strongly urge the Bhutanese authorities to accept the compromise so that field verification can begin immediately .
While the European Union remains one of the major donors , both the UNHCR and the World Food Programme are finding it increasingly difficult to raise funds to run the refugee camps .
I would urge international donors to continue to make sufficient funds available to permit the running of the camps during the negotiation and the verification process .
At the same time , I would expect the donors to insist that the Bhutanese Government facilitate a rapid repatriation of the refugees .
I very much welcome the news conveyed to the House by Ms McCarthy of the generosity of the Japanese people in this particular respect .
We were assured that bilateral negotiations would be speedily concluded and that actual verification in the camps would begin last July .
That agreement regrettably is still outstanding .
I therefore reiterate once more our appeal to all those concerned to take the necessary political initiatives to achieve a lasting solution to the unacceptable plight of the Bhutanese refugees , of whom over 17 000 have been born in the camps .

Mr President , I think first we must thank the chairman of our delegation for relations with South-East Asia , Mr Gerard Collins , who has just spoken and to whom we owe this resolution , for the efforts he has made over the past months to try to resolve an issue which is not really that marginal , since it concerns tens of thousands of people who are now destitute , and have often been so for years .

I also want to say that Mr Collins had the support of the entire delegation , Mrs McCarthy , Mr Thomas Mann and all the other members , and I hope the Commission will follow up Parliament ' s unanimous position and that we will see rapid results .
I think the ball is in Bhutan ' s court , but it is now up to the Commission and the Council to put pressure on the Bhutanese Government .
Aside from this question , I want to draw attention to a matter that concerns us all and concerns our future .
Yesterday we voted for the Galeote Quecedo report on a common Community diplomacy , which in the end was reduced to a report on a future college of common diplomacy .
That is not much .
It is not much when we know that there is no Commission delegation in Bhutan , when we know that there is no Commission delegation in Nepal , but when we also know that no Member State has an embassy in Bhutan .
That certainly does not make for increased contact , nor does it make it easier to take diplomatic action to help solve this particular problem and other more general ones .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is the report you adopted .
It does not mean the communitisation , even in part , of our common foreign and security policy .
Is it really that inconceivable that in a country such as Bhutan , where we have no embassy , we could have a Commission delegation that also acted as an embassy for the 15 Member States ?
Is that really impossible ?
Is it beyond your powers of imagination ?
That is the question I wanted to ask you .
Mr President , we in the European Parliament 's SAARC delegation had an opportunity in April to see for ourselves the conditions in which tens of thousands of refugees have been living for years in the camps in eastern Nepal .
The assistance from the European Union and the international organisations is quite respectable , but no one can guarantee long-term financial aid at that level .
It is high time that substantial agreements were reached .
Bhutan and Nepal are not neighbours , but they are close to each other in spirit .
Both are kingdoms , both have parliamentary systems with short histories , one is Buddhist and the other is Hindu .
Both are aware that lasting conflict will paralyse their national and economic progress .
Bhutan criticises Nepal on the grounds that its constant changes of government make it incapable of action .
That has changed .
Nepal accuses Bhutan of not being ready to adopt effective solutions .
I hope that will change .
The undertakings given by the Bhutanese Foreign Minister when he visited us in Brussels on 8 June have been honoured , as crucial negotiations began mid-year .
There is agreement on the four categories of people living in the refugee camps .
However , there has to be a common definition of the term ' family ' for the purposes of the compromise put forward by the UNHCR , which Mr Collins has referred to .
Nepal has already agreed .
We are also appealing to India to stop primly holding back .
It is linked with both neighbours through agreements and economic ties .
There are 6 million Nepalese working in India .
The borders are open , and there are no asylum problems .
I am very familiar with the charter stipulating that bilateral conflicts should not be resolved at SAARC level .
Nevertheless , the largest democracy in the world does have the greatest influence in the region and bears some humanitarian responsibility here .
Some movement is discernible .
The Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats is putting its faith in far-sighted people of good will in Thimphu , in Kathmandu , and also in Delhi .
We are hoping that the talks in New York between the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and the Prime Ministers of Bhutan and Nepal will lead to a decisive breakthrough .
Mr President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance can only lend its firm support to this resolution which , as the Members who have direct experience of this tragic situation have said , shows our institution 's concern for a region which may well be far away but whose human tragedies cut us to the very heart .
As previous speakers have pointed out , a great deal has already been achieved and more will be achieved in the future , and it is our hope that the outcome of the forthcoming talks will be positive .
For my part , I join with Mr Dupuis in calling upon the Commission and the European Union as a whole to make diplomatic advances towards the countries which are most affected by this crisis .
All that remains is for me to state that we too will follow future developments in the situation closely .
Burma
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are faced , once again , with an exemplary case .
The text on Burma , unfortunately the umpteenth one , is very good .
The situation in Burma is crystal clear ; there is a perfect dictatorship on the one side and an exemplary opposition on the other . There has , in fact , been no sign of progress in this country for ten years .
That is the situation .
So I think we should ask ourselves a few questions .
Our policy towards Asia is a criminal policy ; it is quite literally criminal .
We treat regimes such as India , which continue to consolidate and strengthen democracy , however difficult that may be , on the same footing as other countries like China , Burma and North Korea , which , you could say , do all they can to strengthen dictatorship .
So , I think we should consider drawing up lists , defining categories and establishing different types of relations depending on the type of country .
Unfortunately that is not the case .
The European Parliament has been calling for this for a long time and we must continue to urge it .
We cannot continue to dialogue with organisations such as ASEAN and pretend that we regard them as a homogenous whole .
ASEAN is simply a grouping of totally different countries , with widely diverging interests and no prospect of integration .
We must encourage forms of integration based on democracy - which is absolutely not the case with this kind of country - and therefore promote and encourage our bilateral relations with the countries that respect democracy and want to strengthen democracy and the rule of law , and pursue an extremely tough policy towards countries like Burma .
Let me finish by saying that Burma is a country now occupied by the People ' s Republic of China .
We are informed by many sources that there are dozens of Chinese military bases in Burma .
The People ' s Republic of China is currently encircling India : that is a real fact , an actual fact .
You are aware of the situation in Pakistan .
The People ' s Republic of China ' s strategic aid to the rearmament and strengthening of Pakistan ' s nuclear weapons is a form of encirclement and if , in the course of the twentieth century , the major world problem was the German problem , the Franco-German problem , today and tomorrow too it will be an Indo-Chinese problem ; and if we do not , as of now , support the countries that are moving towards democracy , towards strengthening democracy , such as India , but instead continue to roll out the red carpet for the Beijing authorities , we will simply be encouraging a grouping that will eventually become explosive .
The explosion will hit not just Asia , but in the end will also affect Europe and the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I regret having to speak once again to defend the cause of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi .
This is not only the defence of a person who suffers for having fought for democracy and freedom , but also of what she represents in a whole population ' s fight to achieve those things .
Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi deserved the recognition of the international community by being awarded the Nobel Prize , the Sajarov Prize from this Parliament and the Prize for Freedom from Liberal International .
Now she is being denied the most basic freedoms , along with those who follow her in the difficult process against dictatorship , to which Mr Dupuis has already referred .
All these people are in an unacceptable situation .
Therefore , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports the proposals of the corresponding resolution and , in particular , I would like to draw attention to paragraph 8 , which asks that both the United States and the Commission and the Council impose the appropriate political and economic sanctions as long as there is no process of democratisation in Burma .
Mr President , we are once again debating the difficult situation in which Burma ' s elected President finds herself , as well as the aggression displayed by that country ' s military regime .
I believe that over the past two years , we have submitted as many as five or six resolutions on the situation in Burma .
It is almost intolerable that a President , elected more than ten years ago with 80 % of the votes behind her , who offers peaceful protest against her country ' s military regime , should receive insufficient support to truly adopt the role which she deserves in her country , in order to fight a military regime which rides roughshod over human rights and the rights of minorities .
This is despite the fact that she receives verbal support - by Mr Clinton only a few days ago -and the fact that she has received both the Nobel Prize and Sakharov Prize for her peaceful protest .
The national economy stays afloat thanks to drugs .
Burma , the world ' s second-largest drug-producing country , after Colombia , has dismantled its own parliament , has had numerous parliamentarians killed and imprisoned in the process , and forces its minorities into slave labour , especially in the construction of infrastructure . However , it still benefits from investments , including investments from European countries , such as those of the French oil company Total and the Dutch hydraulics industry , and there has been no attempt to block this kind of investment , either on the part of the EU or on the part of national Member States .

I am not actually in favour of economic sanctions , but in some cases - I am thinking of South Africa and Chile in the eighties - it is necessary to stop cruelty in its tracks .
In my opinion , the European Union and the United States should agree on a strategy against Burma .
I believe that Burma should be isolated politically and economically and that real , effective pressure must be exercised ; if not , we sanction violent opposition .
People elsewhere have commented : look at Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi .
She has now been in peaceful protest for twelve years and still she is being sidelined and placed under house arrest , and her people are being arrested .
And what happens ?
The international community looks on and does nothing .
I would ask the European Union to enter into talks with the United States in order come up with concrete ways of helping her , and in order to ensure that she and Burma ' s parliament can re-establish democracy in Burma .
Mr President , I should like to support what the other speakers have said .
It is ten years since the NLD won a huge majority of seats in free and fair elections , but despite that , democracy has been suppressed from every angle and at every opportunity .
I believe that the recent readmittance of Burma to the Asean and EU-Asean meetings was a major mistake from the start .
Burma has done nothing since being readmitted to Asean to show that it deserves it .
There should be a serious rethink of this policy .
Burma should be excluded .
I also believe that the European Union could do a lot more .
Aung San Suu Kyi has asked for sanctions but we have done absolutely nothing about this .
Even the United States has at least halted new investment .
Why is the European Union not ensuring that sanctions are imposed ?
We have to do everything we can to try and stop the forced labour and the human rights abuses .
As the resolution says , we should discourage any kind of tourism to Burma .
That should be supported .
Mr President , I agree with many of the comments that have been made so far by Mrs McKenna and Mrs Maij-Weggen on the situation in Burma .
However I would also like to refer to the specific case of a constituent of mine , which provides a good example of the brutality of the present Burmese authorities .
In September 1999 , James Mawdsley , from the north-east of England was sentenced to 17 years ' solitary confinement in a Burmese prison .
His mother is currently travelling to Burma hoping to see him .
His crime , according to the Burmese authorities , was to enter the country and attempt to draw attention to the human rights abuses taking place there .
The charges against him were trumped up .
For example , he was alleged to have entered the country illegally and yet British embassy staff have seen his passport , which is stamped with a Burmese immigration stamp showing that he had arrived completely legally .
British Government ministers and staff have been making constant efforts to draw the attention of the Burmese authorities to his plight , but with no success .
I ask Parliament and the Commission to do all they possibly can to secure his release .
Mr President , I would like to make it clear that the fact that Iran has been replaced by Burma in the debate on human rights does not mean that my group is not deeply concerned about the human rights situation in Iran .
We will continue to concern ourselves with that situation .
However , the current situation and the scandalous decisions being taken by the Burmese military Government and their appalling behaviour simply make it essential for the European Parliament to take a stand on this .
We are full of respect and admiration for the non-violent action , the remarkably consistent action being taken by the Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi and also by the members and politicians of the National League for Democracy .
They have earned our unreserved respect , and we wish to assure them that they have our support and that the European Union , together with the international community , will do everything it can to help to restore human rights , or to be more accurate , to introduce human rights , democracy and also the rule of law in Burma .
We are certainly still pinning our hopes in San Suu Kyi .
Her continuing campaigns show that her voice cannot be silenced and that we in Europe , therefore , also have a duty to do everything to ensure that her voice is heard not only here in Europe , but also in America and above all in Asia .
She bears the hopes of the persecuted and the repressed , and also of the many men and women used as forced labour .
She also bears the hopes of those citizens who opted for democracy , the parliamentary system and the rule of law before 1990 .
We must call on our partners , the ASEAN States , but also other states in Asia to do everything to bring about a change in this ' transitional government ' as it so cynically still calls itself .
That is why I think it is right that we should take stronger economic sanctions .
The EU has acted correctly here .
We now need an institutionalised dialogue , and a debate on Burma should be right at the top of the agenda of the Laos Summit , to make it clear that both ASEAN and the EU bear some responsibility for events in Burma .
Violations of human rights in Colombia , particularly the case of Fr . Brendan Forde
Mr President , this Parliament has discussed the situation in Colombia many times .
The situation in Colombia is that of a latent civil war in which , over several decades , the violence has taken on a structural nature .
This latent civil war was complicated a great deal as a result of the development of drug trafficking , with Colombia becoming a country where drugs are produced and transported to the rest of the world .
In that situation , there are various groups who use violence .
I am referring not only to the paramilitary organisations and the guerrillas , but also to the drug trafficking organisations .
At times , even military units use violence and violate human rights .
In a situation of this kind , the attempt to establish peace zones , for example through the peace communities established in the rural region of Urabá , has faced great difficulties .
In fact , recently there have been murders in these communities in Urabá , specifically in the region of La Unión .
Their leaders have had death threats , and death threats in Colombia are something to be taken very seriously , because they tend to be carried out .
There is really not very much this Parliament can do .
We of course support the efforts of the Colombian Government and other organisations to achieve peace , and we reiterate our desire and interest in the European institutions cooperating with the Colombian Government in helping to maintain peace .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Medina Ortega said , we too must reiterate the unfortunate position of the conflict in Colombia , and highlight that in the Peace Community in La Unión , in the region of Urabá , there have been three murders since 1997 .
Fortunately , the Colombian Government has decided to pursue those responsible and punish them accordingly .
But the fact is that , since 1997 , there have been three murders , the most recent on 8 July of this year , and the Peace Community of La Unión and the Intercongregational Committee for Justice and Peace , including the Irish Franciscan priest Brendan Forde , have had repeated death threats , despite their position of remaining neutral and contributing to bringing peace to the area .
We think that this situation again requires the strongest possible action on the part of the European institutions .
Both the Commission and the European Parliament have a series of opportunities for this in cooperation with the United Nations Human Rights Office and also through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Colombia .
We urge the Commission , obviously in cooperation with Parliament , to provide the Colombian Government with all our political force and capacity for pressure so that finally the desired peace can come to Colombia and these tragic situations of assassinations , deaths and murders do not happen again .
I had the honour last year of visiting this beautiful , tormented country and it is a privilege accorded to us here in the European Parliament to be able to raise our voices to defend the rights of people a great distance from here .
I also had the honour of meeting many of the human rights activists in Colombia last year .
This year we have heard in Ireland , as is obvious from the concern expressed by Irish colleagues here today , of the danger facing Father Brendan Forde , a Franciscan working in the small village of La Ùnion who has chosen to remain with his parishioners at considerable danger to his own life .
He is so isolated he probably will never hear of the debate here today .
He has to go eight miles before he can find a telephone to communicate with anybody .
For that reason , it is our privilege here to raise our voices to demand that his life and the lives of those living in his community are protected and to make sure that the Colombian Government is aware of our concerns .
Madam President , first of all I would like to express my grave disappointment at the resolution which we have before us .
My group , the Green / EFA Group , signed the amendment , but we were appalled that the amendment and the resolution does not go far enough .
They do not cover a number of serious issues like Plan Colombia and the grave human rights abuses that are taking place in the country .
It has been stated by many human rights organisations that human rights abuses by paramilitaries have the support of the armed forces and that the murder of the poor people in rural areas is as a result of this .
Most of the Colombian military forces continue to be implicated in serious human rights abuses and their aiding and abetting of paramilitary atrocities are basically ignored by the Colombian authorities .
The US State Department has consistently reported that Colombia 's armed forces have taken measures to punish human rights abuses in their ranks .
Plan Colombia will result in USD 1.3 billion from the US being allocated for mainly military purposes .
Many human rights organisations believe that the plan will worsen conditions for poor rural populations and will certainly increase political violence .
It is going to irreversibly damage the people and the environment and it will not solve the drugs problem .
There was no consultation on Plan Colombia with the Colombian people , which is unacceptable .
I was in Colombia last year with NGOs and I can tell you that the situation there is really grave .
The Colombian soldiers continue to actively encourage the paramilitaries responsible for human rights violations and it is clear that the United States and Colombia have acted against the interests of the people .
I believe that this should have been part of the resolution .
The only group that wanted to address Plan Colombia and the whole human rights situation in Colombia was our own group .
That is really unfortunate and a gross abdication of our duty to people all over the world .
Mr President , when President Pastrana appeared before this Parliament he committed himself to working for peace in his country , but he forgot to mention three quite important issues .
Firstly , the high level of responsibility of the Government itself , which covers up violations of human rights , torture , kidnapping and murders committed by paramilitary groups in collusion with the army .
Secondly , that such serious problems as cocaine growing and violence can only be solved through peace talks with the FAR and the ELN .
And thirdly , that he was preparing Plan Colombia for military intervention in the area with the United States , going behind the backs of European and world opinion .
For these reasons , and given the danger represented by Plan Colombia of Latin America becoming another Vietnam , we need to act with three specific proposals .
Firstly , that any aid to Colombia from the European Union will be granted once a peace agreement has been signed between the Government , the FAR and the ELN .
Secondly , that the European Union must condemn Plan Colombia and demand that the solution to the conflict be a negotiated and peaceful one , in order to avoid this escalation of military action .
And thirdly , the European Union must demand that President Pastrana puts an end to all violations of human rights by paramilitary groups in his country , and that the sad world records of thousands of victims that are reached each year should come to an end .
Therefore , allow me to also add - as has already been said , but I think that it is worth saying it specifically - that the European Union should establish a human rights observatory in Latin America , associated with the United Nations observatory that already exists .
Because there are so many countries , but above all Colombia , that fail to guarantee respect for democracy and human rights , it is our responsibility to give adequate help to the region , which has such importance for us and for the world .
Mr President , could I say directly to Commissioner Nielson that I wrote to you on 18 August expressing my concern about the life and the plight of Father Brendan Forde , the Irish priest whose life is currently under threat in the complex political circumstances that pertain in Colombia .
Could I add to that the name of one young man born and raised in Ireland , Tristan James Murray , whose mother comes from my part of Ireland in Wexford , and his Colombian colleague , Javier Nova , young environmentalists missing since July .
We all have concerns that Plan Colombia might escalate the conflict and increase the influence of the guerrillas out there .
Please ensure that aid from the EU , and indeed American aid , is used as it should be used , not to increase the attacks by the militia against the peace communities in the name of trying to take out the guerrillas .
Father Forde is staying where he is because he is trying to protect his community .
His life has been threatened ; he has been given twenty days to get out and the International Red Cross will support all we are saying about it .
We have to raise the international profile of all the people , including the communities whose lives are under threat and we trust Commissioner Nielsen you will do all you can for us .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , two minutes are hardly sufficient to relate the appalling figures which describe events in Columbia .
I will mention but a few , listed in the last e-mail I received from Amnesty International : 50 civilians were killed last month by paramilitaries ; 400 civilian massacres took place during 1999 ; 3 500 victims of police crimes ; 1 000 abductions ; 250 000 Colombian civilians have been thrown out of their homes for political reasons .
In addition , there has been another massacre in the rural community La Unión , the third in three years .
We have a moral obligation to declare that this massacre was perfectly planned , that , nowadays , everything that happens in Columbia happens for a reason .
So what can we do ?
Wait for the next massacre in La Unión or another village to produce yet another resolution expressing our grief or , as some of the Members have suggested - and rightly so - make our voice heard , loud and clear ?
In my opinion , Parliament must now find the courage to make its voice heard , for , to make reference to Amnesty International once again , all the parties taking part in the conflict are responsible for the violations of human rights in Columbia , but one of them - the paramilitaries - has a greater responsibility .
Indeed , the paramilitary groups are crushing the civilian population in a lethal vice .
As has been pointed out , President Pastrana appeared before this House and offered to make a substantial effort to bring all the parties to dialogue .
It is Parliament 's responsibility to call for a system of rules and rights to be re-established , within the Colombian State , most importantly , as well as condemning the current situation in Columbia .
The paramilitaries act in agreement and in cahoots with the army , which in many cases - including this one - draw up the death lists .
To date , there has been no serious attempt to bring the heads of this alleged paramilitary army to justice - for example Carlos Castaños , who continues to broadcast his interviews on Colombian radio with impunity .
We therefore reiterate our support for a peaceful solution and , without hypocrisy , we call upon the Colombian Government to reflect upon the tragic actions of the paramilitaries .
Lastly , we call upon the Commission and the Member States to employ all the appropriate political resources to preserve the security of the civilian organisations involved in upholding human rights .
Mr President , as Manolo Medina said , once again we are talking about Colombia .
In this case , in order to ask for protection for the Irish Franciscan priest Brendan Forde and his colleagues .
However , the last time a human rights defender was assassinated in Colombia was in May .
His name was Ramiro Zapata .
25 human rights defenders have been assassinated in the past year and a half .
In recent years , 3 000 activists from Unión Patriótica have died .
Luis Guillermo Pérez , also a human rights defender , insists that there is a plan , called the Hundred plan , to assassinate up to one hundred human rights defenders .
I think that this is a catastrophe for Colombia .
Let us hope that this human rights defender is exaggerating .
But if what he says is true , it is a catastrophe for Colombia .
I think that the European Union should have its own initiative , its own strategy , separate from any military venture , as that of the United States appears to be , in order to make life more bearable for the people of Colombia .
Mr President , once again this Parliament , which has an inescapable and irrevocable commitment to human rights in Colombia and the whole world , has to express its concern regarding the situation in that country and , specifically , the death threats received by the Irish priest Brendan Forde and his community , which we firmly reject .
The European Union , Mr President , should , in my opinion , do something more than expressing its concern , demanding the safety of its citizens and reiterating its support for the peace negotiation efforts initiated by President Pastrana with the paramilitary groups .
It is now time to move from words to actions so that we do not just carry on making purely rhetorical statements .
I would like to point out that President Pastrana was the first foreign Head of State who wished to appear before the plenary session of Parliament in this legislature .
He now needs a specific response from the European Union that shows solidarity on the three fronts that he has opened up : the process of negotiation of the armed conflict , combating drugs , which we should approach from a point of view of shared responsibility , and strengthening institutions , with a particular appeal for the defence of human rights .
I would like to recall the words of President Pastrana in this Parliament : " I believe that a decent and democratic future is not possible without a culture of respect for fundamental rights .
I know that in the course of the protracted internal conflict in Colombia these rights have suffered serious violations , and this must not continue .
I am totally committed to the defence of human rights . "
The reality that is currently devastating the country is quite different , Mr President .
Therefore , I think it is important that the Commission tells us what resources it has in order for the Community to respond to this problem , because , in the draft budget for 2001 , no reference is made to the response that Mrs González Álvarez mentioned a moment ago : a genuine response from the European Union itself .
How does the Commission intend to respond , to show solidarity with the conflict that is devastating the country ?
British soldiers held hostage in Sierra Leone
Mr President , unfortunately , kidnappings in Sierra Leone are once again in the news .
This time it is the kidnapping of eleven British soldiers by the West Side Boys militia .
To this we must add the attacks carried out by this group of rebels with the aim of extending their area of influence , which have cost the lives of three members of the pro-governmental forces .
These are actions that the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats strongly condemns and which the European Parliament should also condemn . At the same time , it should also demand the immediate and unconditional release of the soldiers who are being held hostage and show its support for the Government of Sierra Leone , and for the UNAMSIL and British army forces who are working to consolidate peace in that country .
It is still a precarious peace , which is demonstrated by this kidnapping .
That is why we cannot just stop at words of condemnation , but we must move on to action and also demand that the Lomé Peace Agreements are complied with and that all the militias are disarmed .
However , as long as poverty continues to rule in Sierra Leone , until the trafficking of diamonds is put to an end once and for all and the arms trade is ended , there will be no chance of peace for this tortured country .
The European Union must therefore use every means within its power , not only in order to help fund the peace process , but also , above all , in order to make it possible to establish living conditions that make peace irreversible .
We therefore need a generous and coordinated policy of development cooperation , especially in the field of education .
This is why a budgetary effort is being requested for this policy , as a policy that will contribute to ending the blight of poverty .
But , above all , we need decisive action on the part of the European Union , the Member States and the whole of the international community in order to put an end to diamond trafficking in the area .
As long as a country ' s natural wealth is only benefiting warlords , that is , as long as diamonds enable the paramilitaries to have sufficient capital to provide themselves with arms and continue their activities , peace will be nothing more than an impossible dream .
Without peace , development will only be a Utopia .
Mr President , Commissioner , hearing these accounts of misery related each time we meet here in Strasbourg makes me wonder what we can actually do to help .
In Sierra Leone , not only are UN soldiers and British soldiers taken hostage , a complete nation has been held hostage for years We are accessories to this , if only through the diamond trade .
On 5 July , the Security Council instituted an embargo on diamonds from Sierra Leone .
The European Union should now pull out all the stops in order to make this embargo happen and to stop all trade in blood diamonds .
I believe that , for this reason , it is not sufficient to curb the diamond trade in Sierra Leone .
We should also continue to support the Government , but I also believe that support for the war tribunal is absolutely necessary .
We need to put an end to the immunity from punishment whereby people can use weapons to kill their fellow-citizens .
Mr President , of course I feel sympathy for the 12 British soldiers captured in Sierra Leone by one of the armed gangs plaguing the country .
They , too , are the victims of a policy whose main victim is the people of Sierra Leone .
But primarily , that policy is a result of government action , of the action of the UK Government supported by all the major western powers , especially France , and the UN .
I find it disgusting that the resolution makes no mention of the United Kingdom ' s past and present role in that country .
After plundering and exploiting the region , that former colonial power rigged the elections and imposed a government that mainly represents its own interests .
Its machinations are one of the main contributing factors in a barbaric civil war in which it is implicated directly , by its diplomacy and by the naval pressure it is exerting , and indirectly by the behaviour on the ground of the troops of its former African colonies , which is just as dreadful as that of the armed gangs .
These armed gangs , including the RUF , certainly do not represent the interests of the people of Sierra Leone , in terms either of their methods or their objectives .
But , however great their responsibility for the misfortunes of their country , it does not match the cynicism of the British ministers and high dignitaries .
To conclude , we will vote against this resolution , which conceals a colonialist policy that is hardly in keeping with today ' s world .
Mr President , I rather object to the efforts made earlier by the Spanish left to make political capital out of Gibraltar on the back of the tragedy of the Kursk .
HMS Tireless is safe in British territory and the repairs will be carried out to the highest safety standards .
On the subject of Sierra Leone , I further object to the statement by the previous speaker , but there is a wider point that I would like to make concerning the British Government 's role .
We warned the British Labour Government months ago about the dangers of an open-ended commitment of British troops to Sierra Leone .
Our troops should have been given a clear and finite mission with a realistic exit strategy from the start .
The present unacceptable situation is a clear consequence of mission creep and political indecision and provides a clear lesson for the future .
Mr President , the situation in Sierra Leone has been the subject of our urgent debates on several occasions , and we have always dealt with it by encouraging peace talks , national reconciliation and aid for the displaced population , and by calling for an international criminal justice system that can try those responsible for the genocide that is being committed in that country .
Today , we are not faced with a merely political issue , but with a criminal act that falls under a criminal code .
We are talking about a kidnapping carried out by criminals who have no political links , either with the members of the former military junta or with any of the groups that signed the peace agreement in July 1999 .
Their demands are limited to a request for a group of prisoners to be freed and for the revision of a peace agreement that is supposed to be putting back together a country that has been torn to pieces .
The victims of the kidnapping undoubtedly have a great deal of political significance .
The international presence in Sierra Leone is a good example of the perseverance on the part of the international community in seeking world peace .
Therefore , taking on that responsibility , we are in support of the European Parliament addressing the Government of Sierra Leone today and calling for the immediate and unconditional release of the British soldiers who have been taken hostage .
Turkish bombing in the north of Iraq
Mr President , this is a truly distressing affair .
Possibly the most important founding principle of the European Union was peace and those who seek to join the Union must try to conduct their domestic and their foreign affairs in as peaceable a fashion as possible .
Turkey , as we appreciate , suffers from an extremely vulnerable border and it is a particular problem for it to establish the requisite stability and peaceful circumstances that its integration to Europe properly requires .
As a part of the pre-accession phase of Turkey 's candidacy , we should try to establish a functional forum where military as well as civilian and economic issues should be shared between us .
Turkey 's membership of NATO presents many of our Member States with a special responsibility in this respect .
The development of a common European Security and Defence Policy should be seen as a pretext , and also as a bridge , for us to reach common positions on ways to combat terrorism while respecting fundamental rights .
If we are able to succeed in creating such a practical forum , we should be able to expect that this sort of sad critical incident will be put firmly in the past .
Mr President , Turkey is one of the NATO countries and is applying to join the European Union .
It has signed all kinds of international Treaties , including those protecting human rights , banishing torture , etc .
Nevertheless , Turkey continues to bomb the Kurds who live outside its borders , in northern Iraq .
Commissioner , I think we should be quite plain about this .
Matters will never improve without a clear , political and peaceful solution to the Kurdish problem , and Turkey should realise this .
I believe that stabilisation - and we at least hope that peace in the Middle East is inching nearer day by day - will only happen if a solution is found to the Kurdish problem .
We naturally want to express our sympathy to the families hit by bombings , most recently in August , and we demand the greatest respect for international borders .
If this respect is not forthcoming , it will be a continual source of misery .
War will never lead to peace .
Mr President , the mother of a victim of the bombing who was interviewed on television asked " How is my child to blame ? "
Why should women , children and defenceless civilians always be the victims of military action ?
Over 32 people were killed and 40 were injured in the bombing of Kurdish villages by the Turkish military in Kendakor on 15 August .
This is a bloodbath and a crime against humanity .
It is a sign of the Turkish Government 's attitude towards peace and towards the Kurds at a time when the Kurds had made a peaceful gesture .
As a spokesperson for the Turkish Ministry for Foreign Affairs has confirmed , Turkey from time to time carries out operations against the PKK , who have now , for the third time , declared a unilateral ceasefire .
I would like to know why arms are being delivered to Turkey right in the middle of the pre-accession process , and why arms factories are being built .
Why were the human rights organisations and World Peace Day banned on 1 September ?
Is it really possible to accelerate the democratisation process using weapons and arms ?
The answer is no .
The best way to achieve peace is a peaceful solution of the Kurdish problem and respect for human rights .
Why is that mothers always have to suffer ?
Can we not help to foster fellowship and peace between the Kurdish and Turkish peoples ?
I welcome the MEDA programme , which states that all state , legal , political , cultural and social discrimination against the Kurdish population by the Turkish Government should cease .
Granting EU financial aid to Turkey should be tied to solving the Kurdish problem , and this aid should be devoted to overcoming the economic and social underdevelopment of the Kurdish region .
Bombing civilian populations should no longer be allowed in this century .
I wish to condemn this inhumanity and want to see an end to this crime . Those guilty of such crimes should be condemned .
I call on the Council and the Member States to consistently condemn the bombing of Kurdish villages and to make representations to the Turkish Government for them to start negotiations with the Kurds ' democratic representatives for a political solution as soon as possible .
That is the fast track into the EU .
Mr President , this will be the third time that I have spoken in the House during this part-session on various aspects concerning Turkey and its relations with the European Union .
This will have given me an opportunity to address a number of points that I will be taking up in the report this Assembly has asked me to draw up on enlargement to Turkey and its accession to the EU .
I will not go back over that but I do want to give my opinion here .
If it turns out that the bombardment of Kendakor on 15 August was carried out by the Turkish army , we will have to encourage the Turkish Government gradually to reduce the role its armed forces continue to play , on the pretext of combating terrorism , in areas likely to cast serious doubt on the credibility of Turkey ' s wish to join the European Union .
There seem to be signs that the fight against terrorism is being won and I sincerely believe that the time has come to take this kind of decision .
Simply because the military has that force , it cannot and must not , except in times of emergency , have the power of decision on the use of force .
My 40-year military career has fully persuaded me that cedant arma togae , let war yield to peace .
Mr President , the joint motion for a resolution on the Turkish bombing in the north of Iraq was tabled by five of the European Parliament ' s political groups .
That proves the importance our Parliament attaches to respect for international law and human rights in that part of the world and its extreme vigilance when a candidate country for EU membership , in this case Turkey , is concerned .
Indeed , we cannot allow northern Iraq , which is an area of limited sovereignty by virtue of international decisions , also to become an area outside the rule of law , an area where anything goes and where , on top of that , the presence of observers is entirely prohibited .
The legitimate fight against terrorism does not justify collective acts of punishment , victimising the Kurdish inhabitants of entire villages .
Disproportionate reprisals of that kind should be banished forever from the military arsenal of a civilised country .
Mr President , as my colleague Mrs Uca said , it is unacceptable for a country that wishes to become a member of the European Union to bombard defenceless people , kill more than 30 civilians and injure more than 40 people .
We think that the least that can be asked of a country , in these circumstances , is that it respects international law .
And of course , we also must condemn the hypocrisy of some Member States which , breaking the code of conduct for exporting arms to countries that could use them in the way that Turkey did in this particular case , export arms there .
We think it is hypocritical to condemn the event and then to send arms so that it can happen again .
We also feel that the European Union should monitor each of the candidate countries primarily with regard to human rights .
Otherwise , it is not acceptable for it to become a part of this Union .
Firstly , on the refugees in Nepal , the Commission fully shares the concern of the honourable Members about the state of the refugees living in the camps in eastern Nepal and , like them , is calling for an early and permanent solution .
New impetus and political will are needed from both sides to find an appropriate solution .
Above all , arrangements should be agreed for those who wish to go back to Bhutan voluntarily .
Technical solutions cannot be found unless the negotiators are firmly resolved to reach agreement .
The Commission acknowledges the results achieved by Mrs Ogata , the head of the UNHCR , for instance , when she visited Bhutan and Nepal last May , and the commitment of both sides to find a viable solution soon .
I have also talked to government representatives from both parties .
They also seem determined to find a solution .
Mrs Ogata 's and the visit of a European Parliament delegation in April this year have been instrumental to genuine progress .
However , the Commission regrets that the formula for verification in the camps has not yet been agreed , despite recent expectations that an agreement would be found .
In its regular contacts with the Nepalese and Bhutanese authorities the Commission has invariably stressed that this problem must be dealt with as a matter of urgency .
The EC is a major donor of humanitarian aid to the refugees and to date has spent more than EUR 11 million .
The Commission has used every opportunity to urge both sides to achieve tangible results .
It has repeatedly stated its commitment to provide the necessary resources to facilitate reintegration and resettlement of the refugees once real progress has been made .
A number of EU Member States have made the same commitment .
In the current financial year the Commission will supply EUR 1.5 million in assistance to the camps via the UNHCR .
The risk that funds might run short should be avoided .
This is completely manageable , given the amounts involved .
It is our responsibility to prevent it .
The Commission is looking forward to assessing the results of the forthcoming discussion between the Prime Minister of Nepal , Mr Koirala , and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bhutan , Mr Zimba , due to take place in the UN General Assembly on 11 September .

Moving on to the recent events in Burma , on 18 May the Commission deplored in this House the continued violation of human rights by the Burmese military machine .
We referred on that occasion to extrajudicial killings , the imposition of forced labour , the forced displacement of local populations , the repression of political opponents and the prevention of the full functioning of legitimate political parties .
We also condemned the restrictions on the freedom of movement of Aung San Suu Kyi and other members of the National League for Democracy and the routine practice of arbitrary arrests .
At the same time , the Commission expressed its support for the common EU position on Burma and for the decision of the April 2000 General Affairs Council to strengthen this common position .
We use every possible opportunity to press our Asian partners to urge the State Peace and Development Council to enter into a substantive dialogue with the democratically elected representatives and the ethnic minorities .
The aim must be to arrive at a mutually agreed solution to the present situation , re-establishing respect for international standards of human rights in Burma .
Several speakers this afternoon have mentioned tourism .
The EU has already clearly expressed its support for Aung San Suu Kyi 's call on people from all civilised countries to refrain from tourist visits to Burma .
We encourage our citizens to respond accordingly .
The most recent developments in Rangoon provide perfect proof , if proof were needed , of the validity of our condemnation of the military regime 's unacceptable practices .
The unwarranted seizure and subsequent detention of Aung San Suu Kyi and senior members of her party , together with local youth leaders , last Saturday , cannot in any way be justified by claims that they need ' protection ' .
Nor can such treatment be justified by unsubstantiated allegations of conspiracy .
This was a simple exercise in thuggery by an administration acting in panic .
The Commission therefore joins its voice to the calls from all over the world for an immediate end to the house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi and her senior colleagues , the immediate restoration of normal channels for diplomatic access to the leadership of the National League for Democracy , the immediate release of the local youth leaders currently held without charge , and an immediate end to the illegal surveillance of private telephone conversations by democratically elected political representatives in Burma .
On the human rights situation in Colombia , our attention has been drawn on a number of occasions to the murders of innocent civilians in Colombia .
Impunity for the perpetrators of such atrocities has almost been systematic .
We have also seen a dramatic increase in death threats against people providing assistance on the ground to more vulnerable groups .
For example , we have been informed that serious threats have been made against the Irish priest Brendan Forde , who is working in one of the regions most affected by violence .
The Commission deeply deplores and condemns this situation and calls all parties in the conflict to respect humanitarian law and principles .
The Commission also supports the peace efforts promoted by President Pastrana .
It will do anything in its power in order to promote support for lasting peace in the country .
As regards what has been said in the debate this afternoon , in my view more guns are not a shortcut to a solution for Colombia but will merely add to the problems .
The Commission fully shares Parliament 's concerns over the recent kidnapping of eleven British soldiers in Sierra Leone .
We hope the ongoing efforts to secure the release of the remaining six soldiers are successful .
We would like to express our solidarity with the soldiers and their families .
The Commission is concerned that incidents like this and the abduction of UN personnel could hamper attempts to put the peace process back on track .
We would welcome any decision by the United Nations Security Council to strengthen the UN force in Sierra Leone .
The Security Council 's resolution of 5 July this year banning the illicit trade in diamonds from Sierra Leone has now been transposed into Community law .
This ban , as well as the ban on arms sales to other groups which has been in force since 1997 , must be strictly implemented .
The Commission calls on all parties concerned - and that , of course , also includes the diamond industry in Europe - to support the UN 's sanctions committees in achieving this end .
The Commission remains supportive of the Government 's attempts to restore peace to the country and to implement programmes of economic recovery .
With funds from the European Development Fund support is being provided to demobilise and reintegrate ex-combatants within the framework of a wider reconstruction and rehabilitation programme .
Economic recovery is being assisted through a EUR 8.2 million programme of budgetary support and a technical assistance programme supporting improved public financial management .
Within the next few weeks the Commission will be seeking approval for a rehabilitation and reintegration programme of EUR 30 million , a health sector support programme of EUR 28 million , a programme of post-conflict budget support of EUR 34.75 million and a support programme to the Ministry of Finance of EUR 4.5 million .
As regards humanitarian assistance , the Commission , through ECHO , is continuing to finance programmes in support of displaced and refugee communities through international NGOs and the UN .
Since the beginning of 1999 ECHO has provided some EUR 26 million of assistance covering the supply of medical aid , therapeutic feeding , water and sanitation and psycho-social support for children affected by war .
This is especially important , given the terrible situation for child soldiers and children in general in Sierra Leone .
In addition , this funding has specifically covered support for amputees and refugees and internally displaced populations .
As regards northern Iraq , the Commission shares the concern expressed in various draft resolutions about the latest operations by the Turkish Air Force and the resulting civilian casualties .
The Commission has noted that the Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs is looking into the incident and into possible compensation .
The upheavals caused by each incursion of the Turkish military into Iraq undermine the efforts to stabilise the area and inflict unnecessary suffering on the Kurdish population .
They have suffered enough .
What is needed for a return to normal life in the area is stability , peace and support for economic development .
Over the past few years , the Union has repeatedly stressed the need to respect the integrity of Iraq and its border with Turkey .
These latest border violations again do not solve the problems in Turkey , or anywhere else .
In our view , a peaceful dialogue between the parties is the only viable path to lasting stability in the area .
I have noted carefully what Members of this House have said this afternoon about their expectations in relation to Turkey , not least regarding its future place in European cooperation , and I certainly share their views .
Mr President , I would like to say that , with regard to the situation in Colombia , we put a question to the Commissioner , who answered that the Commission supports the peace efforts being made by President Pastrana .
I asked him whether the Commission would complement this rhetorical support with any kind of support that did not just consist of words .
I realise that this is perhaps not the time to discuss this , but I would like the Commission to answer us , even if it is in writing .
I will be happy to augment what I am saying now by more thorough comments in writing .
My immediate response is that we have to be careful , to put it plainly and directly , not to be cast in a role as simply providing funding for activities that we may not agree with 100 % .
We also have to take care to be sufficiently focused on poverty and doing something that really is to the benefit of the most disadvantaged groups .
So what we are doing now and what we will do in the future , financially speaking , in Colombia , will have to be tailored very carefully against that background .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 5.30 p.m.
Temelín nuclear power station
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
B5-0708 / 2000 by Mrs McNally and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the Czech nuclear power plant in Temelín ;
B5-0723 / 2000 by Mr Flemming and Mr Chichester , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) , on the Temelín reactor ;
B5-0732 / 2000 by Mr Echerer and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the nuclear power plant in Temelín ;
B5-0745 / 2000 by Mr Papayannakis and Mr Sjöstedt , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the nuclear power plant in Temelín .
Mr President , I am taking the place of Mrs McNally who has had to go back to the United Kingdom this afternoon .
The European Union with the support of this Parliament has already done much to raise the technical and operational safety of Soviet-type nuclear reactors and to create independent regulators .
As I understand it , what is being done at Temelín has already been done in Finland and there is similar upgrading work in hand at Kozloduy in Bulgaria with the support of a Euratom loan .
What I would like the Commission to confirm , if possible , is if the work at Temelín follows the recommendations of twelve inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency and that it will , in fact , create safety standards equivalent to those in our Member States .
That is the assurance , or reassurance , that the public in the European Union requires .
We have had many messages from the Czech authorities this week .
They claim that most of the actions which we request in this resolution have already been carried out and that the remainder are , in fact , under way .
Is the Commission in a position to confirm that this afternoon , and if not , will it undertake to supply its views on this matter with urgency to the Industry Committee of the European Parliament ?
Mr President , many EU Member States have a very friendly relationship with the Czech Republic , and even one based on family ties .
But I believe that in a good family you can also say things that do not suit other members of the family .
Nuclear power stations in the European Union have the highest safety standards in the world , and a candidate country that wants to commission a new nuclear power station must , of course , comply with those standards .
It is right to say that evaluating safety standards at Temelín is a matter for the Czech nuclear regulatory authority .
But it is also true to say that during the accession partnership with the Czech Republic , the Commission has identified the implementation of Community legislation on environmental impact assessment as a priority , partly because of Temelín .
Nevertheless , although the Czech Republic signed the agreement on cross-border EIA , the Espoo Convention , in 1993 , it has still not ratified it .
Now , all of a sudden , trial operation is to start at Temelín , with undue haste and in a few days ' time , before Germany and Austria , which are neighbouring countries , have received the information requested and before the deeply concerned population of the neighbouring countries has had an opportunity to consider the position and make their objections known to the Czech authorities .
That is what the Espoo Convention stipulates , and it is , after all , valid EU legislation .
I call on the Czech Government , indeed I implore it , to take seriously the fears not only of people in neighbouring countries , but also within its own borders .
The reactors at Temelín are a Soviet design , VVER1000 , and there is nothing Westinghouse can do about that .
Please just think about Chernobyl .
I appeal once again to the Czech Government to act voluntarily now in just the same way as they would have to act if they already belonged to the European Union and were a member of our great European family .
Mr President , I would first like to thank my colleagues for their constructive and objective cooperation , which has resulted in this joint motion for a resolution .
In the course of 13 project modifications , environmental impact assessment has been simply disregarded .
As Mrs Flemming said , it is a long time since the Espoo Convention was signed .
It should have been ratified by the Czech Parliament at the beginning of the year and transposed into national law , but this has been indefinitely delayed without any reasons being given .
Despite this , the constant concerns about safety expressed by the public , in the press and also in private discussions are not being taken seriously .
During the last bilateral meetings between Czech , Austrian and German experts on 2 and 5 September this year , it was once again stated that Temelín does not meet German safety standards and would not , therefore , receive an operating licence in Germany .
My fourth point is that electricity from Temelín is not intended for internal consumption : it is intended for export , and at dumping prices at that .
Fifthly , the safety of European citizens is at stake here and our responsibility towards them should be adequate grounds for action .
The Commission says that we do not have any legal options here .
Well , the Commission has known that for a long time .
Did the Commission expect that somebody would just pull a legal measure out of the hat ?
No .
I expect that the Greens ' view will be the well-established one that safety and nuclear power stations are two incompatible concepts.The fact of the matter is that there are eastern European nuclear power stations and western European nuclear power stations .
Double standards are being applied here , and that must stop .
Our friends in the Commission have to accept that you cannot use legal measures alone to solve every single problem .
I therefore expect the Commission and the Council to demonstrate together the same strong and combined political will that the European Parliament is displaying with this motion for a resolution .
I would like to comment on the Technical Group of Independent Members ' amendment , which does not include any sensible or new requirements apart from a hint at compromise .
I cannot vote for this policy .
It is simply populist to gloss over the long-standing failure or lack of interest on the part of politicians towards this issue by threatening a veto - it will not have the desired effect and it will not create a constructive basis for negotiations .
The safety of Europe 's citizens and , thus , confidence in the Community should be a priority for us all .
Our motion for a resolution is enormously important for the people of Europe and above all for the Czech public .
I hope that we will not disappoint them .
Mr President , this issue should not even be a subject of urgent debate .
I deplore the cynical Green exploitation and misrepresentation of the situation .
Interference in the internal affairs of a candidate country with the political blackmail of a threat to veto accession to the EU is wholly unacceptable .
I regret that people in Austria have allowed themselves to be ruled by emotion , not rational scientific argument .
The Czechs show every sign of behaving responsibly and properly according to internationally accepted standards , and we should leave them to get on with it .
Although I signed the joint motion as instructed by my political group , I intend to vote against this resolution .
Mr President , as the third Austrian to speak , I was starting to worry that I would have nothing to add .
But having heard Mr Chichester , I think it is worth reiterating that we have to pay serious attention to the wishes and concerns of the people of Europe , and of Austria in particular , as regards nuclear energy . This applies especially to the Temelín nuclear power station .
My group is supporting this motion for a resolution on Temelín for reasons of principle , because we take the people 's concerns seriously and because many of us have , for a long time , been actively fighting against nuclear energy in the East and in the West .
The political battle against the Zwentendorf nuclear power station in Austria has had an enduring formative influence on me personally , so I did not need to be convinced by the conservative arguments in the Austrian media over the last few days which I have followed with surprise and sometimes with quiet amusement .
Like Mrs Echerer , I oppose the single , very vaguely worded amendment , because I believe that the phrase ' high level ' does not mean anything , because the Czech Republic itself is surely aware of the need for a high level of safety .
I therefore fully support the motion for a resolution before us and oppose the amendment .
Mr President , I should like to confess to the Members of this Chamber that I feel rather ambivalent about this issue .
On the one hand , I am an old opponent of nuclear power and have for many years been a member of the board of the Swedish Nuclear Power Inspectorate . On the other hand , I am chairman of the Delegation to the Joint EU-Czech Republic Parliamentary Committee .
I should therefore quickly like to say three things .
First of all : concern about nuclear power means that safety will not only be good but that it will , at all times , be as good as it possibly can be .
Secondly , the same rules naturally apply to the Czech Republic as apply to other candidate States and , in the long run , to Member States .
Thirdly , this resolution ought to be seen as part of an open dialogue with the Czech Republic , a dialogue we are conducting within the framework of the Joint Parliamentary Committee but which ought also to be possible to conduct in our respective parliaments .
We must broaden out this debate , which is part and parcel of our democracy .
This ought not , however , to lead to hard feelings between the Czech Republic and the Member States of the EU .
I hope that the Czechs are able to give positive answers to all the questions and that a favourable solution can in that way be found to this problem .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you would think that we would all have learnt some lessons from the accident at the Chernobyl reactor .
In that case , the radiation was not confined to the Ukraine , nor was it simply a bilateral problem .
I know that there are both advocates and opponents of nuclear power in the European Union , and that there is no common line .
And , above all , there are no uniform safety standards for nuclear power stations .
There is an urgent need for action here if our credibility is to be maintained .
However , after the Chernobyl experience we have to ask if it really is possible to bring a nuclear power plant , Temelín , on line in the heart of Europe when it still has significant limitations in terms of safety .
The Czech Republic is trying to present us with a fait accompli in commissioning Temelín .
If you will forgive my saying so , this sort of behaviour falls far short of a spirit of partnership .
Edmund Stoiber was quite right when he said today that it is a matter of following the house rules .
A resolution was adopted in the Austrian Parliament this Tuesday by all the parties - all the parties , mark you - emphasising that approval could only be given to the completion of the accession negotiations if the Temelín plant is retrofitted .
I wish to make one thing quite clear : we support the accession of the Czech Republic to the EU .
But the conditions must be right .
I call on you to support our motion for a resolution , the content of which is identical to the four-party resolution adopted in the Austrian Parliament .
After all , it must be our objective for nuclear power stations to have the highest possible safety standards .
Mr President , I shall also be voting for this resolution , which I consider to be reasonable .
If it can help to defuse the battle of words between the two sides somewhat , than it will certainly have served its purpose .
I regret that the Czech Republic is unable to defend itself here and present its case , as it is always good to hear both sides of such a complicated argument .
However , in the same spirit of openness I would also like to say that I do not think it is right for the Austrian Government and Parliament to be delivering a kind of ultimatum here .
That is not the way we have handled these things in the European Union up to now .
It is quite evident that there is a problem , but if we start issuing ultimatums then the next thing will be that a delegation will arrive representing displaced persons and demand that the Czech Republic can only join the Union if the Benesch Decrees are withdrawn .
And then some other group will come along demanding something else .
You have to be careful with ultimatums like this .
There are other ways of solving such problems .
But I would also like to suggest to the Czech Republic that they should pay serious attention to the concerns expressed by the German Association for Nuclear Safety .
That was another point I wanted to make .
My last , but important point , is one for the Commission .
We hear a lot about environmental impact , and that is fine .
But we also have the Euratom Treaty .
Article 37 of that Treaty effectively stipulates that the Commission must be kept informed about any plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in any form whatsoever .
The Commission also has to determine whether the implementation of such a plan is liable to result in the radioactive contamination of the water , soil or airspace of another Member State .
I know that the Czech Republic does not yet belong to the European Union .
Nevertheless , I would be interested to know what the Commission 's view is in relation to this article , and whether it considers that the Czech Republic has respected it .
It would be interesting , as Gordon Adam has already asked , to know what its view is on the environmental impact assessment .
Mr President , Mr Linkohr 's comments are not quite correct .
I will gladly let you see the text approved by the Austrian Parliament .
It does not contain any kind of ultimatum or any hint of blackmail , and I , too , have made it quite clear now that we cannot and certainly do not want to compel anyone to do anything .
We request , we appeal to the Czech Government to act in accordance with current European law and quite simply to observe the Espoo Convention , even if they have not ratified it yet .
The Commission has been following the political debate on the Temelín nuclear power plant with great attention .
It has repeatedly stressed the importance of candidate countries adhering to a high level of nuclear safety in line with relevant Council resolutions .
The Commission is actively participating in the deliberations of the Council aimed at assessing and ensuring a high level of nuclear safety in candidate countries as a key requirement for accession to the European Union .
The responsibility for licensing nuclear installations lies with the Czech nuclear regulatory authority .
The Commission has cooperated with the Czech authorities in order to reinforce the authority 's capacities .
The Czech authorities have ensured that the operating licence for Unit 1 of the Temelín nuclear power plant will not be issued until all outstanding problems are solved to the satisfaction of the nuclear regulatory authority .
According to current Czech legislation , an environmental impact assessment is required before the operating licence is issued .
The Commission expects this provision to be enforced by the Czech authorities .
Mr Adams asks whether the Czechs took account of the IAEA 's inspections and views .
The answer is ' yes ' .
The IAEA has reviewed the modifications made to the safety systems by the Czechs following the IAEA 's programmes .
The IAEA concluded that the issues were properly addressed by the Czechs .
That is the information I am able to supply on this subject .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a few minutes ' time , at 5.30 p.m.
Fires in Europe
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
B5-0703 / 2000 by Mrs Malliori and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the forest fires in Europe ;
B5-0724 / 2000 by Mr Hatzidakis and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the fires in the south of the European Union ;
B5-0723 / 2000 by Mrs Isler Béguin and Mrs Frassoni , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the forest fires in Europe ;
B5-0737 / 2000 by Mrs Muscardini and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the fires in Europe ;
B5-0746 / 2000 by Mrs Ainardi and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the fires in the Mediterranean regions ;
B5-0747 / 2000 by Mr Korakas and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the fires in Greece .
Mr President , the fires which again destroyed huge tracts of forest in the Mediterranean this summer are mainly the result of the rise in temperature and prolonged dry weather , not to mention of course criminal cases of arson .
Climatic changes , which are happening more and more rapidly , impact on the entire ecosystem .
Scientists have pointed out the risks inherent in our inconsiderate treatment of the planet , one of the results of which is extreme meteorological phenomena .
Southern Europe has been set alight more and more frequently over recent years .
The Mediterranean has become a high risk area and needs special measures .
In my country , Greece , more than 500 fires broke out this year , most of which were dealt with minimal disruption .
However , there were , unfortunately , also occasions on which the fires got out of control , causing death and destruction .
I should like to express my sympathy to the families of the victims and the injured in all the countries which faced similar problems .
I think , Mr President , that a European strategy on the conservation of forests is our political responsibility and an immediate priority .
I also think it essential that we reinstate the budget line for natural disasters .
The Commission should exert its influence to ensure that Member States introduce stricter legislation on changes of land use , compulsory reforestation following fires , suitable training on fire-fighting for those in positions of local and regional responsibility and a public awareness campaign on the benefits of forests and how they can be protected and to encourage volunteers fire-fighters .
Mr President , every September we return to the House and take tragic stock of the number of victims and the extent of the damage to forests as the result of fires .
The fires are , of course , the result of climatic changes and the weather which prevails in the Mediterranean during the summer ; they are also the result of criminal offences .
There may also be other causes , such as refuse tips and , of course , the lack of certain administrative structures , especially the lack of an overall , coordinated approach to fires , exacerbates the damage which they cause .
So what proposals can we make ?
First and foremost , both the Member States and the Commission need to update the regional development programmes and action to prevent , restore and reforest .
They could use the Interreg Community initiative , for example .
Similarly , forest registers are desperately needed ; this will help to protect and recover our ecological heritage and fight land speculation .
However , what we need is coordination and cooperation at European level and I call on the Commission to propose that a European fire prevention centre be set up in order to conduct systematic studies and introduce new technical methods to prevent and fight fires .
And to go one step further : the time has come for the Commission to draw up an integrated defence strategy to coordinate national action and measures against natural and man-made disasters , in line , of course , with the principle of subsidiarity .
I trust that these proposals will elicit a positive response from the Commission so that we can protect our forests more efficiently .
Mr President , indeed , like a chronic recurrent disease , the summer of 2000 will once again have suffered the ravages of fires raging through millions of hectares in our country and our continent and even causing the tragic death of a number of firemen and local residents .

This scourge is the result of criminal action : the blame lies with irresponsible arsonists who should face deterrent penalties , and with unscrupulous developers prepared to use any means possible to get hold of land on which building is forbidden , who ought to be deterred by a whole range of legal means to prosecute them .
But there are also other reasons for this affliction : they include the lack of any inventories of economic activities , such as agro-pastoral activities in Corsica , and the lack of any real approach , on the basis of geographical databases , to a kind of rural planning that makes the most of natural resources and reduces the risk of fires spreading .
Lastly , and above all , there is the lack of any genuine environmental education that goes well beyond the necessary prevention and awareness-raising campaigns .
So this summer epidemic is curable , Mr President .
It is vital to bring a new balance into some of the land-use policies , such as stock farming in Corsica , and to allocate subsidies on the basis of economic and preventive factors .
These upstream provisions cannot replace the need for downstream investment in adequate fire-fighting equipment in sufficient quantity to be deployed in all the EU countries .
The citizens concerned are counting on the Commission to take practical action .
Mr President , this year , the fires in the Mediterranean , and in Greece in particular , broke all previous records .
I believe that the area destroyed by the fires was twice as large as at any other time and a great many people were killed despite the fact , of course , that the Greek Government was well prepared and despite the fact that Greece now has some of the best fire-fighting equipment , aeroplanes and human resources in the world .
What it has proved is that reaction is not enough .
We need to be pro-active .
That is what we all say , but none of us does anything .
It is a complicated issue and , of course , it concerns local authorities and the national government .
What can the European Union do ?
What it can do , Mr President , is to apply a more active basic policy with more coordination and increased intervention .
It can examine the weaknesses of the common agricultural policy , which to all intents and purposes destroys the motivation of people living in and from forests and drives them away .
The common agricultural policy subsidises pasturing on burnt ground , subsidises animals which graze on burnt ground , at the same time as our forests are trying to reproduce naturally .
The European Union should also , of course , review its approach to and priorities for investments .
We have been crying for a land register for a long time now , especially a forest register and forest maps , which need to be supported as a matter of priority over everything else and , of course , any other development and investment measures which boost the development of forests as forests rather than a commodity and which enable people who live off the forest to stay there .
That is the best form of prevention and the best form of protection .
Of course we shall still have fires and , with what is happening to the climate , we shall no doubt be unfortunate enough to witness more and more serious phenomena .
But it is in our hands to try and do what we can to forestall the known causes at least .
Mr President , Portugal has also been affected by these tragic forest fires which have been the result either of natural causes or of criminal acts motivated by base economic interests .
We know that this matter is primarily the responsibility of the Member States , which need to organise themselves and build up their own control and prevention resources . We also know that they should give priority to actions of this kind , and to national afforestation projects , under their national regional development programmes .
It is also necessary , however , to back a European forest strategy with technical and financial resources in order to strengthen and complement national resources .
With this in mind , I would like to highlight the proposal contained in paragraph 12 of our resolution , which aims to create a European Fire Prevention Centre , and I would like to take the liberty of suggesting that it should be located in Portugal .
The Commission deeply regrets the loss of human life as well as the ecological and economic damage caused by the recent forest fires in Europe .
The principle of subsidiarity has been mentioned in this debate .
We have to avoid raising too many expectations and overloading the Commission with tasks .
We must be careful not to promise things we cannot deliver .
Frankly , there has been enough of that in the past .
We should be careful , when entering into discussions such as this , not to automatically assume that the Commission will solve the problem .
We can and should do something , but I wanted to make that cautionary remark .
To get to the core of this discussion , the question of an emergency aid budget line , the Commission is considering proposing a legal basis for such a line at the moment .
However , the Commission might consider financial support for the restoration of the forestry production potential on the basis of the rural development regulation , No 1257 / 1999 .
According to the Greek authorities , the financial contributions from the agricultural funds are not sufficient for a substantial contribution to be made to the restoration work .
The Commission therefore invites the Greek authorities to present proposals for the amendment of the development programme so that the necessary appropriations can be considered .
I should like to draw your attention to EC Regulation No 2158 / 1992 , under which preventive action in relation to forest fires may be financed .
Each Member State should verify that all the necessary steps have been taken to reduce the risk of fires to a minimum .
New Commission initiatives are already in effect , or will shortly become effective .
A proposal for a Council decision establishing a Community mechanism for the coordination of emergency civil protection action will be considered by the college in the near future .
This will aim to improve the mutual assistance between Member States .
It will also have an important side effect in that it will help third countries to manage unexpected emergencies or disasters they would not be able to handle by themselves .
Through this coordination mechanism Member States will be invited to identify groups which can intervene at short notice at the scene .
The Commission recently initiated a satellite-based project to improve information on operational fire fighting centres in the Mediterranean region , with the aim of determining the levels of risk from day to day .
We will consider whether this could lead to a system for early detection of forest fires .
The Commission is also encouraging Member States to reinforce their intervention capacities .
The Regional Fund and the Cohesion Fund have already contributed substantially in the period 1994-99 .
The national authorities should provide for the necessary financial resources to consolidate this action for the period 2000-06 .
In general , the decision on the acquisition of such fire-fighting equipment will remain the responsibility of the Member States .
Self-tuition workshops on fighting forest fires are also planned .
However the Commission does not have enough resources to extend its activities beyond that .
The Structural Funds can be used for restoration after natural disasters and advantage has been taken of this possibility in recent years .
Mr President , like some other Members of the House , I have just been alerted to developments in the situation in northern Afghanistan where , after two months of relentless offensives , the Taliban apparently took the town of Taloqan last night , with a heavy toll of military and civilian victims .
It is obviously too late to table an urgent resolution on this issue .
But I would ask you , Mr President , to forward to the Conference of Presidents a request that the Council and the Commission make a statement to the House at our forthcoming mini-session in Brussels on what action the European Union could envisage to help find a political solution in Afghanistan and put an end to these senseless bloodbaths .
Thank you very much , Mr Morillon , we will pass on that request .
Mr President , I would like to support Mr Morillon 's suggestion .
I would like to emphasise - and I am now speaking on behalf of my group also - that we consider the Council Declaration on this subject to be very important , and I request you to forward it to the Conference of Presidents .
I will gladly do that , Mr Sakellariou
Mr President , following the vote , I would like to ask the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets to tell us whether he has at his disposal the appropriations called for in paragraphs 12 and 14 of the motion for a resolution on fires in Europe for which we have just voted .
Mr President , this shows the folly of making policy on the hoof .
This has never gone through any committee .
There have been requests for money , which does not exist and no one has said where it is going to come from .
It is an urgency which has been voted by this Parliament - so be it , but it is quite ludicrous .
I got the message very well , Mr Wynn .
Situation in Fiji following the coup d 'état
The next item is the Commission statement on the situation in Fiji following the coup d 'état .
Commissioner Nielson has the floor .
The release of the hostages on 13 July , the arrest of the rebel leader and his main associates on 26 July and the efforts of the Government to reinstate law and order give some cause for satisfaction .
However , there are still serious worries about the future of Fiji .
First and foremost , the use of violence by certain ethnic groupings to impose their rule on other communities is unacceptable .
Secondly , a democratic government must be re-established .
The present interim government has no democratic basis .
There should be a clear blue-print for full restoration of democratic principles and practices .
The 1997 Constitution , which lays down the principle of equal rights for all Fijian citizens , must be reinstated .
This process should be finalised very quickly .
The time-frame currently being proposed , two or three years , is far too long .
The fundamental ethnic antagonism in Fiji must be resolved .
Multiracial cooperation and harmony must become a reality .
This might require international mediation .
If we are to be realistic , we must support every possible step on the way to stability without losing sight of the scenario I have just outlined .
The international community and the donors of aid to Fiji agree on these principles .
As far as the EU is concerned , the Council has informed the Fijians of its request to begin consultations under Article 366 of the Lomé Convention , which calls for a thorough examination of the situation on the basis of information to be supplied by the Fijians .
Further input will be provided by the report of an ACP ministerial fact-finding mission to Fiji which took place in mid-August and which was led by the Foreign Minister of Papua New Guinea .
Furthermore , the Commission received first-hand information from the legitimate Prime Minister , Mr Chaudhry on 31 August .
We are now at the beginning of the consultations .
Measures under Article 366 will be taken if the consultations fail to produce an acceptable solution for both sides in the discussions .
All that can be said at present is that the measures , if any , should not harm the poor and those already suffering from the severe economic crisis triggered by the events .
Poverty-related projects should , consequently , continue .
In conclusion , I hope that the coordinated effort of the international donor community will have the desired effect on the current government in Fiji .
Even if we achieve our aim of restoring democratic principles and a government chosen in fair and equal elections within less than two years , this will be only a first step for the solution of the Fijian problem .
A strong long-term effort is required from all parties and , in the first instance , from the Fijian Government and the communities , to work on the entrenched prejudices and anxieties so that racial cooperation and harmony can be restored and become a reality in Fiji .
This is absolutely essential and there are no alternatives to that reality .
Mr President , the events that have unfolded in Fiji over the past few months seem to be taken straight from a soap opera .
Unfortunately , they are for real . What is more , Fiji is an ACP country which enjoys considerable benefits thanks to the sugar protocol with the European Union .
It is almost ironic that the new partnership deal , which considers democracy to be of paramount importance , was signed in Fiji at a time when that country was hit by a coup d ' état .
It illustrates , once again , how fragile democracy is , even in regions where it seemed to be an established value .
But the Fiji story is more complicated than that .
There is a delicate balance of power between the indigenous population and the population of Indian origin , who make up 44 % of the population .
The army plays a dubious role .
The attacks on Indian properties could apparently take place undisturbed and without any intervention by the body of officials responsible for order . In fact , certain elements within the army openly chose the side of the army taking part in the coup .
There are the recent revelations about the role of Mr Speight in the lucrative timber industry , which put the whole matter in a completely new light .
According to recent information , he was apparently discharged as chairman of the state enterprise which manages mahogany plantations , and earlier in the year , he was in danger of missing out on a major contract for the development of hardwood .
All this seems to suggest that personal and economic , rather than political , interests were behind the coup .
Be that as it may , Speight ' s undemocratic behaviour has plunged a whole country into a deep political and economic crisis .
Tourism , which represented one third of the gross domestic product , has dropped to less than one fifth .
Ethnic tension is once again mounting .
Thousands of inhabitants of Indian origin are still on the run , and the events in Fiji are also prejudicing the promising dynamic in the region which was to culminate in the Pacific Regional Trade Agreement .
The European Parliament which , in its agreements with the ACP partners , makes strict demands regarding democracy and human rights , can and must condemn such a course of events .
We need to continue to demand that the safety of all citizens be guaranteed and that any form of ethnic division and provocation be penalised .
Speight should not be let off the hook .
Above all , we must work towards the return of true democracy within the meaning of the 1997 Constitution , which guarantees equal rights to all inhabitants of Fiji , and it is true that elections must be called as soon as possible .
A three-year transitional period is not acceptable .
If the interim government fails to restore democratic order within a reasonable period of time , sanctions must be considered , preferably ' smart ' sanctions , and structural aid must be suspended .
Consultations on this matter will be starting in September .
I do hope that the Commission will stick to its principles and will not succumb to political or economic pressure .
As we are about to embark on a new major partnership agreement between Europe and its partners in the ACP , it is of paramount importance not to create a precedent .
Mr President , I generally welcome the comments both of the previous speaker and Commissioner Nielson who made a statement on behalf of the Commission .
I am not as convinced as he is that the violence is actually over in Fiji .
I had the opportunity last week , along with a number of colleagues from various parties and groups here , to meet with Prime Minister Mahendra Chaudhry who reported to us that violence against the Indo-Fijians is still continuing in Fiji .
Secondly , I disagree that there is a fundamental ethnic antagonism in Fiji .
It seems to me , if one looks at the origin of the coup d 'état , that one should follow the money rather than the ethnic relations .
I welcome the fact that Article 366 of the Lomé Convention has been invoked .
If we look back at the history of what has happened in Fiji , we see a sweeping electoral victory by the Fijian Labour Party in the May 1999 General Election when they won , with their supporting parties , 58 out of the 71 seats , ousting the incumbent right-wing government .
Following that , there has been a systematic attempt to destabilise the new government led by elements of the former governing party and extreme nationalist gangs under the flimsy pretext of protecting indigenous interests .
It is interesting that , although Mahendra Chaudhry is an Indo-Fijian , twelve out of the 18 members of his cabinet are , as it were , indigenous Fijians and a majority of indigenous Fijian MPs actually supported the Government .
The destabilisation operation was financed by sections of private enterprise , frightened by the government 's radical programme of social reform and poverty alleviation and by its close association with the trade union movement .
This financing was led by corporate groups bidding for the right to exploit mahogany and native hardwood forestry .
The police and the military singularly failed to protect and defend the government .
Alongside George Speight and his gang , when the people 's coalition government were taken hostage on 19 May , were members of the armed forces ' counter-revolutionary warfare unit .
What has happened in Fiji is nothing less than a coup d 'état by the military industrial complex .
In fact , it is another Chile written small .
As a result , the 1997 Constitution has been ripped up .
A government has been imposed in power by the military that it is effectively controlled by those supporting the coup and the military is trying to offload the blame by prosecuting one small section of those involved , namely the gang around George Speight
I believe Parliament , the Commission and the Council of Ministers must back the proposals by the Labour led people 's coalition for reinstatement of the 1997 Constitution and , in the spirit of national conciliation , for the formation of a grand coalition for the government in Fiji .
Unless this is achieved , unless the slide towards a form of apartheid in Fiji , where Indo-Fijians who comprise nearly half the population are rapidly becoming second-class citizens , driven from their homes and jobs , is stopped , then we should demand support for sanctions against the current government .

We should support the moves by Premier Helen Clark from New Zealand for a concerted action at bilateral , regional and global levels , which should include , as Mr Van Hecke said , ' smart ' sanctions targeted at those involved in the coups , denying them the freedom to travel , freezing foreign assets and threatening them when they are apprehended with the consequences of the UN Hostage Convention .
Second , Fiji should be banned from all international sporting and cultural events .
Third , there should be a denial of all economic and military assistance to and through the present government .
The issue of Fiji is important , not only in its own right , but because it will set a precedent as to whether semi-clandestine coups-in-waiting along similar lines will see the light of day and whether Europe and the rest of the developed world is prepared to tackle the issue of indigenous rights - the Third World 's variant of the racism that is threatening us all .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the coup in Fiji in May of this year was not the first one .
It was preceded by one in 1987 which resulted in exclusion from the Commonwealth . This does lead me to believe that the tension , possibly ethnic in origin , must go far deeper than we might like to think .
Then too , tension between the indigenous people of Fiji and Indo-Fijians was at the root of the problem and , needless to say , with Indo-Fijians accounting for 44 % of the population and the indigenous people accounting for 64 % , two peoples of more or less the same size are involved .
I can imagine that the removal of prejudice , as you referred to earlier Commissioner , is not a matter of course in such situations .
Moreover , unemployment promotes tension , and the legally elected government was driven out by the military coup .
What concerns me more than anything is that this conflict could spread to other islands with similar problems and similar tensions .
This is , in fact , the opposite of what we have in mind and to which reference has already been made : the establishment of a great Pacific Regional Trade Agreement between 14 nations .
If we are not careful , this will be the first major conflict in the Pacific and this may well affect the situation in the region for a few decades to come .
All this makes me wonder whether this coup is merely the thin end of the wedge .
It also makes me wonder what the European Union ' s prevention policy actually consists of .
What can be done in order to put such a country back on the road towards being a democratic , constitutional state , no longer in a crisis situation and with the guilty parties brought to justice , as has been requested with good reason ? We should also press for the safety of all citizens - this seems basic to me , especially in a country where thousands of people are on the run in their own country - as well as for a parliament which should be re-convened this autumn , and for a democratically elected government .
Some of our motions for resolution also include the requirement that the opposition should take part in the government . This , of course , presupposes an agreement , which has not been concluded since the multi-racial constitution of 1997 , which was seemingly approved by everyone at the time but which cannot , however , be applied in practice .
The European Union is Fiji ' s key trading partner and provider of aid .
How can we translate this role into effective peace mediation ?
Could we not appoint a genuine mediator or mediating body in consultation with the UN and the Commonwealth ?
The Kotonu conventions provide for a partnership for development and peace , and the Lomé conventions also provide for procedures , especially Article 366 , which has already been referred to .
These procedures should be applied with due care , intelligence and maturity .
We invite the Commission to come back before the end of the year to report on the developments in Fiji and the region as a whole and on the efforts which the European Union has made .
Mr President , the events of the past few months in Fiji are not an isolated incident .
They are more than the sum-total of a crazed , racist businessman , a disloyal army , the interests of timber merchants , and politicians who accept that the democratically enacted constitution has been invalidated .
The events have everything to do with the relationship between people and state in general and with the history of Fiji and the composition of its population in particular .
European colonialism caused workers from other parts of the then British colonial empire to move to Fiji , as a result of which the 44 % of people of Indian origin have now started to form a near-majority of the population .
The original Fijian population has never had a say in the matter but has meanwhile been faced with the reality that the composition of the population has changed beyond recognition .
Descendants of those newcomers rightly feel that they are a part of the established population of the group of islands , with equal rights , whilst a large section of the original population still struggles to come to terms with this new status quo .
The situation is in many ways comparable to that in Surinam , Guyana , Trinidad and South Africa .
Indeed , European colonialism brought peoples of very different origins together in those regions too .
The peoples involved had nothing in common in terms of language , culture and religion and there are also striking differences in their appearance .
They very often live as closed groups juxtaposed to one another within the same territory , but largely in separate settlements and urban areas .
In these countries , there have often been harsh clashes between these peoples .
Sometimes , part of such a group believes it is superior , but often the clashes are about the ruthless protection of interests and the distribution of goods in short supply among competing groups .
These competitors need the same land , the same jobs and the same houses , whilst everything is in short supply .
In South Africa , this situation even led to an atrocious system of inequality and oppression , referred to as apartheid .
Meanwhile , the people of such countries have come to the conclusion that all people are equal and that they have no choice other than to join forces .
But this does not take away the fact that closed groups continue to live side by side without real integration .
Politicians and adventurers who wish to set peoples against each other still have plenty of scope .
That is the key difference compared with the current states in Europe .
The latter are generally united with one people , one common history , one language and more or less one culture .
This is true of old countries , such as the Netherlands , Denmark and Portugal but is also true of relatively new countries such as Poland , Italy , Germany and Romania or of very new ones , including the Czech Republic , Slovenia or Lithuania .
Precisely because these countries are incontrovertibly linked to the people who live there as a large majority , they can be open to minorities and newcomers and maintain their democracy .
But in European countries , too , there are unpleasant recollections of former newcomers who came as soldiers , robbers and privileged groups of businessmen and who put the people at a disadvantage .
Very often , people these days would prefer to see the descendants of these newcomers leave their country or else wish that they had completely adapted .
From our European perspective , we recognise the right of the Israeli and Palestinian states to exist side by side , as was illustrated once again very clearly this week during the remarkable visit of the presidents of both parliaments .
It is impossible to live there in peace in one state but people can quite easily co-exist as good neighbours .
Fair enough , Europe is to blame and should help solve the problems .
But that does not take away the fact that the situation which has arisen in Fiji is completely unacceptable .
The equal rights of the large Indian minority , the constitution and parliamentary democracy must be restored .
Those who use racism to their advantage must be punished and at least be excluded from political power , the refugees must be able to return home , and violence must come to an end .
The multi-racial constitution of 1997 , which came about following a previous coup d ' état after lengthy negotiations , must be restored without delay .
Mr President , I speak as a friend of Fiji , as someone who has followed events there for many years .
I have friends and acquaintances there and have been there .
When I spoke to the politicians the last time I was there three or four years ago the one thing they were all pleased about was the new constitution which had taken four years to put together , and when I saw the events of recent times my heart sank because I knew the consequences for that country .
I should like clarification from you , Commissioner .
From what you said , I assume you are saying no sanctions , that it is a matter of wait and see and giving them time to sort themselves out before we take any action .
I would like clarity on that point .
I do not want to walk away from here just assuming that ; it would be helpful if you could be more explicit .
Mr Ford has called for Fiji to be banned from all sporting events .
My sport happens to be a minority sport - rugby league football - and in October or November the World Cup will be taking place in the UK and in France .
Fiji will have a squad there as part of the World Cup .
The Australian Government wants them banned .
The Australian Government thinks that Fiji should not take part in this competition .
If you speak to the players , whether they be Asian , Polynesian or Melanesian , they will say they want to play , of course .
My specific question to you , Commissioner , is would the Commission advocate sporting bans at this time or not ?
It may be quite useful for us , as politicians , to be confronted with the question of whether sports and politics should have anything to do with each other or not .
It is a very useful exercise in analysing the extent of our principles and whether or not there are human activities that should be quite independent .
Sport today is not only sport , it is also business .
For that reason the world of sport has created more difficulties for itself than used to be the case in more innocent times .
As far as I am informed , unlike the line you say they are following with rugby , the Australians , when it comes to participation in the Olympic Games are maintaining a clear distinction between politics and sport .
We have no specific view in the Commission as to one event or another .
At this moment we are engaging in the dialogue of the Lomé Convention , so at this stage we have not drawn conclusions .
In answer to your more general question , there may very well be broad sanctions , but it depends on the outcome of the dialogue .
This dialogue is well-organised and systematic based on the beauty of our relationship with ACP countries .
It is not just a donor-recipient relationship .
We have the background of a system to work from .
This system is put to work in the given situation .
The options are open .
We have both the stick and the carrot .
We are actively drawing into this debate the regional ACP partners and giving the authorities in the country in question a say in the discussion .
But it is an extremely critical situation .
It contains all the dilemmas that situations like this normally present .
It is not easy to find out what the right thing to do is but we are doing everything to mobilise pressure for a rapid , irreversible return to democracy .
This is also the reply to Mrs Maes .
We do have a very important role as a trading partner and donor in Fiji and this creates a serious framework for the present discussion with the people in power in Fiji .
As regards coming back to the Parliament , I would say that I am always of course willing to go to the Development Committee and discuss any issue .
I would certainly like to have an opportunity to go more into detail before the end of the year if this is something the committee would welcome .
I can fully concur with everything Mr Ford said .
It is really tragic what is happening .
Also , as others said , the risk of a negative spillover in the region should also be taken into consideration when we are deciding what our measures should be .
One important measure that was taken - and this is a comment for Mr Van Hecke - was to call off the signing ceremony planned for Fiji .
So it is not the Suva Agreement that will govern our future relationship with the ACP states .
We went to Benin instead of Fiji in the summer and that , in fact , was a strong measure from both the EU side and the ACP side that it was taken as a natural thing that we could not sign the new agreement in Fiji .
So , in political terms we have already sent a strong message .
Mr President , in the joint compromise resolution there is a reference to setting a deadline at the end of November for a restoration of democracy .
Would the Commissioner accept that is a suitable target and a suitable deadline ?
Otherwise , the danger is the current government in Fiji will go on negotiating forever , but never come to a conclusion .
If we reflect on the ethics of picking a date , that date is far too late , but the operational , practical idea of fixing a date is to put meaningful pressure on the partner in the discussion .
I am not sure that particular date is meaningful .
We have partners in the ACP Group who are part of the process of convincing and putting pressure on Fiji to do the right thing .
I would not like to dictate a date just like that .
I prefer to have my partners in the south well on board in the process , also taking into consideration the risk of the negative spill-over in the region .
I would not be willing to accept a specific date at this stage .
There is a tactical necessity not to create the problem .
The debate is closed .
I have received five motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote on these motions for resolutions will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 6.40 p.m. )
Tribute
I am afraid I have to start today by announcing the passing away yesterday of our fellow member , Mr Günter Lüttge , who died after a serious illness .
Mr Lüttge became an MEP in 1989 and was mainly involved in transport policy .
I suggest we observe a minute ' s silence in his memory .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , referring to the text adopted yesterday and the issue of human cloning , item 8 in the English version , paragraph 11 , reads ' considers that any temporary committee set up by this Parliament .... ' .
It does not actually say that such a temporary committee should be set up .
Could we have some guidance as to what the presidency will do about this particular section of the resolution ?
I shall submit this to the Conference of Presidents , Mr Adam , and you will be notified of the outcome .

Mr President , my name does not seem to be on yesterday 's attendance list although I did actually sign in .
Mr Bowis , that will be duly corrected and amended .
Mr President , following up the point that Mr Adam made , I presume you will report back at the beginning of the mini-session on the result and , of course , if there is a proposal for the establishment of a temporary committee this House will have to vote on it .
That will be the course of action , Mr Ford .
( The Minutes were approved )
European Year of Lifelong Learning ( 1996 )
The next item is the report ( A5-0200 / 2000 ) by Mr Gutiérrez-Cortines , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Commission report to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the implementation , results and overall assessment of the European Year of Lifelong Learning ( 1996 ) , submitted pursuant to Article 8 of European Parliament and Council Decision 2493 / 95 / EC [ COM ( 1999 ) 447 - C5-0205 / 1999 - 1999 / 2163 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , the report on the European Year of Lifelong Learning is seemingly an unimportant document , and yet it has revealed significant gaps and black spots in the European system .
The report concerns a year of information and promotion in response to the Luxembourg Summit and other summits , at which tremendous importance was given to training as a means of integrating Europeans into working life , irrespective of age .
The report has shown , first of all , that when money is invested in education , that money is multiplied .
The Member States keen to participate quadrupled their budgets .
That is , money invested in education gives the best results as it is multiplied and does not lead to fraud , or anything like that .
Secondly , the European Year of Lifelong Learning highlighted the Commission 's difficulty in providing information and responses and being transparent .
It was practically impossible to gather all the necessary documentation , partly , it seems , because the Member States do not provide it , and partly because there are no procedures for collecting it with the necessary ease and speed .
We have therefore turned the report into a response and a series of recommendations on the criteria that we think lifelong learning should meet .
We found ourselves with a muddle of criteria , partly introduced by the Council , as the document published by the Commission , the proposal for the Year of Lifelong Learning , was of far higher quality .
It is clear that we need much more clarity over training .
However , training for integration , language teaching and recreational training for the elderly is mixed up with training for work , resulting in such a muddle that it is impossible to make an assessment or gauge the quality and know what the criteria are for good practice .
So , we are asking for the educational objectives to be clearly distinguished and regulated .
Obviously , education for the integration of immigrants is not the same as training for new qualifications , training for a first job or retraining , or many other types .
We have therefore requested clarity and better organisation of the system as a whole .
We have also requested greater lifelong learning and retraining for teachers .
It is clear that , if we consider lifelong learning to be simply for unqualified groups , account will not be taken of retraining university staff and teachers at training centres , who have to be the flagship of knowledge and disseminate information in society .
Finally , we have asked that it be made quite clear where the money from the Structural Funds for training , which is not monitored , is going .
From our point of view , this is a key issue .
What we cannot have is Europe paying so little attention to education and the education funds being used for other purposes .
One of the great problems of European history stems from the fact that once social classes have fought their way up the social scale and succeeded in integrating into the ruling classes , they have imitated the faults of the aristocracy , they have become conceited and lost sight of the value of training and the fight to retain the knowledge they have acquired .
So , we are living in an aristocratic Europe , which does not want to concern itself with education , which has become somewhat conceited about being European .
We consider that it is enough to be a European citizen and we do not realise that if we want to have researchers , if we want to have a truly competitive Europe , we need to take care of our human resources .
Europe needs to realise that , in spite of the subsidiarity principle , training people and helping them to manage themselves and their future is one of the fundamental objectives of its existence .
Therefore , a Europe that only takes care of its own interests , a Europe of subsidies , a Europe with teachers who only want to reduce their teaching hours , a Europe that contemplates and confuses trade union policy with educational policy is a worrying Europe .
I would like to draw attention to this situation , and I believe that we must rethink our attitude towards education , as we are talking about people and our future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have the report before us , undoubtedly so that we can make improvements to it , as the rapporteur , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines said .
I also think , however , that we ought again to use this morning ' s discussion to raise awareness once more and to make people aware of education again .
We are all delighted with the new achievements of our age : travel , the Internet , mobile phones and simultaneous television broadcasts from the other side of the world , as we are now experiencing again with the Olympic Games in Australia .
These are all achievements , but also signs of the time and of the society in which we live : the information age , the information society , the age of knowledge , technology and globalisation , to mention but a few designations .
All are characterised by a very rapid pace of change and by an enormous number of transformations , indeed revolutions , which have been triggered , and continue to be triggered , by the new knowledge .
The dissemination of information and knowledge is now incomparably faster and more extensive than it was even a few years ago .
People must be prepared for this vertiginous and fascinating roller coaster of change .
From the earliest days of childhood , from schooldays in fact , the key words have been lifelong learning .
That tenet is now only half the truth , however , and it cannot remain so , for the processes of change and transformation in society , in the world of work and in the environment are by no means over after school or after training , but continue and become still more marked .
Human beings must therefore learn to meet these challenges themselves and to adjust to lifelong learning .
Only in that way can we all , in future , also participate in the fine achievements of our age , that is to say , hold our own in the ever more rapidly changing competitiveness of life - both personal and professional - and both seize and help to create opportunities .
In order to help these insights come to the fore throughout Europe , 1996 was designated the European Year of Lifelong Learning .
With relatively modest financial resources of ECU 8.4 million from the European Union , a much welcomed ECU 34 million was raised for the project with the help of partner countries from the European Economic Area : Liechtenstein , Switzerland and Norway .
In many congresses , seminars and PR events , there was constructive discussion in all areas of society of the necessity and opportunities for rethinking education in the direction of lifelong learning .
These are opportunities - especially for Europe and European integration - of which we can avail ourselves here and now : knowledge of other languages , other cultures , other ways of life , everything that is so important for us as Europe grows together .
The European Year of Lifelong Learning set us thinking in a way which must be continued and consolidated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the traditional concept of education was that students would cease learning when they left school .
It is true that a small elite would continue to create , pass on or acquire new knowledge and ideas , but for the great majority , leaving school meant the end of formal education .
Things have changed radically .
Learning has become broader and longer .
New methods and sources for acquiring knowledge and training have appeared .
Anyone who does not keep up with this progress , these new requirements , risks becoming marginalised , undervalued in his or her professional life , risks losing social status and suffering intellectual impoverishment .
It is said , and rightly so , that we are becoming a society of information and knowledge . The great philosopher Nietzsche , however , warned us that it is impossible to found a civilisation on knowledge .
This warning should give us food for thought .
Although , today , there is no alternative to scientific progress and to the increase in knowledge and information , the truth of the matter is that lifelong learning cannot be reduced simply to the acquisition of useful skills . It must be part of a culture , of a set of values that provide meaning for mankind ' s life in society .
Lifelong learning and training has therefore become an indispensable factor that states , educational bodies and the public themselves can no longer underestimate .
Holding the European Year of Lifelong Learning and Training was an important step and a symbolic moment in raising the awareness of the European people with regard to this new state of affairs .
The theorising that preceded and continued throughout the European Year of Lifelong Learning and the considerable interest it raised in schools and citizens ' groups made a major contribution to this .
' Lifelong learning and training ' has definitively entered the vocabulary of politicians , educationalists and businesspeople . Even more importantly , these words have also become part of everyday language .
Lifelong learning and training has also become an instrument in the fight against academic failure , students giving up on education and illiteracy .
It is therefore a good cause .
For these reasons , this initiative was valuable , timely and fruitful .
Its objectives were achieved and what was lacking in funds was compensated for by the harnessing of goodwill and by the number of people who signed up to it .
The line between people ' s first educational experiences and later opportunities has now been crossed .
Education ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express the Liberal Group ' s support for the report by Mrs Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines , which , as she herself mentioned in the introduction to her report , is not , and should not be , considered to be purely a formality , a summary of the application of the European Year of Learning in 1996 , but rather as an analysis that serves to make a series of proposals on what the standing of education should be in its various fields , including the fields of lifelong learning and vocational and technical training , which deserve special attention .
This coincides with the ideas expressed a few months ago at the Lisbon and Feira European Councils , when all the Member States pledged to develop a series of measures at European Union level so that , during this decade , the European Union can become a leading society at international level and achieve the levels of competence that North America has today , particularly in technological areas .
To be precise , the key element in the process to achieve this level of competence lies in training , education and in a society with levels of excellence that lay the necessary foundations for progress to be made in the most technologically developed and advanced fields of scientific and technological innovation .
The report by Mrs Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines , and she has also mentioned this today , shows the imbalances that still exist in the field of education between the level of the European Union and national level , that is , on the one hand we want action in education at European Union level , but on the other , the Member States do not want to give up their competences and establish true cooperation on an educational level .
It is true that there are some programmes that we always use as references , such as Socrates or Leonardo , but in precisely these programmes , we must recognise the lack of sufficient resources to achieve the scope and effect that we would like .
Finally , I therefore recommend that you pay particular attention to points 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 23 and 24 , which constitute a good guide for the achievement of these higher levels of education at European Union level .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to congratulate our rapporteur on her excellent work and also on the commendable way in which she cooperated in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
Philosophical and literary texts , as well as popular wisdom , tell us that ' you are never too old to learn ' .
The ' Lifelong Learning ' initiative was a perfectly proper one and the result of a wise decision , aimed at doing justice to the demands of the twenty-first century and at enabling people to adjust to these demands .
It is mainly the early phases of life which , right into our own time , have been , and remain , the time for education and training .
The importance of lifelong learning cannot , however , be limited to the spheres of education and training policy alone .
Its success also depends , in large measure , upon labour-market policy and upon the successful dissemination of science and technology .
Lifelong learning begins where schooling , or basic education , leaves off , and this is where the first and , in my view , also the greatest weakness of this wonderful initiative is to be found . Lifelong learning can only work if there is a change to the way in which , and above all the pace at which , basic education under the original educational systems is adapted .
In a knowledge society , one of the main functions of schooling should be to offer students methods they need to gain access to large amounts of information , to understand this information and to transform it into knowledge .
Syllabuses , or the means by which learning has so far been imparted , must be fundamentally altered .
I do not of course want to interfere in the nation states , but this is , nonetheless , an idea which we ought to explore communally in this European Community .
Instead , the direction taken should be an individual one , but with social components .
We need to learn more about arguing critically , about increasing students ' self-confidence and about increasing their ability to express themselves in language .
Skills of this kind will become ever more important alongside instrumental skills such as the ability to write , to acquire other languages and to do arithmetic .
One goal must be to enable pupils constantly to update their knowledge and skills so that they are neither able nor willing to view a diploma or certificate as the end of a learning process or as a seal of approval upon something finally completed .
Our society must break away from the outdated system of school , work and pension .
Lifelong learning begins , then , with the reform of our schooling .
The individual must learn for him or herself .
That is not something it lies within our power to bring about , but we can do a lot to help bring it about , for the population of Europe is not , of course , just a human resource for the European labour market , but a wealth of marvellous individuals .
Allow me to give a personal example by way of conclusion . I know a joiner in a small suburb of Vienna where the prejudice is still somewhat commonly held that anyone who works with their hands must not be very well educated .
This joiner is between 40 and 50 years of age , speaks four languages and is known as something of a philosopher .
A Europe of people like that would be my ideal .
Mr President , in Finland we ordinary people say : ' All in the good time of the powers-that-be . '
We could say the same in connection with this , as the political balance sheet for the Year of Lifelong Learning ( 1996 ) is yet to be reckoned .
In spite of the time wasted , the rapporteur regrets that the qualitative assessment of the implementation of the theme year programme is imperfect .
The number of opportunities can surely be counted in a shorter space of time than this .
In a seminar on the European paper industry held here in Strasbourg on Wednesday a representative of employees in the industry turned our intention to an important issue .
When we purchase hardware , it is always an investment , but when we acquire software labelled ' company staff training ' , it is not considered to be an investment .
The rapporteur has justifiably emphasised this .
Training has to be considered to be an investment and not a running cost .
We must stress the importance of the fact that lifelong learning also involves an all-round educational element and not just a professional one .
Far too often training is too biased in its scope , and that is especially true today of information society development .
Electronic programs are complicated and get more so all the time .
Those who master the language of software often do not understand the language of its content .
Can I ask something that is being asked in Finland now ? A man speaks six languages , but what has he got to say ?
A person might speak the language of computers in the information society , but perhaps he has nothing else to say .
It is only noughts and ones anyway .
In this , we are clashing with the eEurope strategy , which the Commission prepared for the Lisbon summit .
Much attention was paid to hardware in it , but little to that software which we call training software .
The public must be trained , not only to use computers , but also to use them for their own benefit .
People must know how to use computers for beneficial and essential purposes so they can improve their own way of working and take better control of their lives .
Nowadays , everyone must have the necessary reading and writing skills to use the various forms of electronic media to their advantage .
This new sort of literacy has to be taught to many adults starting at the beginning .
When , under the eEurope programme , the aim is in place to bring a computer cable into every home , that will increase democracy .
These days , democracy is created by everyone having equal access to a diverse array of information .
For the information to be fully exploited we have to remember that learning is also a social event .
Training cannot be left to depend on the eEurope programme alone : we also need social communities for it .
As no one knows everything , an individual must be able to decide for him / herself what is worth knowing .
If the state makes that decision it is just a step away from propaganda and indoctrination .
When we examine EU programmes , which are often mean the same kind of thing for everyone or contain demands for conformity on the part of everyone , we see we are turning the EU into a totalitarian federation .
We need lifelong learning and all-round educational knowledge , so that we can counter the attempt by the European Union to create a European totalitarian state and be its politburo .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , just an hour ago I was still sitting with my French teacher , making a big effort to learn some more French .
I must tell you , it is really fun learning a language .
It is good when you know that you do not have to take an examination afterwards but are learning for yourself and in order to communicate with other people and treat them in the right way .
I have to say that I am honestly enjoying learning French
( The President asked the speaker whether he might not like to continue his speech in French . ) ( Laughter )
I believe that that is also what we need in the future : for learning to be fun .
In life , the learning pyramid is , in fact , turning .
When it comes to learning , we really used to think of young full-time students , whereas now we see that people in employment are having to learn more and more .
I believe that we , ourselves , in the European Parliament can confirm that we are actually , day by day , doing more in the way of learning , evaluating and passing judgment than ever we had to do at school or university .
With increasing age , you also become more aware of what it is you would like to learn .
You become significantly more selective , and it is the very joy of learning that makes you enthusiastic and want to learn new things .
What we have here , then , is a paradigm shift , not only in the economy , but also in broad strata of society , not only through e-learning and the new opportunities provided by technology , but also through a change in consciousness .
I believe that this very change in consciousness shows that adults in all walks of life really do consider lifelong learning of this kind to be more and more important .
I therefore consider it a very good thing that we in the European Parliament should have a good look at long-term strategic issues of this kind .
Especially on a Friday like today , it is important , I believe , that we should also have the courage to think in terms of long-term strategy about how we might best provide support to the people of Europe .
Particularly for elderly people , the subject of health becomes increasingly important on into old age .
We still have a lot to learn about , for example , how to eat properly and how to treat our bodies .
I believe that precisely these fundamental virtues are very important for the future .
What do we need now at the level of the European Community ?
We need a general system of accreditation for private , public and in-house education , a European education passport like a European driving licence so that the building blocks of education can be used and compared throughout Europe .
We need ways of comparing educational expenditure and revenue throughout Europe , as well as ways of comparing qualifications .
We should be trying to introduce best practices worldwide as a spur to positive competition .
We ought to be learning from the whole world which system and which form of education are best for our people and citizens in Europe .
Mr President , I hope I will not strike too discordant a note , but it seems to me this debate has been excessively self-congratulatory so far .
When I picked up the agenda and read the phrase ' Year of Lifelong Learning ' it seemed to me that this was an oxymoron similar to the phrase ' military intelligence ' .
A year seems a short time for the project .
The question is : how valuable are these ' Year of ... ' enterprises when applications for funding have to be submitted within three months and everything will have to be carried out in one year .
I have been at the receiving end of such systems , both as a university teacher and when I was involved in an educational and social charity .
From the point of view of people trying to do the job , these challenges , at very short notice and with very little explanation of how applications are to be made and what criteria are to be applied , can do at least as much harm as good .
One can always point to the fact afterwards that the money was spent and other money came in and that good things have been achieved ; but could things have been done better ?
Both the Committee reports - the Committee report and the subsidiary Committee opinion - draw attention to the fact that the assessment methodology used by the Commission was not very exact and the criteria set were not particularly clear .
This is not to say we should not do these things , but we should do them better and reflect very carefully on what can best be done at Community level and what at lower levels , not even at Member State level or in autonomous regions within the Member States , but right down at the level of schools , colleges and universities .
My constituency has just come through a serious crisis in its educational assessment , partly due to a lack of proper consultation with classroom teachers .
Grandiose ideas issued from on high and not adequately and rigorously tested at the sharp end will always fail , sometimes with damaging consequences for individuals and for society .
Subsidiarity matters , especially in a field like education and lifelong learning , and we forget that at our peril .
Networking can be useful in disseminating ideas for best practice , but we must not delude ourselves that a Year of Lifelong Learning will make a real difference .
That can only come from the commitment of the people on the ground .
Those are the people we must respect and encourage and support .
We are all in favour of lifelong learning , but let us not be too self-congratulatory when the evidence is so thin .
Lifelong learning is something we all look upon with the greatest benevolence .
We can hear that especially from this discussion .
When it comes to taking action , however , the situation is often the reverse .
I agree with the rapporteur who criticises the Commission ' s efforts on behalf of lifelong learning during 1996 , the year of the relevant campaign , together with the slipshod evaluation which followed .
Lifelong learning is a phenomenon requiring a lot of resources .
It demands new thinking on educational policy and calls for financial resources to be prioritised .
Allow me to begin by commenting on the new thinking required .
In our education systems , we specialise in the contrary , that is to say self-enclosed educational courses , limited by time and with heavy emphasis upon the final examination .
Lifelong learning requires the opposite , namely continuity and courses of long duration .
It is no longer enough to educate for the immediate needs of the workplace .
Now , it is a matter of educating people for life .
We therefore need new forms of organisation in education .
We need new educational ideas and tools .
Perhaps the greatest problem is that which many other speakers have raised , namely access to money .
We need to allocate much greater resources to education than we have done up until now , both to the workplace and to the public education system , as well as to other areas .
There must be money to pay for the costs of education and also to replace income in the form of wages , especially in the case of those who need to study full-time .
It is especially important to be able to finance the fairly long study periods which may be required if people are to be able to move from traditional sectors to new areas of the labour market .
Because access to money is always a problem , I think that quantitative objectives are required in connection with expenditure on adult education .
Consideration might be given to earmarking a certain proportion of companies ' production costs for this purpose , a specific percentage of the State budget , a particular portion of normal working hours or , if appropriate , a certain number of the individual ' s working hours . Alternatively , other similar quantitative measures might be made use of .
The Swedish Presidency , which will begin on 1 January 2001 , has said that lifelong learning will be one of its priorities .
I think we could call upon the Swedish Government to propose just such quantitative objectives for lifelong adult education .
Many speakers here in the Chamber have agreed about the need to set financial priorities .
Perhaps we could issue a joint statement to the Swedish Presidency on this issue .
Mr President , one of the most pleasant forms of lifelong learning is membership of the European Parliament and , especially , participation in these Friday sittings at which , for once , you have the time to deal with the reports of colleagues from other specialist fields .
I hope that a majority of this House will also learn and not go ahead and abolish these Friday sittings .
But now to the subject in hand . Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines has submitted an excellent report which is also very critical of the fact that our heads of state and government are constantly making grandiose announcements .
The Feira Summit was just such an occasion - a pure media event , to use the buzz word . Very little of substance happened , however .
Little is being provided for in terms of the budget and few resources are available , because it is all about appearances .
We need to put an end to this kind of spin .
I am therefore very grateful for the sound report which Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines has submitted .
One thing , of course , she has quite clearly emphasised is the importance of the subsidiarity principle .
Nonetheless , resources must also be invested at European level .
Above all , value must be attached to quality in this area , and quality means setting priorities .
One of our priorities must be to extend precisely this idea of lifelong learning to people in the candidate States for , in Central and Eastern Europe , a totalitarian system has , for decades , robbed people of the opportunity to develop freely .
It is a great failing of our strategy that we concentrate very heavily upon young people in these countries .
It is obviously important to do that as well , but the bulk of people are elderly - elderly people who have to overcome decades of dictatorship but who are , today , able to make a fresh start .
This too is something we need to support by making this area a priority .
I should also like to say that , in my view , elderly people in particular , who nowadays still have twenty or thirty productive years in front of them after they retire , must be able to play an increased part in our society .
As a part of this process , there must also be educational opportunities .
I am sorry that , nowadays , the discussion is about increasingly closing the doors of universities to older people , charging fees and ensuring that older people can no longer take an active part in the life of universities .
Mr President , Gutiérrez-Cortines ' report states that the Union administration ' s besetting sin - its slow start to getting measures off the ground - afflicted the theme year of lifelong learning .
National coordinating bodies suffered from such matters as materials arriving late and there not being enough of them .
Furthermore , things moved slowly when it came to using the Internet .
That naturally made it hard to implement the theme year programme .
Unfortunately , the situation appears to be the same with the Socrates programme 2 that has just started .
Messages of concern are coming from national agencies that the agreements between them and the Commission are still not finalised and there is a lack of certainty about payment .
This cannot help but be reflected also in the implementation of the adult education component , Grundvik , which forms part of Socrates .
That is a pity .
The administrative problems associated with Socrates have to be resolved swiftly for the Union ' s input into lifelong learning to come within reach of the people .
Training and education are being seen more and more clearly as European resources .
They do not mean just vital items of expenditure .
Hopefully the change in attitudes will also be reflected before long in the Union ' s budget .
But the Year of European Languages , organised for next year , will have to persevere in the same way , appropriations being as meagre as they were with the Year of Lifelong Learning .
Parliament , however , did its best to establish a legal basis in time for the measures to be effected .
Although training comes under the principle of subsidiarity , its European dimension is strengthening all the time .
European success in global competition is built on skilled and involved people .
Lifelong learning is essential in the fight against unemployment and exclusion .
It is justifiable that the report adopted by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport should contain a request to the Commission to apply the notion of further education , not only at the level of advanced know-how and skills and universities , but also in traditional professions , particularly the craftsmen trades .
Lifelong learning , as such , is often seen only as a necessary regeneration of the workforce .
It should , however , be a fundamental right of every citizen , leading not just to improved professional skills , but also to human growth , happiness and understanding .
The facilities modern technology offers for learning can be brought within everybody ' s reach .
That opportunity must be taken .
Mr President , paragraph 16 of Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines ' excellent report calls for training designed to correct school failures .
It would be far better if we could avoid that sort of failure .
The saddest case of all is a school leaver with no qualifications to his credit descending into hopelessness .
A situation which becomes sadder and sadder as the occupations available to those with no qualifications become scarcer and scarcer .
The reason is often that the young teenager is discouraged from learning by the rigidities of an education system that sticks to established lines and tries to fit square pegs into round holes .
I appeal to the Commission to look favourably on a research programme into the use and development of aptitude tests to identify at an early stage - 12 or 13 years old at the latest - what a young person is going to be good at , no matter what that profession , occupation or job may be .
Schools have to respond by providing courses at which young people will succeed .
Success encourages further ambition .
It means satisfied , enthusiastic teenagers instead of discouraged troublemakers .
It means school-leavers with light in their eyes , with excitement about the future , able to contribute to society .
It means school-leavers with a passport to a better and more fulfilling life .
Nothing is more vital to the future of Europe than the young people who are going to build that Europe .
There is not one young person who cannot play his part .
We have to enable this sadly wasted potential to be mobilised and to succeed .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Explanations of vote
Mr President , I voted for this important document , and its importance has been stressed by all the speakers , particularly by Mrs Echerer who said : ' You are never too old to learn ' , by Mr Posselt , who is so eager to support the elderly that I could give him a Pensioners ' Party membership card , and by Commissioner Barnier himself , who has assured us of his strong commitment in this area .
However , Mr President , as representative of the Pensioners ' Party to the European Parliament , I call for words to be translated into action .
The elderly in the Member States have no opportunity learn , have no help from national states and are not even allowed to use school buildings , which accommodate children in the morning and could accommodate old people in the afternoon .
Mr President , my reference to Communist dictatorships has clearly triggered feelings of great agitation in an MEP from the extreme left .
I should therefore like to say that today ' s vote has been very important .
The people in his party , the PDS , are clearly determined not to learn anything new for the rest of their lives .
I am therefore very pleased that we have adopted this report by a large majority .
Mr President , lifelong learning must be a responsibility not only of the European Commission and the European institutions but also , and especially , of the Member States .
I voted in favour because I believe that tax advantages for professional and private education must be placed centre-stage so that educational sponsorship , in particular , becomes a possibility , too .
Incentives must be created so that , in order to take some of the pressure off the system , foundations can take over educational establishments and sponsorship can be broadly based .
I also believe , however , that we ought to set an example at European level .
Every year , we ought to devise and evaluate training and further education syllabuses for our officials and politicians to enable us to measure how we are meeting our own needs for professional development .
Mr President , the Communist Party of Greece is in favour of a state lifelong learning system , since it will give workers the chance to improve their knowledge and professional skills as well as their contribution to society as a whole and their standard of living .
However , the model being promoted by the European Union merely attempts to patch over the shortcomings in an education system which turns out disposable workers who are unable to keep up with developments in the productive process .
Workers are forced to pass their entire lives in a vicious circle of work , unemployment , training and so on and so forth .
Despite identifying certain shortcomings in the system , Mr Gutiérrez-Cortines ' report fails to go far enough in analysing the causes or suggesting remedies , which is why the MEPs of the C