Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 5 June 2008 .
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to make two statements .
The second of these is made on behalf of the Conference of Presidents at its request .
The result of the referendum of 12 June 2008 in Ireland confronts the European Union with one of the most difficult challenges in its history .
The Reform Treaty of Lisbon , born of the Constitutional Treaty which was drafted by a convention comprising Members of national parliaments and the European Parliament , meeting in public , serves to make the European Union more democratic , more effective and more transparent .
It strengthens the European Parliament , gives national parliaments more responsibility for shaping EU policy , enables citizens of the European Union to present initiatives to the European institutions and guarantees the role of local government .
The Treaty of Lisbon is the response to public criticism of the shortcomings of the European Union .
The Treaty brings the European Union closer to its people .
There can be no doubt that the application of the Reform Treaty is absolutely imperative if the European Union is to defend its values and interests in the 21st century .
Without the reforms made possible by the Treaty of Lisbon , the accession of other countries to the European Union is scarcely conceivable .
We call on the participants in the EU summit in Brussels this coming Thursday and Friday to take every appropriate step to implement the Reform Treaty .
The ratification process must be continued without restriction .
We urge the Irish Government , for its part , to propose ways in which we can work together to emerge from this difficult period in the political life of Europe .
The European Parliament will strive with all its might and with passionate commitment to meet these challenges .
We expect the European Commission and the Governments of all Member States of the European Union to do likewise .
We also expect them to involve the European Parliament fully in their efforts .
Our goal remains the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in time for the elections to the European Parliament in June 2009 .
With your agreement , I shall resolutely defend these principles before the European Council in Brussels on 19 and 20 June .
( Applause )
The debate will take place on Wednesday morning with the Council and the Commission .
The intention is not to discuss the matter now .
The debate on the preparation of the European Council meeting is on Wednesday morning , and that is the logical time to discuss the issue , when the heads of the Council and the Commission will be present .
We must conduct a highly structured debate , and I have presented you with my firmly held views on this issue .
Another reason why I have done so now is that a former President of the European Parliament , Simone Veil , who will be presented with a distinguished award in Spain on Wednesday , has asked me personally to deliver the laudatio .
I could not but accede to her request , and I wanted to ensure that you were aware of my personal views on the events in Ireland and on the challenges that face us .
The Conference of Presidents has asked me to make a statement on the Middle East .
A 14-member delegation from our working group on the Middle East , headed by Veronique De Keyser and Annemie Neyts-Uyttebroeck , visited Israel and Palestine from 30 May to 2 June 2008 .
During its visit , the delegation assessed the practical implementation of the objectives that were publicly proclaimed in a joint statement by all parties to the Annapolis Conference six months ago as part of the effort to achieve a two-state solution by the end of this year .
Among the main focal points were the strengthening of the security forces by the Palestinians themselves , the issue of the development of settlements , especially around Jerusalem , economic development , restricted freedom of movement in the West Bank and , lastly , the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip , which is cut off and subject to international sanctions .
The report , which the delegation adopted unanimously - and it was a representative cross-party delegation - was presented last week in the presence of the Commission and the Council , then transmitted to the Conference of Presidents , and it paints a depressing picture .
While some encouraging advances have been made , these have been sectoral in scope and limited in their effects .
The general sequence of events gives no grounds for optimism .
As things stand , the ambitious Annapolis targets are scarcely achievable .
The delegation was unanimous in its view , which the Conference of Presidents endorsed , that the blockade of the Gaza Strip must be lifted , that controlled cross-border movement of persons and goods must be reinstated and that the violence must be curbed .
In the West Bank too , a new course must be pursued , in which the credibility of the Palestinian Authority is bolstered and the conditions for sustained economic development are systematically established .
Israel 's policy of constant division and geographical separation must be opposed .
Like the US Administration , which expressed this view yesterday through Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice , we call for an end to the spread of settlements , particularly in East Jerusalem .
We believe that no one has the right to evade the obligations agreed in Annapolis .
The Israelis and Palestinians committed themselves to negotiations in good faith and in a spirit of reconciliation .
They must resume the rigorous pursuit of this path .
They need to show the courage and strength to engage in political renewal .
It is up to us Europeans to accompany and support our partners in this process .
The European Parliament will exercise its responsibility with determination .
The European Union 's relations with Israel and the Palestinian Authority must be developed in such a way as to promote the overall peace process .
The Barcelona process - a union for the Mediterranean - could be an additional factor in the effort to foster peace .
The European Parliament expects to be duly consulted in the framework of the European quest for peace in the Middle East .
While we are meeting here , the fishermen of the Gaza Strip are putting out to sea .
Because of the blockade , environmental pollution is rife to an alarming degree . It is threatening the livelihood of the fishing crews , and they are protesting about it .
They have been demonstrating for their right to catch fish , to earn their living and to live in freedom and peace .
Our delegation promised to support the fishermen .
On behalf of all of us , may I therefore convey to these fishermen the solidarity of the European Parliament .
Thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for listening to my own statement and this second statement which the Conference of Presidents asked me to make .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Declaration of financial interests : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Referral to committees : see Minutes
Change of interinstitutional classification number : see Minutes
Decision on urgent procedure : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda for this part-session has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday / Thursday :
No amendments
Wednesday :
The IND / DEM Group has moved that the debate on the preparation of the meeting of the European Council be named as follows : ' Preparation of the European Council after the Irish referendum ' .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I should like to propose that the title ' Preparation for the European Council ' be expanded to : ' Preparation for the European Council after the Irish referendum ' .
( Parliament approved the request . )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we have just amended the title of the debate , and because of the implications - on which there are divergent views - of the decision in Ireland , it would be reasonable to give the House some time to discuss these problems .
For this reason we move that the second item on the morning agenda be moved to the afternoon .
Now I know that we shall be pushed for time in the afternoon , but in view of the urgency and the importance of this meeting of the Council , postponement makes good sense .
We would have no objection to one item or other being deferred to a later sitting , but our motion at this instant is that we devote the entire morning to the substance of the renamed debate to give us enough time to discuss the issue .
Mr President , having been rapporteur on the Lisbon Treaty , I should like to support this proposal .
We must have a wide-ranging debate to show that we are listening both to the views expressed by the Irish people and to the views expressed in every other Member State , most of which , if not all of which , wish to proceed with this Treaty .
, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon and events in Ireland are very important , but should not prejudice discussion of an issue like fishing .
I have to say that many deputies are not very interested in fishing . However , if ever the fishing industry suffered a real crisis , it is the one it is going through right now .
On 23 June , the European Union Council of Fisheries Ministers will take a series of decisions on the crisis in the fishing sector , which is conjunctural and structural .
I think that the European Union fishing sector would not understand it if this Parliament did not take the time to examine this issue and take a position on it .
I therefore ask the political groups to show some sensitivity and , once and for all , to contribute to a good debate on the crisis in the fishing sector .
( Parliament approved the request . )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to put two questions .
The first is the same question put by Mr Swoboda , who asked for more time for the debate on the European Council and the issue of the referendum .
The second question is whether we should separate the debate on oil prices from the fisheries debate or hold a single debate on both .
Those are two separate questions .
I suggest you should take the question of speaking time for the debate on the European Council first , and only then take the question about fisheries .
( Parliament approved the first request and rejected the second . )
( The order of business was thus established . )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( EL ) Mr President , I have listened most attentively to your message about the Irish ' no ' vote .
I fully endorse your statement on the need to continue the ratification process .
It is indeed perplexing that the Irish ' no ' comes at a time when the EU is increasingly democratic , transparent and effective .
However , Mr President , we need to decode the message from the factors supporting the ' no ' vote .
Irish citizens have made their decision and exercised their democratic right ; however , this ' no ' also calls on us to engage in some constructive self-criticism .
I suggest focusing this self-criticism on two points : we are bombarded , Mr President , by the Commission 's over-regulation ; we , the European Parliament , cannot concern ourselves with every detail of this legal technicality and over-regulation .
Mr President , I know your dedication to European affairs , and I call on the European Parliament to rise to the occasion as a political body , a corps politique , a rallying point for the declared directions of the course of European unification .
Thank you for your words of encouragement , Mr Papastamkos , but I must also ask you to adhere to the time limit of one minute that is assigned to explanations of vote .
Moreover , I was informed that you wished to speak on a different subject .
( ES ) Mr President , although there was no time for my speech in the last sitting and a month has gone by since then , I feel I must mention that 12 May was World Fibromyalgia and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Day , two diseases that mainly affect women .
They are both gender-specific diseases , difficult to diagnose and for which few resources are available for research and treatment . They usually cause problems at work because people do not understand the way they reduce the capacity of sufferers and make them unfit for work .
We should take this situation seriously and urgently try to find out the causes of these diseases , provide more intensive treatment and compare the results , as well as raising social awareness and providing more information about their social , legal and employment impact .
Sufferers must not feel they have no protection .
We owe this to our citizens .
( BG ) The upcoming French Presidency of the European Union comes at a critical time for the European intergration process on the Old Continent .
Topics such as the Sustainable Development Strategy , the European Immigration Pact , Europe of Defence and the reform in the Common Agricultural Policy are crucial for Europe .
But the main question now is how to continue the Union reform and deepen the integration process in the aftermath of the Irish ' no ' .
Ireland 's rejection of the Lisbon Treaty has once again put to the test the common will of Europeans to overcome the challenges of globalisation together .
As a founder of the European Union , France and its president , Nicolas Sarkozy , have the task to pool the efforts of all twenty-seven member states together again , and come up with a legal formula and an action plan to find a way out of the Lisbon crisis because unless we overcome it , we run the risk of centrifugal and nationalistic passions taking the upper hand and putting a freeze on the process of further enlargement of the European Union .
This watershed moment calls for us to realise these threats and deliver on our responsibilities and the expectations of the majority of European citizens for whom the Ode of Joy has already become a second national anthem .
( PL ) Mr President , today I would like to speak of an incident that recently took place in Warsaw .
A person closely associated with the Chinese Embassy in Poland attacked a woman distributing the opposition periodical The Epoch Times .
Similar incidents have been observed for some time now in New York , where groups organised by the Chinese Consulate have been attacking Falun Gong believers as well as people demonstrating peacefully in favour of Tibet .
If similar practices start occurring in other countries , we shall be faced with a glaring breach of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations that was adopted in 1961 .
What is more , despite the fact that the Chinese regime is doing all it can to show its positive side during the Olympic Games , it is continuing to persecute any groups that represent non-Communist ideologies .
It is going even further , in that it is redoubling its efforts and is exporting this activity to the territories of democratic Western nations .
For this reason I am calling on the EU authorities and on Member States to monitor the situation with care and to react decisively if the circumstances I have described should be repeated .
( EL ) Mr President , the General Affairs Council is meeting today .
I do not yet know the result , but among the topics being discussed is the proposal to upgrade the EU 's relations with Israel .
Furthermore , the fishermen of the Gaza Strip are today demonstrating against the inhuman measures the Israeli Government is imposing on them .
Israel not only forbids them to fish in their open marine waters , but also deprives them of adequate fuel , so that they are forced to fish in the shallows where raw sewage is discharged without check .
This situation threatens , immediately and alarmingly , to lead to epidemics .
I submit to you , Mr President , the request of these fishermen that under such conditions the EU should not go ahead and upgrade relations with Israel .
A further reason why this upgrading should not happen now , especially for us MEPs , is the fact that Israel recently showed , once again , that it does not respect even our human rights .
Its forces tried to violently suppress peaceful demonstrations against the racist dividing wall from being built ; they injured demonstrators , including our fellow Member Mrs Morgantini .
( BG ) In this House , at the Commission , and in Bulgaria , there is a lot of talk about fighting corruption at the top levels of government .
Yet ' corruption ' is not just a word that exists in and of itself .
There are real people behind it .
I want to show you the face of official corruption at the top in Bulgaria .
Yesterday , the largest Bulgarian daily published photos of the leader of the Turkish ethnic party , MRL , Ahmed Dogan , who , three years ago , was granted a mandate to form the Bulgarian government .
These shocking pictures reveal that Dogan lives in a huge seraglio which is registered as a four-star hotel , and there he indulges in luxury .
This same individual , Dogan , authored the phrases that his party was surrounded by a circle of companies and that buying votes is an European practice .
He told the Trud Daily that his main occupation was to run his business , something which he cannot do legally while a member of Bulgarian Parliament .
Mr. President , ladies and gentlemen of this House , Commissioners , Dogan is one of the heads of the lamia of corruption in Bulgaria .
The destruction of this monster begins with investigating Ahmed Dogan 's circle of companies and his business .
Mr. President , I submit to you the newspaper so that you can read about this yourself .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the 862 415 Irish people who voted ' no ' to the Lisbon Treaty in last Thursday 's referendum .
They voted for freedom , democracy and common sense .
Were the British people to be allowed a referendum , they would undoubtedly vote ' no ' in even greater numbers than the Irish .
Given the chance , many of the other European nations would also vote ' no ' , just as the French and the Dutch proved in 2005 .
With breathtaking arrogance and disregard for democracy , the European political elite intend to bulldoze onwards with the ratification of the Treaty .
The Treaty is dead but the EU refuses to bury it .
The EU 's ongoing love affair with the Treaty is an act of political necrophilia .
But the body is beginning to stink and , the longer it is unburied , the worse the stench is going to get .
We must bury the Treaty .
It is polluting the political atmosphere .
Mr Batten , your comparison is entirely inappropriate , if I may add my own comment .
You are in a Parliament that is very much alive .
If this Parliament did not speak , you , as a living being , could not have addressed it .
( Applause )
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I will speak in Hungarian .
In Slovakia a new education act has been passed by Parliament , and all that is needed for it to enter into force is the signature of the President of the Republic .
The new act means that from now on , names of places and historic figures in history books intended for students whose mother tongue is Hungarian will have to conform to Slovakian spelling rules , thereby ignoring our centuries-old historic and linguistic traditions .
The new act seriously infringes the rights of the Hungarian community in Slovakia to use their language .
Slovakia signed and ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in 2001 .
Commissioner Leonard Orban himself believes that fostering national minorities ' mother tongues is a matter of strategic importance .
In this European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , it is lamentable and unacceptable that Slovakia is acting in a manner that runs counter to European practice .
Instead of broadening minority rights , it is doing the opposite and curtailing them .
As a result of the Treaty of Trianon , several thousand Hungarian-speaking settlements ended up outside the country 's borders , and we have a right to call these places by their Hungarian names .
Linguistic diversity is part of Europe 's cultural legacy and a unique treasure that we all have a responsibility to protect . Thank you for the opportunity to speak .
( ES ) Mr President , in the early morning of 8 June , the terrorist group ETA attacked the offices of the daily newspaper El Correo while 50 staff were in the building and preparing the Sunday edition .
Fortunately , no one was injured but there was significant material damage .
I would be grateful if you would send a message of solidarity . However , I would also like to comment on and have recorded in this Chamber the urgent need to eradicate the terrorist violence perpetrated by ETA against the media and guarantee the full exercise of freedom of expression .
This is a good reason for Europeans to support the Treaty of Lisbon , which will make it possible to develop common policies for justice , security and anti-terrorism and not to depend exclusively on bilateral and intergovernmental cooperation .
Our solidarity should therefore also be expressed in support for ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mrs Ayala Sender , since you addressed me personally , let me say that we are a community based on solidarity , and that solidarity applies in every case , including the present one .
I am grateful that you appreciate this point .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , at the previous plenary session the Leader of our Group , Graham Watson , addressed this Parliament in a one-minute speech because of the anti-Roma atrocities taking place in Italy .
Today , too , I regret to have to inform you of similar incidents , this time in my own country , Hungary .
A few weeks ago , 70 kilometres from Budapest in the village of Pátka , three vigilantes threw a dozen Molotov cocktails at three houses where Roma people lived .
On 16 April in the village of Fadd in Hungary 's Tolna district , unidentified individuals threw Molotov cocktails at two homes .
A week ago my own colleague was attacked in Nyíregyháza by extremists yelling : ' Filthy gypsy , get out of our country ! '
Most of the residents of Pátka stand by their claim that the vigilantes are innocent , although one of the suspects has confessed that he was involved .
Despite this , on Friday a demonstration was held by around 150 uniformed individuals proclaiming Nazi principles , and later on a number of unidentified persons wearing hoods again tried to mount an attack in the presence of 100 riot police .
I too was present .
At the same time , the police covered up the identity of the person injured in the Pátka incident .
In Italy , our fellow EU citizens are living in prisons reserved for refugees ; they too are Roma , of course .
Commissioner Barrot , I hope that once your new cabinet is formed we Roma , too , will be able to enjoy the security provided by European Union democracy , and that the definition of EU citizenship will apply to me and my children as well as to my non-Roma fellow citizens .
Thank you very much .
( PL ) Mr President , even in situations where the issues are completely clear , the solutions that should be adopted should take into account the context and relations between different objectives , the importance of the issue in question and the costs involved in achieving the objectives .
In every issue , especially one that affects the lives of billions of people in the way that climate change does , it is important to act with moderation , common sense and some degree of fairness when trying to resolve the problem .
I do not see any fairness in the proposal to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide .
There are two solutions that are particularly offensive in this regard : treating highly developed countries that have been responsible for a large proportion of carbon dioxide emissions to date and for much pollution , but have better technological capabilities , in the same way as less developed countries , especially those whose economies are based on coal ; and secondly , treating manufacturers of large vehicles , where reducing carbon dioxide emissions by 20 % is easier , the same as manufacturers of vehicles with small engines and low levels of emissions , so that reductions incur higher costs .
It looks as if the issue of climate change is not what is important here , just business issues .
Mr President , Europe 's bees face extinction within a decade .
Diseases and viruses have already wiped out one third of the colonies in America and now threaten our own .
The American situation offers a dangerous snapshot of what we potentially face in Europe unless we act now .
At least 70 crops that contribute significantly to the overall economy depend directly on pollination by the bees .
The US is having to import bees to make up the losses .
In the current climate there are serious questions over the EU 's capacity to produce enough food to satisfy demand , and the implications of a similar outbreak here would be disastrous .
Beekeepers across Europe already know about the threat caused by the varroa mites that have decimated bee colonies .
They are having to deal with Colony Collapse Disorder , which is when hives are systematically abandoned and the bees effectively disappear off the face of the earth .
We need to provide funding and proper scientific research in this area .
The UK Government currently provides just GBP 250 000 towards bee research .
That is a drop in the ocean for such an important issue .
Bees are an integral part of the food chain : without bees , beekeepers , crops , fruit and nuts will be adversely affected .
( FR ) Mr President , I see from the agenda that we will be considering a codified version of the directive on static testing of roll-over protection structures of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
I feel that following the Dublin vote history dictates that we consider other , more urgent issues .
We cannot subcontract a matter such as the Lisbon Treaty to the European Council alone .
We MEPs may legitimately become involved , especially if we know the necessary ingredients for finding solutions .
First of all , the key questions must relate to certain vital institutional aspects and not cover several hundreds of pages .
We need validation by European referendum , with an opt-out for countries that do not wish to follow that course and , finally , as the President said , we need a very tight timetable - 2009 - otherwise the electoral campaign will become impossible .
Let nobody tell me such a scenario is impossible ; it is no more improbable than the one on which the chancelleries are currently working .
In any case , I , for my part , am ready .
Mr President , the Commission is currently examining complaints made by certain private businesses in Spain , France and Italy against cooperatives , and against the cooperative movement as regards its statute and tax treatment .
I would urge the Commission , in examining that complaint , to take due account of the particular needs and characteristics of cooperative movements .
They are not like profit-making shareholder organisations .
A cooperative is owned by its members and profits are distributed equally , not paid out simply to shareholders .
The European Union recognised the particular nature of the cooperative movement in 2003 in adopting the Regulation on the Statute for a European Cooperative Society .
I would urge the Commission to take due account of that and thereby earn the gratitude of the 55 million people in Europe employed by cooperatives and the 163 million people who are members of them .
( DE ) Mr President , last week China demanded an end to the Tibet protests as the condition for further talks with representatives of the Dalai Lama .
According to the Chinese Foreign Minister , the Tibetans must ditch their attempts to ruin the Olympic Games .
The protesting Tibetans , however , surely cannot be expected to accept meekly the crushing of their demonstrations in March .
The Chinese Government has the opportunity to change the situation in Tibet radically .
Given an honest dialogue without prior conditions , the Tibetan people will take part in a constructive process of change .
The first priority is to send out a clear signal , not least by allowing foreign observers into the country to assess the situation for themselves .
Thank you , Mr Horáček !
May I also refer to our resolution of 10 April , in which we called on all EU politicians not to attend the opening ceremony on 8 August unless the rights of the Tibetans had been guaranteed .
I once more commend that statement of 10 April to everyone .
( HU ) Mr President , when Pope Benedict XVI spoke to the Hungarian bishops regarding the burdensome legacy of the long era of Communist rule , it was most apposite .
His comments are particularly topical today , which is the 50th anniversary of the execution of Imre Nagy , the martyred Prime Minister , and 60th anniversary of the start of the brutal religious persecutions and imprisonment of Cardinal József Mindszenthy .
The ghost of this painful era , in which state violence was coupled with militant anti-religious sentiment , was raised by Magda Kósáné Kovács , post-Communist Member of this House , in her most recent intervention here in plenary , in which she sought to defend European values from Pope Benedict , or rather from the Catholic Church .
A few years ago , former party chairman Mrs Kósáné Kovács made the defamatory claim that the Vatican , then under the leadership of Pope John Paul , was keen to get its hands on the whole of Europe and bring it under its control .
As a bishop of the Reformed Church , knowing that the Christian churches themselves have helped shape genuine European values in this European Union which has its roots in the Christian Democrat movement , I reject every manifestation of anti-religious ideology and intolerance .
Let us invite Pope Benedict to the European Parliament .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , fifty years ago today in Hungary , on 16 June 1958 , Imre Nagy , Prime Minister of Hungary 's 1956 revolution and struggle for freedom , was sentenced and executed following a summary show trial along with defence minister Pál Maléter and colleagues Miklós Gémes and József Szilágyi ; Géza Losonczi , meanwhile , was killed while still in prison .
Their corpses , tied with wire and wrapped in paper , were buried face down .
Their trial was one of the most shameful events and biggest injustices of the twentieth century .
Imre Nagy was a fervent Communist , and yet he opted for his country to return to free Europe rather than remain in the Soviet camp .
This made him a national hero , a martyr of the revolution , a politician of European standing .
His moral stance made him an emblem of freedom and of a European Hungary .
The reburial Imre Nagy deserved did not take place until 16 June 1989 , but by then the Communist regime had come to an end and Hungary was able to rejoin the family of free European nations .
The message of these events is clear : freedom and national independence were what Hungary aspired to as it shook off Communism .
This is what those who died fifty years ago gave their lives for ; their sacrifice was not in vain .

( DE ) Mr President , I listened very attentively to the Member who spoke before Mr Szájer and attacked my colleague Magda Kósáné Kovács in a totally inappropriate manner .
Mrs Kovács is my deputy on the executive of the Socialist Group .
She is not present here , which means that she cannot defend herself against that attack .
I know that Mrs Kovács is a convinced democrat and a committed campaigner for European unity .
She certainly does not deserve to have any Member abuse the privileges of this House in order to settle some domestic score or other that may exist between them in Hungary .
I consider the remarks in question to be totally inappropriate and a grievous slur on the character of Magda Kovács , a slur which I reject with the utmost repugnance .
( FR ) Mr President , first I want to welcome the Commission 's initiative to grant fishers emergency aid .
Even if that aid is certainly not enough to resolve the problems in the sector , it does at least seem necessary at this point .
The current situation is indeed critical : in the space of a year , the price of diesel oil has risen from 35 to 73 centimes a litre .
So there is a heavy bill to pay for the oil price rise and in my constituency , the Baie de Somme , professional fishers are very much concerned and very bitter .
Aside from the question of oil prices , fishers want above all to sell their fish at the right price and are opposed to the unjustified margins taken by intermediaries .
This is more than a crisis ; it is a structural issue for the fisheries sector that we must tackle at European level .
As we have seen , the protest movement has taken on a European dimension .
That is only logical given the fact that the fisheries policy is one of the oldest European policies .
We must help the fisheries sector to modernise so that it can rid itself of the constraints imposed by the price of diesel oil , while respecting our obligation to protect the environment and manage fishery resources .
With that in mind , I hope the plenary debate scheduled for Wednesday will conclude with a resolution that benefits the European fisheries that are now at risk .
Mr President , Chee Soon Juan was released from Queenstown Prison in Singapore two days ago .
He has been convicted and imprisoned several times in the last few years .
Chee Soon Juan is not a criminal .
His ' crime ' is very simple : he is leader of the democratic opposition .
He is constantly struggling for freedom and democracy in his country .
Since his last release , the state-controlled media in Singapore started to discredit him , to destroy his credibility , with baseless personal attacks and character assassination .
We have a strong solidarity with Mr Chee Soon Juan and his fellows , who are struggling and fighting for democracy and human rights in Singapore .
We call on the Singaporean authorities to stop harassing the democratic opposition , to stop the violation of human rights and to start respecting the basic right of free expression .
We hope very much that Singapore will go along with our strong wish to respect basic rights .
Mr President , last week the Irish people made a democratic decision on the Lisbon Treaty which must be fully respected .
While many of us who voted or campaigned for a ' yes ' vote are disappointed in the result , I think it is important that we reflect on that result .
In response to Mr Batten 's remarks , I want to emphasise that Ireland is not anti-European .
Ireland remains completely committed to the European idea .
We are mindful of the fact that Ireland is one of 27 Member States , but this is not just an Irish problem .
It is a problem for all Member States .
Europe has faced many challenges in the past and it has overcome those challenges through mature and wise leadership .
I would ask for the same to be shown here on this issue and on the challenges that we face .
We are in uncharted waters and I think it is very important that we avoid knee-jerk reactions or hasty decisions .
We need some reflection and maturity to make sure that we can fully address the present situation and try to get Europe back on the road so that it is fully accountable to the citizens of Europe .
( EL ) Mr President , the European Parliament 's offices in the Member States are the line of communication between Parliament and the citizens .
One of the main purposes of these offices is to inform public opinion , through various activities , about what is happening in the European Parliament .
One such activity involves inviting journalists to come to Strasbourg to cover proceedings in plenary .
On 24 January 2008 , Mr President , I submitted a question to the European Parliament about the decision to reduce the budget for inviting the press .
In spite of this , about five months have passed and I have not yet received an answer .
Something similar is happening to other committees , so that legitimate questions put by MEPs remain unanswered .
I wonder whether this policy can have any positive effect on the operation of Parliamentary institutions and the competent departments , at a time when the EU is in need of fully functioning procedures as provided for in its Rules .
( FR ) Mr President , I want to draw MEPs ' attention to Sami Essid 's expulsion from Italy to Tunisia on 3 June , in total violation of Italy 's commitments under the European Convention on Human Rights and , in particular , Article 3 thereof .
Why ?
Because Mr Essid is accused of terrorism and the European Court of Human Rights has established without any doubt that any person accused of terrorism was without fail tortured in Tunisia .
That is why the European Court asked Italy to suspend the expulsion measure .
Nonetheless , Italy expelled him on 3 June , in total violation of its commitments .
I ask both that Italy be reminded of its obligations as a party to the European Convention on Human Rights and as a Member State of the European Union , and for assurances that Mr Essid , now deported to Tunisia , will not suffer inhumane and degrading treatment there .
( Applause )
( GA ) Madam President , the Irish vote last Thursday against the Treaty of Lisbon was not a vote against Europe .
Ireland 's place is in the European Union , where it has obtained social and economic benefits - both north and south - due to its Membership .
People were concerned about the weakening of Ireland 's voice , and that of other small countries , in the European Union ; about neutrality and military affairs ; about workers ' rights and public services .
Not only were those concerns raised on the doorsteps , but they were also voiced in the opinion polls published throughout the campaign .
Their automatic right to a referendum on future significant changes is also important .
Some of those issues have already been raised in France and the Netherlands .
We must address those concerns .
( HU ) Madam President , I speak now as a Member representing a country whose Parliament , supported by all the political parties , was second to ratify the Treaty Establishing a Constitution for Europe and first to ratify the Lisbon Treaty .
In this capacity I would like to remind you that the greatest danger in Europe today is national egoism , or nationalism .
We must give some thought to whether we should be rewarding those who constantly demand more , or should we instead be sanctioning this kind of behaviour ?
Protecting national interests is a fundamental duty of every country 's government and its representatives in the European Parliament , but the European Union cannot function unless sober compromises are reached among the various national interests , and unless there is solidarity among its nations and peoples .
I therefore strongly urge our Polish friends to lend their support , as the other twenty-six Member States have done , to establishing the European Institute of Innovation and Technology in Budapest .
In the case of Frontex in Warsaw , Hungary too seemed to be in the running for a while , but did not use its veto .
It would therefore be unfair if our Polish friends did not reciprocate with a similar gesture .
Hungarian and Pole are two good friends ; as the saying goes , ' Magyar and Pole , two friends so fine ; together they fight and drink their wine ' .
That concludes this item .
Revision of the framework directive on waste ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Caroline Jackson , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on waste and repealing certain Directives ( 11406 / 4 / 2007 - C6-0056 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Madam President , following your ruling that there is no time for points of order , I will continue with my speech on the Waste Framework Directive .
It is a little difficult to do so against this background , but I will persevere .
Since certain comments have been made on this point in the British press recently , may I begin by drawing attention once again to my declaration of interests , which I made on the record , and which cites my membership of the Environmental Advisory Board of Shanks plc .
That company operates a wide range of waste technologies in Britain and on the continent , and the primary purpose of its Environmental Advisory Board is to provide independent audits of the operation of its plants .
My fellow board members include the chairman of the EU Scientific Advisory Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks and a member of the Green Alliance .
Like many Members , I value the opportunity this kind of experience has given me to learn at close hand about the issues and problems facing this industry and those who work in it .
Turning to the Directive , it has been a long and tortuous road to this second reading and I congratulate those of my colleagues who have accompanied me on it to the very end .
The issue is a very important one .
Various judgments in the Court of Justice regarding the status of waste destined for treatment in energy-from-waste plants needed to be clarified .
New definitions were needed .
Two existing directives on hazardous waste and on waste oils were repealed and their provisions transferred to the Waste Framework Directive .
However , the committee was not content with those original proposals , and went on to transform the Directive from a technical one into a campaigning one .
I congratulate my colleagues on that .
I have to say that the mood in the Council was very bleak , possibly mirroring our economic times .
There was much resistance to what we wanted to do and the Council drove a very hard bargain , but we achieved the following .
Firstly , we have added recycling targets to the text .
That is a very significant achievement since these were not in the original proposal , and this is the first time that recycling targets for household waste have appeared in EU legislation .
It is entirely due to Parliament that they are there .
The new Article 8a requires Member States to take the necessary measures designed to achieve an overall recycling rate of 50 % by 2020 for paper , metal , plastic and glass from household and similar waste .
There are some Member States , such as Germany , for which this is a conservative target , but there are many for which it is very demanding , and we need to take them into account too .
The same article also requires that by 2020 70 % of construction and demolition waste be recycled .
The Greens and their supporters are putting it about that the targets are not enforceable .
They may even believe that , but they are - extraordinarily - rejecting their own achievement .
The Commission has issued a statement to help them , and Mr Dimas will confirm this .
The statement says quite clearly that if in 2020 the targets are not achieved , this will be a serious indication for the Commission that a Member State has not taken the necessary measures designed to achieve the targets .
On this basis , supported by conclusions in the tri-annual national progress reports , the Commission can take Member States to court for non-compliance with the requirements of the Directive .
It may be important to the Greens not to be happy , because Greens are eternal campaigners , but they should take some account of what the Commission has said in that statement .
Secondly , we have added new provisions on the prevention of waste , in Article 8a .
These will mean that the Commission has to report on the evolution of EU waste generation and the scope for waste prevention by 2011 , and by 2014 must produce proposals for waste prevention , and decoupling objectives for 2020 .
It proved impossible to get the Council or the Commission to agree to quantitative waste prevention targets in this Directive , partly because the data necessary for those targets is missing , but Parliament has , through its amendments , created momentum for future policy that may contain waste prevention targets .
The new article therefore represents a significant achievement .
It is something for our successors to build on .
We cannot do everything in this Directive , but have to hand things on to our successors in the next decade .
Thirdly , we have firmly placed the famous EU waste hierarchy in EU law for the first time .
We have been talking about this for years , but if you look at EU law it is not there .
However , it will be soon , and we can celebrate a minor victory in getting the Council to agree that the hierarchy shall apply ' as a priority order ' in waste prevention and management legislation .
Fourthly , we have secured agreement to place better emphasis on hazardous waste management , as several colleagues wanted .
Fifthly , we have also ensured that priority will continue to be given to the regeneration of waste oils - although there was no support for a policy , which I know some colleagues wanted , that would have made regeneration mandatory in all Member States .
We secured Council support for the amendment put forward by Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges and colleagues designed to make it easier for SMEs to use the waste list , and we also obtained support for a new article on biowaste .
In conclusion , the Directive specifies the energy efficiency criteria for incineration , with energy recovery to be classed as a recovery operation rather than disposal .
That is the best deal available .
Anyone who thinks that we could get anything better by going to conciliation would be deceiving themselves .
In the famous words of Jack Nicholson , ' this is as good as it gets ' .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me first thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Jackson , on her excellent contribution to the revision of the Waste Framework Directive , and the shadow rapporteurs and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for their positive and constructive contribution .
With this Directive , the Community is taking the first substantial step towards creating a recycling society .
The Directive introduces a modern approach to waste management , treating waste as useable raw materials and providing clearer definitions , simplified regulations , and new , ambitious targets .
Thanks to the incorporation of the provisions of the Directives on Hazardous Waste and Waste Oil , this Directive contributes to the broader effort in improving legislation and simplifying the acquis communautaire .
The next step , of course , will be its successful implementation .
Parliament 's considerable efforts and perseverance have been rewarded .
It was not easy to persuade the Member States to accept the new recycling targets and agree to the waste prevention objectives .
Nevertheless , this aim has been achieved in full .
Some doubts have been expressed regarding whether these targets will be implemented by the Member States .
I should like to underline that with the current formulation of the quantitative targets , the Commission has the ability and the political will to refer Member States to the European Court of Justice if they have not taken the measures that are essential for achieving the recycling targets .
Parliament has incorporated many other significant points into the text of the Directive .
Among these are the hierarchy of five categories of waste , new provisions on the separate collection of biowaste and hazardous waste , and many useful clarifications .
These points enrich the Commission 's original proposal and improve the text , so that it becomes an ambitious legislative instrument for future generations .
The fact that it has been possible to achieve agreement at second reading is , of course , particularly satisfying .
I should like to emphasise once more the European Parliament 's constructive role in this process .
This Directive creates a new framework for waste management and provides a solid foundation for other Community policy initiatives .
The European Commission is in a position to support the compromise package in order to achieve agreement at second reading .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , Caroline Jackson referred to a quotation I think from Jack Nicholson .
Knowing her golfing prowess , I thought it might have been from Jack Nicklaus , but no doubt they would have had the same sort of quotation : ' This is about as good as it gets ' .
That is a great tribute to our rapporteur and I salute her on behalf of our Group .
It is necessary that we support her and take action .
It is not as good as we might have envisaged it being at one point .
However , we have made enormous progress .
Commissioner , it is up to you now to ensure that it is implemented and to bring forward the subsequent provisions on prevention with your target of 2014 .
I know you will put this process in motion and that is important too .
It is important because we have had a whole raft of waste proposals in my time in this Parliament : we have dealt with vehicles , electrical and electronic equipment , batteries , packaging and so forth .
However , waste goes on rising ; it rises faster than the growth of our economies .
It grows fastest in some areas like municipal waste , and that is why we need to take action .
My own country sets one of the worst examples in terms of waste .
The Netherlands we salute as setting the best example .
However , we all need to catch up .
We all need to have more recycling so as to meet the terms of the hierarchy : we need to meet the recycling targets and prevention targets and so forth .
I believe that this is a measure which will at least send us down that road in a better frame of mind than we have shown in the past with our wasteful economy , wasteful society and wasteful policies .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am helped by the fact that Mrs Jackson and Commissioner Dimas have given a full explanation of the main elements of this compromise , which I also support .
Let me therefore put forward some eminently political thoughts .
I am a negotiator and I always ponder whether or not the compromise that has been reached is valid .
I therefore read the texts again with a fresh mind , following the night of the negotiations .
Goodness only knows why negotiations always have to end at night .
Is an agreement reached in the morning of less value ?
There is food for thought there as well .
In all sincerity - and I say this to our Green and GUE colleagues , and to Karl-Heinz Florenz who I see has re-tabled an amendment from the Environment Committee which bore my signature and which I cannot therefore but support - in all sincerity , looking at both the compromise and the Environment Committee texts , we have achieved - and the main credit goes to you , Mrs Jackson - a really amazing result .
Are we aware that there was nothing about recycling in the Commission proposal and then in the common position ?
Nothing apart from a recital which mentioned the recycling society without going into further detail .
There was nothing !
Now we have precise targets ; we have a review in 2014 when other materials , not covered at present , could be included ; we know for sure , as Commissioner Dimas has just confirmed it , that legal action can be taken against States failing to implement the measures planned to achieve those targets .
That seems a very important fact to me .
It is also very important that a political and legal process has finally been set in motion to compel States to draw up genuine waste prevention plans , and that a hierarchy of waste disposal which respects the environment has finally been included in European law , and is legally binding , making waste no longer just a problem but a resource .
In all honesty , therefore , and shouldering our full responsibility , I believe that rejecting this compromise and heading for a risky conciliation would not be in the interest of European citizens , but would turn the achievement and establishment of these targets , set out here in a clear and absolutely incontrovertible way , into a kind of Russian roulette .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , with this text we hope to reverse the trend of producing more waste than we recycle .
It is the result of several years of debates and taking account of the reality of two major groups of Member States as regards waste management systems : recycling states and landfilling states .
The achieved compromise must be seen in this light .
For the first time , prevention and recycling have been given a central role in the Directive .
Furthermore , the text includes the necessary dynamics to adapt higher targets as well as targets for new waste streams It is a carefully balanced compromise : achievable and realistic .
Amendments : we do not consider that in their entirety they endanger the general agreement .
With regard to by-products - the article in the body of the Directive and the article on end of waste - most critics fear sham recovery .
As the issue is not internationally agreed , the danger is real .
It must , therefore , be made clear that the Commission will use the guidelines from February 2007 in order to prevent this .
I would much appreciate it if Mr Dimas would give us today an assurance that a substance or object will be shipped as a by-product outside the Community only once the conditions of Article 4 ( 1 ) are met in the Community .

Similarly for end of waste .
When certain waste ceases to be waste , the substance or object resulting from it can be shipped as such outside the Community only once the conditions of Article 5 are met in the Community .
It would make it easier for many MEPs to vote for the compromise .
To conclude , I wish to extend many thanks to the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs for fruitful cooperation to the benefit of the citizens of Europe .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would also like to thank Mrs Jackson .
We may have ended up in disagreement about the tax , but I think that there is no doubt that there has been excellent cooperation throughout the discussions .
We are not happy today - I wish we were - and I would like to give some of the reasons why we are not happy with the compromise .
We have supported 30 of the compromise amendments and we have tabled others to try and strengthen the compromise in the areas of hazardous waste , end of waste , by-products and separate collection of biowaste .
But from the very start , the main issues for us were the adoption of binding targets on waste reduction and recycling and opposition to the reclassification of incineration as energy recovery .
The final compromise does not have a legally binding target for waste reduction .
A study on waste prevention is no alternative to stabilisation measures ; the continuous growth in waste is unsustainable and without this measure it will continue to grow .
Although recycling and reuse targets have been set at 50 % and 70 % and the Member States are legally obliged to put measures in place to achieve these targets , the targets themselves are not binding .
I am grateful for the explanation that we have had from Mr Dimas , but why was there such a debate over the wording of this ?
The reason was to avoid making those targets binding .
Manufacturing and industrial waste , which have a huge potential for reuse and recycling , have been left out altogether .
Incineration cannot be viewed as a waste management option on a par with recycling and reuse ; this will just attract further investment into incinerators and directly undermine the waste hierarchy .
If the weak compromise is adopted , we will have missed the opportunity to ensure real EU action and leadership on waste policy when we so desperately need it .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( GA ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Jackson for her work .
We have worked well together to make some improvements to the original Commission proposal , although we do not agree on everything .
Many people throughout the Union will be concerned about the proposal to ' re-brand ' incinerators as a form of recovery if they meet certain efficiency criteria .
We remain opposed to the ' re-branding ' of incineration and have put down an amendment to have this deleted .
With regard to recycling , the latest proposed deal sets out targets which may be very difficult to enforce due to vagueness in the wording which states that , " member states shall take the necessary measures designed to achieve recycling targets . ”
Good legislation demands that we be more precise in our wording on targets and do not leave interpretation to the European Court of Justice .
Therefore we want to defend and keep the wording as voted by the committee .
Proposals on waste prevention have weakened to the point where they will not be able to make a substantive enough contribution or to clearly help Member States in stabilising and reducing their waste .
The weakness of the reference to prevention targets means that a harmonised prevention initiative and indicators is not yet enshrined in legislation
Therefore , we can be cosignatories to some of the work we have done together .
However , regarding other parts of it , we believe that we must table amendments .
I would like , once again , to thank Mrs Jackson for the open and inclusive way she corresponded with the shadow raporteurs .
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has produced a very good report as a recommendation for second reading .
I am thinking in particular of the prominent place given to the waste hierarchy , the scrapping of the by-products category , the careful handling of the end-of-waste concept , the protection rules on hazardous waste and the prevention , reuse and recycling objectives .
The only negative aspect of the report by the Committee on the Environment was the amendment to encourage waste incineration by regarding it as efficient use if enough energy is recovered .
In the negotiating result achieved after two months , not all that much remained of the recommendation by the Committee on the Environment and that was due not to the rapporteur , but to the uncompromising position of the Council .
The article on by-products was not amended and Member States can decide on their own initiative when waste ceases to be waste , with all the disruption to competition that that entails .
Furthermore , no prevention objectives have been set and the reuse and recycling objectives are considerably weakened .
It was for those reasons that I did not support the compromise package .
However , I hope that we still adopt the better parts of the Committee on the Environment report when we vote tomorrow .
I am referring in particular to the amendments by the GUE / NGL Group and the Greens .
The environment deserves that we go through a further mediation procedure to that end , in which we actually get the Council to make the necessary improvements .
If we , as a Parliament , are convincing , it should be possible , with the leadership of Mrs Jackson , to do more than is the case at present .
I should like to thank Mrs Jackson and the other shadow rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation and I hope we shall see a successful outcome from the vote tomorrow .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome and support all the amendments intended to introduce targets which are indispensable for prevention with a view to improved recycling .
Naturally , I also support the insistence on a clearly defined and clearly structured waste hierarchy .
It is also indispensable to be able to draw on sound and comparable statistical data if further progress is to be made as regards both prevention and recycling of industrial waste .
Ladies and gentlemen , I consider that we in Parliament must staunchly support the application of the hierarchy principle as a general rule , and not as a guiding principle as preferred by the Council .
The directive must clarify in detail the criteria to be used for any departures which , in my view , must where necessary be framed in an ordered and distinct way , so that there can be no doubt about what is considered as recovery and what is considered as disposal of waste .
I agree with the rapporteur that energy from waste plants can play an important part in dealing with residual waste and that we are now faced with an important choice in this respect , bearing in mind the European Union 's dependence on insecure imports of energy from so many other parts of the world .
I would conclude by saying that I also welcome the amendments relating to the regeneration of waste oils , which had initially been taken out .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , may I say to Caroline Jackson that I am unhappy with the compromise , but that is not because of any flaw in Mrs Jackson 's negotiating skills .
On this occasion , I have to say to Stavros Dimas that my displeasure is directed at the Commission for a change .
In the case of aircraft , industry and motor vehicles , the Commission is extremely strict , haggling for every gramm by which it can reduce CO2 emissions , and rightly so .
In the case of waste-management policy , however , CO2 does not enter the equation at all .
The evidence points to a potential cut of 100 million tonnes of CO2 .
That is a golden opportunity , but it has been squandered in this document .
My second cause for regret is that we have become a kind of concreting firm .
We concrete over the divergences in Europe instead of aiming for harmonisation .
Although we define targets , they are not binding .
Over the next 20 years we shall not obtain any genuine harmonised targets in Europe .
That is what disturbs me about this report .
Twenty years is almost half a generation .
We ought to have been far more innovative , and we could have been .
I believe , Commissioner , there is only one major problem , namely Article 14 .
I would be delighted if you could say some more about that provision .
In a federal state , it may be a highly complex matter .
It is about the question of mixed or unmixed waste management and how it is dealt with in accordance with the principle of self-sufficiency .
I beg you earnestly to comment on this matter again in your concluding explanations .
At the present time , of course , one or two people are saying that we shall secure a large majority , but , if these questions are not resolved , some of the large countries will undoubtedly agonise over their vote .
Please consider that we do not only have tomorrow 's reading ; we have a third reading too , and 64 amendments on the table are quite a lot for a conciliation procedure .
So if you take the opportunity , Commissioner , to explain one or two things about these unresolved issues , I could imagine that we might reach a successful outcome .
Madam President , in Europe we are currently recycling only 27 % of our waste and almost half of our waste ends up in landfills .
This shows that we have to fundamentally change our waste management .
Most importantly we should encourage waste prevention , strengthen reuse and recycling and minimise the amount of landfill waste .
Therefore I welcome the fact that the waste hierarchy remained in the new compromise text after some debate .
As regards prevention - the main aim of the legislation - I miss the waste stabilisation targets in the latest text , but we had already adopted them in the first reading .
In the old Member States one person generates almost twice as much household waste - 570 kg per year - as a person in the new Member States - 300 to 350 kg per year .
So the rich nations should start to decrease waste production first .
The amount of generated waste is increasing on a European scale .
Therefore prevention programmes , as proposed in the compromise , are not enough : we must set binding targets to halt the growing waste generation .
That is why I consider supporting Amendment 48 which reintroduces the waste stabilisation target .
I welcome the mandatory waste reuse and recycling targets , but I am afraid that the new text , which says that Member States ' shall take the necessary measures ' to achieve the targets is not enough .
We need concrete , enforceable and binding targets , both for household and industrial waste .
Therefore I propose to support Amendment 82 , to ensure the enforcement of the recycling targets .
Having made these comments , I welcome the report and the work of Mrs Jackson , my friend Guido Sacconi and others .
Madam President , this agreement is as good as it gets , the rapporteur says , and I pay credit to what she has achieved .
There are gains to be made at 3 o 'clock in the morning during a conciliation session that cannot be achieved at other times during the negotiating process .
We all recognise that the size of our waste mountain needs to be reduced .
One British supermarket has recently announced that by 2012 it intends to reduce the use of packaging by 25 % and its use of carrier bags by 33 % .
It wants to ensure that waste food is converted to energy by anaerobic digestion .
It wants to restrict the number of materials used in packaging to just four which are easy to recycle or compost and it wants to print simple symbols on all packaging to make it easy for customers to recycle or compost their waste .
Now all this is a matter of political will .
Reducing waste is a matter of political will and that will can be strengthened by European Union law .
I suspect that we could have got the Council to at least agree to bring forward the date by which it will publish proposals for waste reduction from 2014 to a few years earlier .
Parliament has done well .
It could , perhaps , have done better .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal is a disappointment .
It is nothing short of a failure to meet the need for more efforts to tackle climate change and conserve resources .
We know that the European Environment Agency has predicted a 50 % increase in the volume of waste by 2020 .
In this respect , the fact that binding stabilisation levels or binding recycling targets have not been prescribed represents a flop , a caving-in to pressure from the Member States .
The instrument that was needed has unquestionably been watered down in response to that pressure .
It is also disappointing that waste incineration is increasingly becoming the ultima ratio at the expense of waste avoidance .
It was precisely to redress this imbalance that these recycling quotas and the stabilisation of waste volumes would have served .
I hope that , by adopting amendments , we can still make some improvements to this draft and actually do what is necessary , namely to formulate the sort of ambitious waste-management policy we need in the European Union .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry but I have to criticise some of the compromises reached as , in some cases , they run the risk of undermining what Parliament very rightly voted for at first reading .
I am also sorry because these changes for the worse have been imposed by the Council and are mistaken and dangerous .
I say this from my own standpoint , living , as I do , in Italy .
In this case , Italy unfortunately offers a bad example of waste management , failing to respect the spirit and the letter of European law under which a virtuous hierarchy , ranging from reduction to recycling , has for some time been consolidated .
That hierarchy has to be strengthened by quantified and certain targets - for reduction and recycling - for industrial waste as well , and not weakened , as is to some extent the case , by leaving scope for disposal policies which undermine its philosophy .
Italy has , for instance , offered billions of euro in incentives for waste incineration in recent years , with results that are evident to all and can in no way be seen as positive .
Madam President , across Europe , every Member State is struggling with runaway energy prices .
Therefore seeing waste as potentially important fuel is , I believe , both sensible and necessary .
It is surely a win-win situation - both dealing with our massive stockpiles of waste and providing an alternative energy supply source , particularly as we face an energy crisis and increasing dependence upon insecure foreign supplies of oil .
I therefore do not therefore understand the reticence of some in facing up to the obvious advantage of promoting energy from waste .
I fear some colleagues feel so precious about their recycling and anti-incineration dogmas that they would sacrifice the opportunity of heat and power from waste .
In that , I have to say , I believe they are profoundly mistaken .
On a related note , could I say that I very strongly favour maximising the definition of ' recovery ' under the Directive , making it indisputably clear that energy from waste represents recovery , not disposal , of waste .
We should particularly apply that to our agricultural sector , where there is much opportunity in that regard .
( FR ) Madam President , first I want to offer warm thanks to our rapporteur , Caroline Jackson , for the remarkable job she has done , which reflects the quality of her expertise on the delicate issue of waste management .
I also congratulate her on listening so attentively , which she has done throughout the negotiations , and thanks to which we have achieved this difficult compromise with the Council and the Commission .
We have a new directive that endeavours to clarify a number of points .
We welcome the waste management and hierarchy and the ambitious recycling targets set for the Member States - 50 % for household waste by the year 2020 .
Waste management must be based on prevention , reuse , recycling , recovery and , lastly , disposal , and this hierarchy must be a guiding principle .
It is also important for incinerators to be subject to energy efficiency criteria , as set out in the text , provided of course that incineration is used only when no other method is feasible .
On that basis , I regard it as very positive that the text also provides for very tight controls on hazardous waste and more stringent traceability measures .
This is , of course , a compromise and we would have wished to go much further on certain points , such as adding environmental criteria in the definition of recovery and setting more stringent conditions for departures from the status of waste ; then there is the issue of by-products , where the definition poses some problems .
Nonetheless , we absolutely must support this compromise because we know full well that it was difficult to reach and that if we want to go to conciliation we would be taking the risk of defeat and delaying matters hugely .
We must realise that since our European waste policy has been a failure to date , it is far preferable to agree a solution that seems reasonable , and the European Commission must be very vigilant in ensuring that this directive is implemented properly .
We will see if we can go further in a few years ' time .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for my part I am not satisfied with either the form or the substance of this compromise text .
On the form , I believe we cannot do our job properly when , after spending two years working on drawing up a text , we find that the final decisions - which are more than just adjustments - are taken on the quiet and go far beyond what was adopted in the Committee on the Environment and only land on Members ' desks a few hours before the vote .
On the substance , this compromise text is a cop-out that fails to give a clear definition of recovery , no longer tries to stabilise the volume of waste , no longer sets out ambitious recycling targets and unfortunately reflects the inability of the Commission and the Council to translate the highly ambitious declarations made at European and international level into actions .
No , I am not satisfied , and I am in fact concerned at our political incapacity to take genuine environmental action or action to improve our health , which is also why I have voted against the text .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I want to pay tribute to the work done by our rapporteur , Caroline Jackson , and by Mojka Drčar Murko , rapporteur for our ALDE Group .
The question of hazardous waste raises vital issues of traceability , non-dilution , homogeneous storing of information on waste movement over a long period , i.e. five years for all parts of the chain ; yet all those issues have been treated rather lightly .
That is more than regrettable in terms of health and the environment .
In regard to by-products , I am most disappointed .
I am not against the concept of by-products : on the contrary , I recognise their importance ; but I do feel that the definition given in the Council 's common position does not offer enough guarantees and that at the end of the day it risks destroying the very concept as a result of the possible abuses .
Other questions , such as the status of end of waste and the recovery of waste , seem to me to have been sacrificed in the name of an agreement at second reading .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Jackson , we shall be tabling a cross-party amendment that attracted majority support in this House at first reading .
It addresses the following problem : in many countries of the EU untreated , unsterilised food scraps are repeatedly fed to livestock or fly-tipped .
Time and again , this kind of behaviour poses the risk of diseases such as foot-and-mouth disease .
It is therefore essential to ensure that food waste is sterilised and safely disposed of by approved companies using suitable methods .
Member States should only be allowed to authorise its use in pig feed if it has been sterilised for 20 minutes at a temperature of 133 ° C and a pressure of 3 bar and if all other requirements of Regulation 1774 / 2002 have been met in full .
I firmly believe that , if Parliament adopts this amendment , the Council will incorporate this rule into the compromise .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the compromise that has been reached is a retrograde step from the text approved by the Committee on the Environment .
The original text said that waste production should be reduced to 2009 levels from 2012 , introducing a genuine policy of prevention with measures staggered over time .
That objective has been rescinded in the compromise , leaving everything vague .
The Committee on the Environment had set minimum targets for the recycling of domestic and industrial waste , to be achieved by set - albeit far-off - deadlines .
Those targets have also been watered down , limiting them solely to some types of material and excluding industrial waste .
Another negative aspect is the promotion of incinerators over a certain efficiency from disposal plant to recovery plant .
This directive seems to be giving in to what powerful lobbies want .
The outcome of the Irish referendum has shown that you are either on the side of citizens and their concerns , or you run of risk of rejection of the idea of Europe and paralysis of the integration process .
Parliament must take heed of the thousands of emails from European citizens calling for greater commitments and binding targets , otherwise we risk losing another major opportunity to enhance the credibility of the European institutions .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
I welcome the compromise package , but at the same time I would like to emphasise that the compromise is a rather fragile one .
It is therefore vitally important that each of the Member States behaves responsibly and does not go looking for any loopholes that might have remained in the legislation .
In Hungary at present , separate collection of waste accounts for 2 % of the total .
In my view , there is nothing more to say about this other than to express the hope that the impact of the Directive will finally help to shift the situation forwards from this low position .
In the eastern half of Europe , investment in waste management has increased in recent years , largely thanks to funding obtained from the Instrument for Structural Policies for Pre-Accession ( ISPA ) and the Cohesion Fund .
Construction of landfill sites has been a major activity , but in a number of communities waste separation programmes have been initiated , including measures aimed at separate collection of organic waste in some instances .
On the other hand , genuine measures and investment aimed at waste reduction have not been forthcoming at all , and a distinct industry for processing recyclable materials has yet to emerge .
The nature of the guidelines set out by the European Union will therefore be crucial , not least for Hungary .
According to the statistics , every community could basically achieve a 50 % reduction in the waste it produces as soon as it introduces dry waste recycling and separate door-to-door collection of organic waste .
When setting out the new obligations , however , we must also consider their enforceability and associated costs .
For example , can the additional investments be put in place in the same areas as the ISPA projects ?
Can the original contracts be amended ?
If not , then it makes little difference whether demand exists to expand waste separation or whether legislation is in place to reduce the amount of waste that goes to landfill ; under the twenty-year contracts the waste collected must be taken to the landfill sites that have been constructed .
In addition to approving this directive , therefore , we must not delay in getting to work on potential ways of amending the existing contracts .
I congratulate the rapporteur on her outstanding work . Thank you very much .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe we can congratulate the rapporteur .
She has certainly managed to achieve an acceptable outcome with the Council .
I particularly wish to emphasise the inclusion of the divergent waste hierarchy .
There are , however , minus points , which are truly incomprehensible and which were put into this document by the Council .
The first of these relates to animal by-products .
We had established in committee that animal by-products would be dropped from this framework waste directive .
What the Council has now done is to erect the sort of bureaucratic obstacle that drives farmers to the barricades .
It lays down that slurry processed into biogas suddenly becomes a waste product .
Do you know what this means ?
It means that farmers will need a waste-treatment licence and will have to specify the precise volume and nature of the waste to be treated and the place of treatment .
The Animal By-products Regulation lays down explicitly that exceptions apply to slurry .
It would now therefore be easier for a farmer to spread slurry on his fields than to process it into biogas .
In other words , we are creating bureaucratic obstacles to a practice we actually seek to encourage .
The second point concerns waste oil .
The Waste Oil Directive - which , as you know , is now to be repealed - stipulates that waste oils are to be treated and regenerated .
There are large volumes being processed under that directive .
It has already been established , of course , that waste oils need not be treated in cases where regeneration is not economically viable or technically possible .
It has now been laid down that the Member States are to decide .
Well , are we now a European Union or have we reverted to a collection of Member States ?
The fact is that we are quite clearly breaking up the market again .
I find that very disquieting .
Let me move on to the question of increased self-sufficiency .
Local authorities will now determine who may dispose of what and when .
Needless to say , there was a great deal of pressure from local authorities with spare incineration capacity .
That , however , is the wrong way to go .
It is not an option , and this extension is causing the market economy to grind to a complete halt in the realm of waste management .
( NL ) Madam President , I think it is clear that this compromise is an important step forward for European environmental law .
All the same , I am not entirely happy with the compromise .
Why not ?
My own region , Flanders , along with , for instance , the Netherlands , has the best waste policy and is excellent at sorting and recycling , so we find the proposed recycling and prevention targets totally inadequate .
It really does not give us any encouragement at all to do better in the future .
We are also not entirely happy about the possibility of household waste incinerators being regarded as an efficient use on the basis of the energy efficiency formula , which we believe might , in practice , create a great deal of confusion .
All the same , I am certain that the overall result has to be seen as very positive and I therefore want to thank Mrs Jackson sincerely for her huge contribution .
We shall be supporting the compromise .
( HU ) Madam President , in its present form , unfortunately , the Waste Framework Directive threatens the expansion of biogas use .
I completely agree with our fellow Member Mr Schnellhardt from the PPE-DE Group that the present directive is inadequate with regard to biogas production , as also with regard to the use of slurry or municipal waste .
In its present form , unfortunately , the Waste Directive will jeopardise expansion of biogas use .
This calls the Jackson report into question .
Within the framework of the Waste Directive , the definition of animal manure used for biogas production as waste is ambiguous .
If the scope of the directive were to include this , it would make it impossible to produce biogas from animal manure , despite the fact that this would have major advantages from the point of view of energy management , the environment and climate protection .
We must clear up this muddle and restore legislative consistency as soon as possible , and therefore we must adopt the Commission 's position on the directive as regards biogas .
( PL ) Madam President , congratulations to the rapporteur on a realistic appraisal of the growing waste problem .
The basic assumptions in the proposed regulations are waste prevention and material recycling .
Recovery of energy is simpler , but it should not replace material recycling , which is more difficult .
For this reason it is necessary to create the conditions to enable material recycling to take place and to make more precise legal distinctions describing , for example , when scrap metal does not constitute waste , but becomes a raw material .
We need better and cheaper material recycling technologies .
Products should be designed in such a way as to simplify recycling .
Selective collections are needed and these need to be adapted to the market in such a way that both households and potential users of secondary materials can benefit .
Without these solutions we face the risk of a repeat of the present situation in Naples , where , unfortunately , the incineration of waste may turn out to be the only option .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank all the speakers in this debate for their positive contributions .
On the basis of the agreed text , Member States will now have to take a number of measures in order to improve their waste management .
The Directive lays down clear definitions and waste management principles , which I trust will resolve the existing interpretation problems , reduce the number of court cases and set a sound legal basis for the functioning of the waste treatment sector .
A number of key elements have been included in the overall compromise package that is now proposed .
The most important are these .
Firstly , the environmental objective of the Directive is now clear and ambitious .
The level of environmental protection has not only been maintained but also strengthened in several cases , such as hazardous waste .
The co-legislators have agreed on a number of cornerstone definitions , including definitions of waste , prevention , recycling and recovery .
These definitions are clear and understandable .
In addition , the Directive successfully incorporates the provisions of two other directives to make the legislation more accessible while maintaining the high standards of environmental protection .
A distinction between recovery and disposal has been made clear , with a possibility for the Commission to further delineate this distinction should there be such a need .
A clear five-step ' waste hierarchy ' has been set up which promotes waste prevention and allows for disposal of residual waste only as the last resort .
At the same time , it allows for the necessary scope of flexibility justified by sound life-cycle considerations .
I would like to recall the importance given by Parliament during the negotiations to strengthening the upper levels of the ' waste hierarchy ' by introducing the recycling targets .
If these targets are not met in 2020 , the Commission can take Member States to court for non-compliance with the requirements of the Directive .
In addition , the current formulation introduces a more regular and thorough process of monitoring the measures taken by Member States to attain the required targets in advance of the 2020 deadline , instead of a simple check of the actual compliance levels in 2020 when waste management systems are already in place .
Such an early enforcement process can help to avoid unpleasant surprises in 2020 .
Last but not least , the Directive introduces a completely new dimension on waste prevention which the Commission is keen to pursue immediately after its adoption and transposition .
The Member States will now have to establish their national waste management plans and networks which need to reflect the principles and new obligations set out in the revised Directive .
Article 14 of the Waste Framework Directive does not prescribe whether private or public authorities should participate in the setting-up and in the operation of such networks , nor does it affect in any possible way the ownership - public or private - of waste-management operations and infrastructures .
The division of responsibilities between the public and private sectors is an internal matter that can only be decided by the Member States .
If an adequate network of disposal and recovery operations is already in place - be it private , public or mixed - there is no need for additional measures to set it up .
Regarding the concerns relating to the lack of a recycling target for manufacturing and industrial waste , my services will look into the possibility of setting such a target as the first priority within the context of the 2014 review , which is foreseen in Article 8a ( point 4 ) .
Regarding the issue of feeding animals with animal by-products such as catering waste , this is regulated by the Animal By-Products Regulation , which is currently under review .
It should be addressed in that regulation as the Waste Framework Directive is not the right place to regulate the use of catering waste .
Concerning the question of whether by-product requirements and end-of-waste criteria must be fulfilled in the European Union before shipment to third countries , the Commission confirms that this is the case .
Regarding the question of whether manure should be excluded from the scope of the Waste Framework Directive , manure is not considered waste when it is used as a fertiliser .
However , it is considered waste when it is destined for further treatment or disposal operations , for instance incineration , production of biogas or compost and landfilling .
Excluding manure from the scope of waste legislation would create a serious gap in environmental protection , since there would be no legal means to control issues such as emissions to air and water , landfilling requirements , noise , odour etc .
Finally , the European Union should promote the production of biogas and the composting of waste .
However , biogas and composting plants are not environmentally neutral .
They also emit to the air and water and can be a source of nuisance , for instance in terms of odours or noise .
Excluding manure destined for biogas production or composting plants from the scope of the Waste Framework Directive would result in excluding such plants from the scope of the IPPC Directive .
To conclude , I should like once again to congratulate and thank Mrs Jackson for her excellent work .
The Commission is very pleased with the outcome of the negotiations and can accept the proposed compromise amendments in full .
rapporteur . - Madam President , just briefly I would like to thank all those colleagues who took part in the debate .
There is only one colleague that I want to respond to , and that is Mr Davies - hereinafter known as ' Chris ' Newsnight ' Davies ' , for the programme that he likes appearing on - who said that I gave in too easily in the Council .
I hope that my colleagues will reinforce me when I say that I did not give in too easily and that I have never given in easily on anything .
As Mrs Laperrouze will attest on the water issue , the Council is getting increasingly difficult to negotiate with .
As the recession bites , it realises that this legislation is going to cost money and it is reluctant to accept Parliament 's amendments .
We have a choice tomorrow morning .
We can agree to the package of amendments before us and I hope very much that is what will happen .
We can vote through some major amendments , for example on by-products , which will mean that the package falls and we all go into conciliation .
Won 't that be fun !
Or we can agree perhaps to some minor amendment , or to an amendment which is characterised by its movers as minor , such as Amendment 88 on which I await the Commission 's opinion , perhaps overnight .
I think it is very doubtful indeed as to whether the Council will accept any amendments , however minor , so I am in favour of the package itself , unamended .
After all , the package must mean something , otherwise why did the Council fight so strongly over it ?
It is not a meaningless package as the Greens are trying to make out ; it is a package with teeth .
I would like in conclusion to thank the shadows - Caroline Jackson and the Shadows , it sounds like a 1960s band - for their cooperation , without necessarily wishing to see them again and again and again in conciliation .
I think we ought to try to put this issue to bed tomorrow morning .
in writing . - ( DE ) With the new framework directive on waste , Parliament has now won acceptance for the establishment of high and binding recycling quotas .
There was , indeed , an urgent need for these , and I look forward confidently to a future in which waste separation and recycling will be practised to an ever-increasing extent throughout Europe .
I believe that 50 % recycling of household waste and 70 % recycling of building and demolition waste by 2020 are very good targets that pave the way towards a functioning system of environment-friendly and climate-friendly waste management in the whole of Europe .
Precisely because the Austrians are already exemplary in separating and recycling waste , I am delighted that all the other Member States will now be taking part in these operations , thereby bringing us another step closer to efficient protection of the environment .
We should not forget that waste products are also raw materials and that more efficient use of these materials can help to combat climate change too .
It is now a matter of waiting for the Commission to make its specific proposal as to how we can ensure that economic growth does not mean growing volumes of waste .
Environmental quality standards in the field of water policy ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading by Anne Laperrouze , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy and amending Directives 82 / 176 / EEC , 83 / 513 / EEC , 84 / 156 / EEC , 84 / 491 / EEC , 86 / 280 / EEC and 2000 / 60 / EC ( 11486 / 3 / 2007 - C6-0055 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are presenting today at second reading is the outcome of teamwork , thanks to which we have reached an agreement with the Slovenian Presidency and the European Commission .
For me , it was a real pleasure to work on seeking a compromise with my co-rapporteurs from the political groups .
I was fortunate to have competent and experienced colleagues , who listened carefully and were present at the negotiating meetings .
I would like to offer them my warm thanks , and I also want to thank the secretariat of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the political group advisers and my assistant , Sylvain Maréchal .
I am using the phrase teamwork because we did excellent work together with the representatives of the Slovenian Presidency , who took account of Parliament 's recommendations , and with the representatives of the European Commission , who gave us answers that made it easier for us to understand this proposal for a directive .
I think we can all recognise the fruits of our cooperation in the compromise amendments that will be tabled for the vote tomorrow .
So I thank everybody for having helped me in my job as rapporteur on this technical dossier .
I come now to the substance .
The framework directive on water sets out a strategy to combat the chemical pollution of water .
This proposal for a daughter directive aims , by establishing environmental quality standards , to guarantee a high level of protection against the risks that certain substances pose to the aquatic environment .
Let me highlight the main advances of this compromise text .
We have introduced two major principles : the polluter pays principle and the principle of priority correction at source .
The most significant aspects are practical ones .
For example , the transitional areas of exceedance - redefined as mixing zones - are no longer simply zones that are established but now serve as a tool for underlining a problem , and it follows that it is up to the Member States to describe the corrective measures .
The main object of this directive was to harmonise standards at Community level .
As a matter of course , it would therefore be up to the Commission to define the guidelines for harmonising inventories , emissions , discharges and mixing zones .
We achieved that .
We have also managed to ensure that more account will be taken of the situation of transboundary surface water bodies between Member States but also from third countries .
In regard to additional substances , Parliament had hoped to add a consistent number .
On the basis of a preliminary filtering , the Commission has selected 13 substances it regards as giving cause for concern .
The compromise clearly stipulates that on the basis of scientific data the Commission will have 24 months to pronounce on the final classification and to propose the relevant limit values .
That represents fairly considerable progress , because in the main these substances are PCBs , free cyanide , EDTA , dioxins and bisphenols .
On the thorny question of sediments and biota , in the absence of scientific consensus , the compromise provides that Member States must monitor them in order to assess the long-term trends of the substances that accumulate there .
Finally , surprised that the proposal contained no new measures to monitor emissions , MEPs secured the compromise that stipulates , in Article 7 , that the Commission shall , on the basis of reports from Member States , evaluate the effectiveness of existing legislation and progress in the reduction of the extent of the mixing zones , and then make amendments or propose the relevant legislation .
In view of those advances , I would ask Members to support this compromise package .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are a discussing one of the most crucial challenges of environmental policy : the protection of our water resources for our own benefit and that of future generations .
Let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the excellent work they have done , and their collaboration on this directive .
As you will remember , in the Water Framework Directive , the main legislative instrument for EU policy on the protection of water , allowance was made for further legislation being necessary on two issues : EU quality standards for groundwater and EU quality standards for priority substances in surface water .
The Groundwater Directive was approved at the end of 2006 by means of the conciliation procedure .
Today the European Parliament is to decide at second reading on the proposed directive on environmental quality standards for priority substances in surface water .
The directive lays down harmonised quality standards for the 33 listed substances , so that the basic concept of good water quality is expressed in fixed numerical values based on the best available scientific data and knowledge .
The directive will thus contribute towards achieving a high level of protection of the aquatic environment and human health .
This is , moreover , the aim of the Water Framework Directive .
The Commission is determined to keep a close eye on the enforcement of this directive and the Water Framework Directive .
It also aims to monitor and evaluate the available information on the presence and impact of substances not included in the priority list or the list of priority hazardous substances .
It intends to submit proposals for the adoption of further necessary measures , as appropriate .
Throughout the negotiation process , Parliament 's interventions on various important issues have contributed towards securing the ambitious level of targets originally proposed by the Commission .
This applies especially to key points such as : the future revision of the priority substances list , which is now clearly linked to environmental quality standards and will be proposed within two years of the entry into force of this directive ; the list of candidate substances to be examined when the existing list is revised ; and the criteria for the inventory of emissions , discharges and leaks , and for mixing zones .
Let me also briefly mention the issue of pollutant emission control .
As you know , the Water Framework Directive provides for an approach linking emission controls and environmental quality standards .
Emission controls are to a large extent covered by existing Community legislation .
In addition to emission controls under the directives on urban waste-water treatment , pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources , and integrated pollution prevention and control ( directives that were already in force when the Water Framework Directive was approved in 2000 ) , more than 30 Community legislative instruments have in the meantime been enacted or proposed by the Commission .
Let me mention some of these by way of example : the REACH Regulation , the Regulation on Persistent Organic Pollutants , the Mining Waste Directive , and the restrictions on use of substances under the Pesticides Directive , and the Directive on Restriction of the Circulation and Use of Certain Hazardous Substances .
We therefore believe that the Member States have sufficient legislative tools at their disposal to achieve the aims of the Water Framework Directive .
In addition , the Commission will assess the need for further control measures at Community level and , if necessary , submit proposals when revising the list of priority substances .
The Commission will also assess the need to class priority substances as priority hazardous substances , taking into account the new information that will be available , and the latest developments within the scope of the REACH Regulation .
Let me end by once again expressing my satisfaction with the work that has been jointly accomplished , particularly by the rapporteur .
I reaffirm the Commission 's full support for the compromise package of measures that has been agreed on this very important legislative instrument at second reading .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Laperrouze .
She has been an outstanding rapporteur and I have very much enjoyed working with her .
I am delighted that the Commission has said that it will endorse this report .
The proposed directive - and I will not go over all the ground that Mrs Laperrouze has covered , but I have to add some of my own comments - a daughter directive to the Water Framework Directive - ensures the final piece of legislation for good-quality water for different Member States .
Together with the rapporteur , the Council and Commission , we have had a lot of discussions , and I think we have finally agreed on a compromise package on which we are all in agreement .
I urge - as did the rapporteur - everyone to vote in favour of it .
I believe it is a balanced package : the environment will be protected , the water quality of our citizens will be increased , and the burden on the economy will be reasonable - and I think that is also important .
Through the negotiations we had many discussions with NGOs and industry and came up with a proposal which is excellent .
The proposal limits the concentration of chemical substances , hazardous groups including heavy metals , some pesticides and other hazardous chemicals in surface water .
It is based very much on the principle of preventative actions .
The Member States may designate - as the rapporteur said - mixing zones , where concentrations of chemical substances may exceed the relevant environmental quality standards under certain circumstances , but of course they will have to reach and be monitored with great care .
We have zones which may be designated as mixing zones in transboundary water bodies - an excellent piece of legislation .
It says here that Member States shall collect information , including maps .
I think we might have difficulty in getting the maps , but nevertheless we will sort that out .
It provides for the establishment of a river basin management plan , dredging and shipping - even this leads to discharges and emissions .
Losses of priority substances can now take place , providing it reaches the Water Framework Directive .
Ladies and Gentlemen , I leave you with one last thought .
Water is the staff of life - this directive is so important .
Even on Mars , it is the staff of life .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me in my turn thank Mrs Laperrouze and all the shadow rapporteurs , as well as the Slovenian Presidency , for the work they have done .
This is the last daughter directive under the framework directive on water , and it was very important for us to reach a compromise that represents genuine progress in terms of our ambition to combat pollution , and in particular the chemical pollution of water .
It is clear from the news every day how much the presence of PCBs damages our Community 's water resources .
Mme Laperrouze has listed all the points on which we have made progress .
Of course , as ever with compromises , we would have preferred to achieve more , but I believe we have secured a good basis .
Quite simply , we will remain vigilant because much will now depend on the Commission , and we hope that when it takes measures to support the findings of scientific experts , it will prove to be very ambitious in classifying future priority substances and priority hazardous substances , the famous 13 substances that are to be classified in the very near future .
We will also take care to ensure that the current scientific uncertainty as regards sediments and biota will not create a kind of soft focus that will in the long term exempt the European Union from endeavouring to understand and improve the quality of those biota and sediments .
Lastly , there is a need to improve the mixing zones and the knowledge of pollutants and sources of pollution , together with the monitoring of emissions .
We will ensure that Parliament remains vigilant , and I thank the Commissioner for pointing out that alongside the provisions in the compromise on which we will be voting , the Commission wanted to provide information on the implementation of the framework directive on water and , if necessary and if any delays build up in the Member States or any doubts need to be raised , to present complementary measures to ensure that we do indeed achieve environmentally acceptable water in 2015 , in line with our vote in 2000 .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , as the rapporteur is a member of my group and a close colleague , the House will understand if I defend her agreement .
Perhaps we could have done more , perhaps another chemical here or there could have been included in the package , but scientific opinion is divided ; political will is not always strong .
In the words of the previous rapporteur , this can reasonably be described as ' as good as it gets ' .
I think water policy is one of the successes of European environment policy .
I think that we should pay tribute to the work of the Commission over the years and indeed to Mrs Lienemann for her work on the Water Framework Directive some seven years ago .
Even when no transboundary issues are involved , the collective determination to address the pollution of both past and present years has brought about levels of investment to secure improvement in water quality that have far exceeded what would have been achieved if Member States had been left to act in isolation .
The laws we have put in place are clear in this instance .
Pollution is identifiable and measurable .
The requirements to prevent it are enforceable and this legislation takes us a step forward by introducing further prohibitions on a range of chemicals , pesticides , pollutants that present a risk to aquatic and indeed human life .
But we also see reports from the European Environment Agency that there are many instances of Member States still failing to enforce the legislation as effectively and as adequately as should be the case .
So on this note of agreement across the House about the nature of this legislation and the positive direction in which Europe is going when it comes to water quality , let us also look to the Commission to say , ' You have the powers to investigate , to act and to enforce - please use them ' .
Mr President , I should also like to thank Mrs Laperrouze for her friendly , obliging cooperation .
It did prove possible to retain a vestige of the positive outcome of first reading in spite of everything but , all the same , what we have here today is a poor show .
Most of what had been achieved has been lost following lobbying by the agrochemical industry and the less efficient among the public regulatory authorities .
What we are discussing today are the sad remains .
Our overarching aim is to progressively improve water quality in European rivers and lakes .
Copious pesticide use in agriculture and toxic industrial discharges must be curbed , and tough requirements must be enforced regarding the quantity of the priority substances or priority hazardous substances permitted in water .
The weakness of the present report is that there is no real political will to scrutinise any more substances .
It has already become clear that the present system , under which substances on the list are to be examined and new ones added , at best works too slowly .
If the precautionary principle were to hold force , a number of other substances would have to be examined , but we are letting that possibility slip through our fingers .
In addition , it is not clear what it takes for a substance to be declared so hazardous that it has to be banned completely .
We have ended up with a number of substances that are in all likelihood extremely hazardous , yet the Commission balks at finally banning them .
This is unacceptable : if a substance is hazardous , it is hazardous .
We must monitor whether the Commission gets going with the examination of these substances or whether it just continues to put off taking a position on the grounds that it does not have enough data .
If that is the case , it should go and get the data .
There are some improvements .
For example , countries must now chart sources of pollution and also include concentrations in sediment and biota .
In addition , the Commission is not permitted to wait until as late as 2025 , as it had wished , to review the situation .
It must produce such a review in 2018 .
Yes , we shall be voting in favour of this report .
We are thankful for small mercies following a downturn of the kind seen after first reading .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , there are thousands of sources of contamination of surface and ground water , not just agriculture and the agrifood industry , mines and chemical factories , but also residential homes .
Wherever there is no water treatment plant , we are putting ever-increasing amounts of poison into our scarce water resources .
Landfill sites are a source of many poisonous substances , and biological wastewater treatment plants cannot purify the waste coming from them , as the bacteria themselves get poisoned .
Deposits on the bottoms of lakes and artificial reservoirs also store poisonous substances .
How to clean them - this is the problem .
If they flow into the seas or the oceans , they will poison the whole globe ; and this is what is happening over time .
Cleaning reservoirs of these deposits will be very costly and there are no technologies to do this .
I would also like to speak once again of the thousands of tonnes of outdated pesticides that are systematically poisoning our water and have already reached depths of 1 000 metres .
For this reason our group believes that despite the cost , the Directive should pay more attention to protecting water .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) The intention of this directive was to lay down environmental quality standards for a number of hazardous chemicals and thereby protect watercourses from chemicals and other harmful substances .
Unfortunately the lobbyists have been adept at influencing both the European Commission and the Council of Ministers .
Now that this matter has come up for second reading , regrettably the good intentions have been thoroughly watered down .
One example of this is that only 11 of the 29 chemicals over which we wanted Parliament to have monitoring powers are now classified as hazardous substances .
There will be no concrete requirement for Member States to meet reduction targets .
Nevertheless this compromise is better than what the Commission had originally proposed .
Hence we in the GUE / NGL Group support it , but you may be sure that we shall be following the matter closely and seeking to ensure that watercourses do get better protection in future .
When the time for a review comes , we hope that there will be some further tightening up .
I have a question for Commissioner Dimas , who is here this evening : how would you feel if individual Member States wanted to go further and adopt more extensive measures than are stipulated in this Directive ?
If individual Member States wanted to classify more substances than those listed under this compromise , would you let them go ahead and thus adopt more stringent legislation ?
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze , for all her work in the negotiations with the Council .
I think what we have is a very good compromise package for water quality standards .
I am particularly pleased that the concept of mixed zones is retained .
On that subject , I have a question for Commissioner Dimas .
From the point of view of feasibility it is an important concept , provided , of course , that it does not significantly damage the environment .
The framework water directive calls for the drinking water purification effort to be reduced .
Drinking water standards are strictly than water quality standards .
There are various collection points for drinking water in surface water , and it can happen in practice that the collection points are fairly close to a source of pollution , so that a collection point might be in a mixed zone and the purification effort for water purification companies is increased .
Can Commissioner Dimas assure me that he will do everything possible to prevent mixed zones creating problems for drinking water collection points ?
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur and the Commission for the very constructive work that has been done on this proposal .
I wish to remind the House that this is a compromise package .
It is a very sound compromise that has been negotiated here , and it is certainly another piece in the jigsaw of excellent water quality in Europe .
I do wish to stress that Europe is the continent , or the political entity , that sets great store by its environment and imposes very high standards .
It may be that our goal could be achieved more quickly but , if we compare Europe with other parts of the world , we can claim to have attained a very high standard , and that standard must be maintained and further improved .
In this context , I would also like to remind the Commission that we need to be effective in selling these successes that we have incontestably achieved in the field of European environmental policy , and especially water policy .
The Irish referendum in particular , however , shows that we have not managed to convey this success story .
Europe is highly successful in the environmental field , but very few of its population are aware of its leading role .
It may well be that lobbyists have watered down the compromise to some extent , but there are also other lobbies which have helped to ensure that the compromise does indeed impose the need for strenuous efforts on the part of industrial firms , farmers and other polluters .
In this context , let me remind you that water is certainly one of the elements on which we shall have to focus more political attention in future .
I must ask the Commissioner to keep his eye on the future development of water policy , because climate change in particular is set to confront us with new problems , and the importance of water to the economy and to human life is set to increase sharply .
On the whole , it is a balanced compromise , and I ask all my fellow Members to endorse it .
It was not possible to achieve any more .
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze , for her work , which has led to a satisfactory agreement at second reading .
Clean surface water is , of course , very important .
There are regular reports of excessive mercury and other harmful substances in fish .
That is unhealthy for people and the environment and we definitely have to do something about it .
The result we have here is a good balance between protection of the environment on the one hand and , on the other hand , cost effectiveness for businesses , water companies and governments .
The European Parliament has successfully pressed for a number of improvements .
Thus mixed zones close to discharge points where a higher level of pollution is allowed have to be clearly demarcated and Member States have to indicate how mixed zones can be reduced in the future .
Parliament also has a policy for the future : substances that might be harmful have to be put on a separate list for further investigation .
I am strongly in favour of that .
I also support the question that Mr Blokland put to Commissioner Dimas on discharge points and drinking water collection points in mixed zones .
I should also like to draw attention to a number of source measures , particularly near hospitals , and to leftover medicines .
That is another important point to look at in the future .
( DE ) Mr President , as we know , water is the most precious of all resources , and we must not let our water drain away by choosing not to adopt an ambitious water policy .
It is very regrettable that the momentum imparted by the European Parliament at first reading to the protection of our water resources has been dissipated by the doubling of the list of hazardous substances subject to control and the obligation imposed on EU Member States to reduce their pollutant emissions .
The result is therefore a missed opportunity to do more to protect our water .
In the context of water protection , it is important to ensure consistency across the various fields of legislation .
We need a ban on carcinogenic , mutagenic and reproductively toxic ( CMR ) pesticides and endocrine disrupters .
That is why I find it regrettable that the Commission constantly plays the role of a shunting yard at the expense of the environment and public health .
In 2006 , the Commission said that , in its draft instrument on environmental quality , it did not intend to make any proposals on the reduction of the volume and toxicity of priority hazardous substances .
They should be made in REACH and in the framework of pesticides legislation .
But what actually happened ?
It was a parliamentary report , our proposal from this House , that established consistency with the Water Framework Directive and with pollutants legislation .
Parliament did that , not the Commission , which had promised to do it .
Our demand , then , is that no pesticides that feature on the list of priority hazardous substances should be authorised .
The simplest solution is to ensure that these hazardous substances cannot get into our water in the first place .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Laperrouze , who has worked extraordinarily hard with other colleagues in my Group , and with Parliament as a whole , to reach agreement and form a consensus .
I am very pleased with this Directive , which deals with several important issues .
First , as Mrs Lienemann said , sustainability is a process , and water treatment , improvements in the quality of water and water policy form part of a process that we began many years ago .
Above all , it is a process that has to be realistic , because it has to be put into practice .
It is much easier to legislate than implement . It is much cheaper to legislate than implement .
It does not cost anything to ban something . However , implementation means that companies , farmers and local councils have to put policies into practice , which is not always easy .
I think that this is an important step forward , but we have to be realistic , because , as we saw yesterday , for example , in the referendum , it is sometimes not easy to be European . It costs money and effort and that is something we are doing right now , especially considering that this is a policy that applies Europe-wide .
The entire water policy has to be implemented throughout Europe , and we therefore have to deal with enormously complex situations , with many factors , including extremely important geophysical factors .
I would like to mention two other aspects of this directive that I think represent progress .
First , it requires much more transparency from governments .
Water has always been rather opaque .
In the European Water Forum , one of our objectives is transparency in providing information to the public , and we are now seriously addressing our commitment to transparency of information to the public .
The same is true of the indicators , including molluscs , and I want to emphasise the importance of water analysis for health .
( LT ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and express my full support for the idea that we need more stringent regulations on the quality of surface water and the effectiveness of the assessment of Community legislation .
The small EU countries situated at the outer borders are facing a very sensitive issue - water contamination from neighbouring EU countries .
It is neither the wish nor the intention of the EU to fence itself off with an ' iron curtain ' as far as ecology and other issues are concerned .
Therefore , it is equally important to reduce contamination both within the EU countries and in the neighbourhood .
Amendment 26 points out the Commission 's obligation to present a detailed report on the situation regarding pollution originating from third countries , one year after the date of entry into force of the Directive .
The Commission should do more to encourage further implementation of environmental obligations during the course of negotiations with neighbouring countries .
This issue is of the greatest importance to the countries that share river basins with neighbouring EU countries .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ' Water is life ' or ' Water - valuable as diamonds ' : those were the headlines and the motivation when we launched the Water Framework Directive in the year 2000 .
The directive on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy is now the last major daughter instrument to the Water Framework Directive .
Its purpose is to set environmental quality standards for priority substances and priority hazardous substances so as to ensure that our water , the source of life , receives a high level of protection from risks , by which I mean the highest possible level of protection - the protection that is necessary and possible on the basis of the latest scientific knowledge .
In my view , however , this also means that the protection of water is a permanent task .
We shall have to keep a constant political eye on scientific studies and findings with a view to assimilating new discoveries and guaranteeing the protection of water at all times and in all circumstances in accordance with the latest science and technology .
It must never happen again that - as in the present case - the Commission does not fulfil its mandate and allows time to elapse without acting .
The list of priority hazardous substances must be constantly reviewed and checked without delay .
The Commission 's failure to act prompted us in Parliament to take action and propose a second list - a list containing substances that require checking on the basis of the latest findings .
This list must not pre-classify or prejudge substances .
It should also provide an opportunity to clear substances of suspicion .
Substances must not , of course , be included in such a list on a mere whim .
The PPE-DE Group has called for a faster and more prioritised treatment of the substances on which data are already available that indicate high risk levels .
Six months will suffice , in our view .
I do very much hope , Commissioner , that full use will not be made of the 24-month period which is currently prescribed , for it must always be possible to act on safety findings without delay .
We shall support en bloc the compromise worked out by Mrs Laperrouze .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Most of Europe 's rivers are shared by several countries , which benefit from the river 's resources and share in the responsibility this entails .
The water quality each Member State receives depends on the country upstream .
The Danube , for example , flows through seven countries , the Drava six , and the Rhine and the Tisza five .
This poses a major challenge and calls for cooperation on a large scale .
Hopefully the adoption of this legislation will help to bring an end to the foam that has been present on the River Raba for the past seven years .
At the moment , bathing in Hungary 's only genuine river wetland is only to be recommended if you are wearing one of the swimsuits shown in the pictures distributed to Members of this House , and which are also to be seen on flyers and posters .
The River Raba of course merely act as a kind of litmus paper , showing that something is amiss with the current legislation , because if everyone is adhering to all the legal limits and there is still thick foam on the river , then something must be wrong with the legislation in this regard .
This is why we must change it , and I therefore ask you all to cast your vote tomorrow in support of the compromise package .
( HU ) My fellow Members have already stated that fresh water is perhaps the most valuable resource of the 21st century , and one cannot disagree with this .
It is also true that in Europe the situation is basically good , in terms of both fresh water quantity and quality .
I would like to draw your attention to an issue that has not been raised so far , namely the fact that as a result of climate change the precipitation curve , and with it the distribution curve of fresh water recoverable from it , is becoming increasingly extreme .
This means that we are having long , hot summers and torrential rainfall events throughout Europe .
Over and above all the environmental considerations we have discussed , therefore , we also need a system for managing water resources that , unlike the present system , basically captures this water and enables it to be stored for use in dry years .
It is also vitally important that this should be made European Union policy , because this would enable us to maintain the quantity of fresh water in Europe ; its quality , meanwhile , will be assured by the legislation .
Thank you .
Mr President , water pollution takes place in rivers , in lakes and in the ground , but it can also take place during transportation .
This risk has been aggravated recently with the drought we are having in southern Europe , where a large number of oil tankers are now being converted for the transportation of drinking water .
This is an area where , perhaps , expertise is lacking .
I would like to ask the Commissioner to make sure that such transportation will be totally safe and devoid of any pollution by aromatic hydrocarbons , which , as we all know , can cause serious damage to both humans and animals .
Mr President , in addition to the points I mentioned in my introductory statement , the proposed directive also contributes to the process of simplifying EU legislation on water .
You will remember that the Water Framework Directive already includes provisions on the repeal of seven previous legislative acts dating from the 1970s and 1980s .
The present directive will repeal five more directives and will at the same time simplify the submission of water reports under the WISE framework , the newly established Water Information System for Europe .
In this way , we shall gain a better knowledge base for decision-making at political and technical level .
You will also remember that Parliament attached particular importance to the target of eliminating or phasing out certain substances included in the Water Framework Directive .
The planned inventory , which will include maps , will be a necessary source of information for everyone .
It will serve as an assessment tool for investigations by the Commission into whether the environmental target of progressive reduction or gradual elimination is being met .
The Water Framework Directive and its ' daughter directive ' will provide a firm , predictable and long-term basis for decision-making at every level , from river basin and local level to European level .
This is particularly important for drafting the river basin management plans and the programmes of measures to be submitted by December 2009 .
Last year the Commission submitted its first report on the implementation of the Water Framework Directive .
The report included an assessment of achievements and shortcomings .
Now it is up to the Member States to meet their obligations in time .
I should like to take this opportunity to remind you that EU financial aid is available under the regional development and cohesion policy and the rural development policy .
It is the Member States ' right and also their responsibility to choose their priorities and projects .
Article 7 of the Water Framework Directive has already laid down the obligations for drinking water , and this compromise does not alter the relevant procedures and provisions .
I should like to point out that Member States must report their compliance with Article 15 of the Water Framework Directive and the measures they are taking to reduce the spread of mixing zones , as well as the international coordination on defining mixing zones .
In addition , if a Member State wishes to impose stricter environmental standards , the Commission will have no objection .
To conclude , the Commission is in the happy position of expressing full support for the compromise package in order to achieve an agreement on this directive at second reading .
At this point I should like once again to thank the rapporteur for the excellent work she has done .
On the problem raised by Mr Matsakis about transporting water to Cyprus , I know the problem exists and I shall answer this question later .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your contribution to this debate .
You may ask what our final objectives are with this directive .
They are , of course , to improve the quality of bodies of surface water .
We do not want to find any more lead , cadmium , nickel , mercury , solvents or other highly toxic and carcinogenic substances such as PCBs in our waters .
Mrs Lienemann referred to a news report a fortnight ago that showed that PCBs were bio-accumulated in fish and that man then ate those fish .
We can no longer accept such a situation , and I believe that the citizens of Europe may also expect Europe to send out a strong signal that it is protecting our environment , protecting our health .
I believe that we will be able to get that European message across if we respect this framework directive on water , together with its daughter directives .
Some Members have said that not enough substances were listed , that Parliament had backtracked in relation to the first reading .
At first reading we had proposed 33 + 28 substances in total , i.e. 61 analysed substances .
At second reading , we have a total of 33 + 13 , i.e. 46 , but we must point out that these are hazardous substances of particular concern that should no longer occur in river waters today .
The other point of interest in this directive is that it allows us to check compliance with European legislation - I am thinking here of the implementation of the REACH regulation and of the IPPC .
We now have an instrument to verify that .
The Commissioner has heard my colleagues say that if the Council and Parliament approve this text , the ball is in its court .
It has an enormous amount of work to do , it has a great many analyses to conduct and inventories to draw up .
I wish it all the best .
In any case , we will continue to monitor this legislation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 17 June 2008 .
Reinforcing the Union 's disaster response capacity ( debate )
The next item is a statement from the Commission on reinforcing the Union 's disaster response capacity .
Mr President , last year , thanks to the Community Civil Protection Mechanism , the EU mobilised en masse to help the Member States stricken by the catastrophic forest fires .
We have identified certain points that require immediate attention in a bid to avoid similar disasters in future .
Firstly , we need to overcome the lack of available technical resources for disaster relief .
This was noted during the operations in 2007 .
Secondly , there must be an integrated approach to dealing with forest fires , and prevention , readiness and response .
Thirdly , the operational capability of the Commission 's Monitoring and Information Centre should be strengthened .
The Commission has already adopted some practical operational measures , the main ones being :
the establishment and training of a network of forest-fire experts ;
interoperability training for national firefighting teams ;
a large-scale exercise organised in Sardinia in April , with the participation of forces from five Member States ;
the formation of three civil protection units for aerial forest firefighting .
Funds have already been secured for the transport of aid equipment .
In addition , under the 2008 pilot programme for forest fires , we are cooperating with Member States to create tactical reserves that will be on standby for emergencies in Europe .
In addition , between 2007 and 2013 , approximately EUR 5.8 billion will be available under the cohesion policy programmes , for risk prevention and response to various types of disaster , including forest fires .
A further EUR 1.6 billion will be available from the rural development funds to restore forest resources and initiate preventive actions .
Lastly , for the most devastating natural disasters , the option of support from the European Solidarity Fund is retained .
In the Communication it presented in March , the Commission underlined the need for an integrated approach to disaster management , which must include prevention , readiness , response and restoration .
It examined all types of natural and man-made disasters , within and outside the EU , and also all the Community resources available for disaster response .
In addition to civil protection , the Communication examined three other areas of Community action :
strengthening European humanitarian aid ;
improving the coordination of intervention capability for disaster response ;
upgrading interinstitutional cooperation , i.e. cooperation between European agencies or institutions .
We are also developing an action plan .
This will be ready in the summer and will map out a range of specific initiatives over and above those mentioned in the Communication , such as :
analysis of the shortcomings in material and technical support capability , for both humanitarian and civil protection actions .
This will enable us to determine which particular tools are available , which are the most necessary , and which are most cost-effective ;
support for initiatives to limit disaster risks in third countries ;
closer cooperation with the UN , the International Bank and various NGOs , with a view to strengthening disaster response capability at global level ;
better use of science , technology and innovation ;
an upgrade in the role of our agencies in disaster response throughout the world ;
a more effective evaluation of disaster damage .
As regards disaster prevention , there is at present no integrated European approach .
To address this issue , the Commission is preparing a communication to assess the added value of instituting a Community disaster prevention mechanism .
The Commission will present possible options aiming at :
improving our knowledge of disasters and their impact ;
improving the interconnection of related policies , e.g. the interconnection between land-use planning and disaster prevention ;
improving the use of Community resources .
In addition to this initiative , which will focus on the EU , the Commission is drawing up a strategy for disaster risk reduction in developing countries .
Lastly , the Commission has taken a series of measures to strengthen the EU 's intervention capability to respond to disasters that might occur in Europe .
In particular , the Commission 's Monitoring and Information Centre is being strengthened .
Since we do not currently have detailed analyses of the gaps and shortcomings in response capability in the event of major disasters , we are in the process of analysing disaster scenarios and testing innovative arrangements .
This will release civil protection resources and capabilities for operations on a European scale .
By mid-2009 , the Commission also intends to submit proposals for a European disaster response training network .
To conclude , I would like to thank Parliament for the constant , steady support it is giving in strengthening the Community 's disaster response capability .
This support is reaffirmed in the draft resolution that is to be put to the vote in plenary .
Mr President , in recent years many EU Member States have been stricken by natural disasters such as fires , floods and earthquakes .
Human lives have been lost , properties , farms and houses have been destroyed , and the environment has suffered devastating damage that will take many years to repair .
One of the key principles on which the EU was founded is that of solidarity .
This means that in the event of a natural disaster , it is extremely important that the EU should be able to provide not only coordinated technical assistance , but also , through the European Solidarity Fund , financial resources to stricken areas .
I have listened with interest to the Commissioner 's analysis of all the elements of prevention and coordinated intervention , and we expect to see corresponding action on the part of the European Commission .
Allow me to focus attention on an issue concerning the European Solidarity Fund .
I consider it unjustifiable for the Council decision not to adopt the regulation on the European Solidarity Fund , and this decision should therefore be revised .
The restructuring of the European Fund will contribute significantly .
Firstly , the EU will be in a better position to manage natural disasters effectively and flexibly .
Secondly , citizens left homeless and insecure after a disaster will immediately be aware of European solidarity .
They will understand the importance of being citizens not only of a country , but also of the EU .
Such are the policies and actions that European citizens expect of us , and I hope the regulation on the European Solidarity Fund will be adopted without delay .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a sort of annual ritual , either before or after the summer : forest fires are on the political agenda .
This is an increasingly serious issue , however , because natural disasters are linked to climate change .
And because extreme weather events are gradually getting worse , scientists warn that natural disasters are becoming increasingly frequent and intense , which means periods of repeated and more extreme drought , heavier and more destructive flooding , more frequent bouts of excessive heat and more violent and larger forest fires which are more difficult to combat .
In 2006 the European Parliament approved three reports on this issue , in one of which the Environment Committee draftsman suggested that the Commission present a directive on fires .
My question to the Commission is therefore : in view of the circumstances and bearing in mind that an integrated approach to this issue is needed - in other words , anti-climate change policy cannot be dissociated from civil protection policy - does the Commission not think that in these circumstances a directive on fires is justified ?
Meanwhile , this debate is taking place at a particularly critical time : the energy crisis , the food crisis and so on .
All this is also linked .
Biomass , for example , should be exploited to clean up the forests , thereby avoiding fires , and used to produce energy at the same time .
Another advantage of this is that it means that cereals are not being used to produce biofuels .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , recitals A and D and paragraph 4 of this resolution clearly stress the value of prevention .
This is extremely wise , as prevention is always better - much better - than cure .
In this respect I wish to speak about a particular type of preventable mass disaster : that of building collapse .
I was prompted to do so by an event that occurred in Cyprus very recently .
Last Wednesday the steel roof of the 1 100-seat capacity municipal theatre of Nicosia collapsed , suddenly and without warning .
The force of the falling steel beams and other debris crushed the seats below .
Luckily the theatre was empty at the time ; otherwise hundreds of civilians would have been killed or injured .
In the previous few days this theatre was packed with children attending various school events .
Two weeks ago the visiting Bolshoi Ballet performed there to a packed audience , and a few months ago President Barroso - along with many EU officials , MEPs , the President of Cyprus , ministers , MPs and many others - attended the ceremony of Cyprus 's entry into the euro area in the same theatre .
It is a miracle that a mass disaster of huge proportions did not occur .
It is noted that major reconstruction works costing approximately EUR 6 million were carried out in the building only three years ago but it seems that none of the responsible , esteemed and highly paid architects , engineers , government officials etc. managed to diagnose that the 50-year-old steel roof was totally unsafe .
It is suspected that other public buildings in Cyprus may be structurally dangerous but , due to apparent negligence or ignorance , or corruption concerning relevant authorities or departments or private firms , corrective measures are not being implemented .
A similar situation , in fact , may apply to other EU Member States .
Incidentally , in Cyprus , public buildings are , mostly , totally not subject to anti-seismic legislation , although private buildings are .
I call upon the Commission to make sure that , with this resolution , a check is carried out on the safety of buildings in the EU .
Mr President , Commissioner , we can all see that natural disasters are on the increase because they are caused by changes in both climate and land use .
The resolution I have drawn up - and I hope we shall have a near-unanimous vote on Thursday in plenary , as we did in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - calls on the Commission to stop procrastinating , talking idly and postponing .
I ask you , Commissioner : do you intend to take steps in the Commission to ensure that the Barnier proposal on the creation of a European civil protection force is approved , as the European Parliament repeatedly requests in its resolutions ?
Do you intend to take steps to make the Solidarity Fund more flexible and less bureaucratic ?
Do you intend to take steps to fill in the serious gaps in the legislation and the policies applied to allow Europe a greater and more effective presence in backing up the action taken by Member States where natural disasters are destroying properties and taking lives ?
In the Committee on the Environment , we approved a series of questions to the Commission , and you told us today that in a year 's time , in mid-2009 , you would present proposals .
The question is , when will the Commission decide to examine these issues seriously and give an answer to the European Parliament 's proposal ?
Which proposals do you agree with , and when will you carry them out ?
Which do you disagree with , and why ?
If the Council is holding you back and refusing to give you the funding you need , or if certain people in the Commission are preventing you , Mr Dimas , you should tell us so that we can help you .
We do not want just fine words ; we want action , so that this summer we will not be mourning the victims of major ecological disasters .
( BG ) Earlier this evening I presented to this Parliament the face of corruption at the top in Bulgaria , Ahmed Dogan , and the party he heads , the Movement for Rights and Liberties .
Now I would like to provide some specific information concerning forest fires .
It is a public secret in Bulgaria that what Dogan himself refers to as ' the circle of companies ' around his party has been cutting down , for eight years now , the forests of Bulgaria .
The easiest way for them to cover up this crime is to set up forest fires , and every summer thousands of hectares of Bulgarian forests are set on fire and burnt .
And if that used to be a purely Bulgarian problem , today it emerges as a problem at the European level as well because Bulgaria is entitled to quite substantial subsidies to respond to disasters occurring in the forests .
But where would these subsidies go through ?
These subsidies would be remitted to the Ministry of Emergencies , which is headed by Dogan 's deputy , Mrs. Emel Etem .
It is the ministry where tens of millions of euros from the European Solidarity Fund intended for the floods in Bulgaria have disappeared .
And I call upon you , Mr. Commissioner , and you all , members , to come visit Bulgaria in order to see the kind of solidarity that Emel Etem has for her own constituency , that of the MRL to its own constituency , to the Muslim Bulgarians , who have been living in temporary shelter , in caravans not fit for living in , while the money from the European Solidarity Fund has sunk away somewhere in the depths of the ministry run by the MRL .
This is the reason why I bring up this issue .
This is a grave crime against Bulgarian nature and against the European Union , a virtual theft of its funds .
Whatever disaster may befall Bulgaria in the future , it can never compare to the disaster called Movement for Rights and Liberties .

( ES ) Mr President , I welcome the Committee on the Environment 's initiative , which we can add to a list of many others by the Committee on Regional Development in the present legislative period , even though these initiatives are not always well understood .
The truth is that some developments , including some legal decisions , show our concerns were fully justified .
Nevertheless , it is sad to see the Council being so insensitive and unresponsive .
It is also paradoxical that questions affecting the environment , regional policy and agriculture are the responsibility of the Ministers of Finance .
National governments should reflect on the stubborn refusal to reform the obsolete Solidarity Fund , despite the efforts of Parliament and the Commission and the clear public demand for such reform .
I hope that this summer we do not suffer the scourge of fires , droughts and floods of other years .
I hope the Council is not forced , once again , to issue empty communiqués of solidarity rather than offering coordinated civil protection mechanisms and funds to help people , leaving us to complain about citizens being indifferent and disinterested in what our institutions are doing .
Some members of the Committee on Regional Development have presented amendments to draw the Council 's attention to the need for reforms and initiatives .
We will see whether the Council , which is conspicuous by its absence today , is able to make some response .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by welcoming Parliament 's initiative to step up the European Union 's disaster response capacity , given that , unfortunately , disasters are increasingly common and this will certainly become a fundamental challenge to our political initiative and capacity to respond rapidly .
We must adopt a wide-ranging approach that considers how to deal with , prevent and recover from disasters , so it is important we ask the Commission to urgently present proposals to prevent disasters in the European Union .
Similarly , we must take into account the need to recognise the specific nature of natural disasters caused by droughts and fires in the Mediterranean region and adapt our prevention , investigation , risk management , civil protection and solidarity mechanisms accordingly .
We know that the resources available to Member States to fight forest fires , especially from the air , are sometimes limited , so we ask the Commission to bring forward measures to finance community teams , with the aim of increasing capacity and complementing national resources .
This resolution must also make a firm request to Council to adopt a decision on the proposed Regulation of the Solidarity Fund , to facilitate a quicker and more effective response to disasters that Member States are unable to deal with alone . Neither can we forget the victims of these disasters , who need immediate aid and support .
We cannot remain indifferent to this situation , which , year after year , summer after summer , afflicts many parts of the European Union . We must be able to respond decisively to these unfortunate events and help the people who are caught up in them .
The future is uncertain , and we in the European Union must get involved .
( FR ) Mr President , it is surely regrettable that once again , on the eve of the holidays , we are meeting to discuss this same problem , which creates the impression that we are seeing no progress from one year to another .
At a time when most of our fellow citizens have doubts about the effectiveness of Europe , it is urgently necessary to show them that when natural disasters , be they fires , floods or even epidemics , put people 's life and property at risk , Europe can respond and that , basically , when they are in trouble , they need Europe and that Europe is there for them .
Where are we today ?
Once again , we talk about the need for solidarity and , of course , of the need for a binding framework .
We absolutely must convince Member States of the need for a genuine , operational civil protection force equipped with financial reserves , assistance mechanisms and additional European resources .
Of course we must strengthen humanitarian aid by filling the existing gaps as regards the provision of that aid and strengthening global capacity .
We have to create a training network .
As the Commissioner said , it is essential to train experts in emergency aid in the event of disasters , drawing on the experience acquired by Member States in the field of civil protection training .
Above all , however , we need to take preventive action and in order to do that we need genuine policies relating to soil , land and forest .
We need to take preventive action and only then can we prepare for disasters by taking remedial action and setting up early warning systems , for that is absolutely essential .
What is the situation with the Barnier report proposal ?
I would like to see practical results in the wake of that proposal .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , last September , many politicians expressed grief over the fire victims , but not many spoke of the responsibility they should have felt because the fires had been allowed to happen and we had suffered such disastrous results .
Now , politicians should feel responsible .
For this reason , before the summer and the outbreak of fires , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament requested in its oral question that we hold a debate here with the Commission on what was being done to prevent fires .
Commissioner , you said that EUR 5.8 billion would be made available for the period 2009-2013 to prevent fires .
Today , in 2008 , how much money have you allocated for prevention ?
How many governments , and which ones , have made use of this funding ?
Unfortunately , last year when the worst fires occurred , the Greek Government acknowledged in its report to the Commission that there was a lack of coordination between the agencies concerned , and a lack of prevention plans .
Have you , in the meantime , looked at what has been done in Greece to alleviate these problems , or are you simply allocating funds to governments that are likely to waste them ?
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a signatory of some amendments on behalf of the PPE-DE Group and as a member and Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Regional Development , I would like to take the opportunity to present my views on the Solidarity Fund and its revision , as rapporteur of the European Parliament .
Since the report on the Commission 's draft instrument on the new Solidarity Fund was adopted in Parliament by an overwhelming majority in May 2006 , this draft has been with the Council , where a majority of the Member States reject the new Fund in its amended form .
None of the intervening Council presidencies has included the new Solidarity Fund in its work programme .
On the contrary , the revised version is being blocked in the Council by the Finance Ministers .
Accordingly , the new Fund , designed to cover the period from 2007 to 2013 , is not in force .
Unfortunately , until further notice we only have the old Fund , which has been in existence in its present form since September 2002 and which was cobbled together hurriedly at the time .
In tough negotiations and hard bargaining here in Parliament in 2006 , we managed to work out compromises designed to make the Solidarity Fund a faster , more effective and , above all , more clearly defined emergency aid instrument .
Now the Council wants to bury this revised version once and for all .
I fail to comprehend how we , as a community based on solidarity , can turn our backs in this way , because of the sensitivities of some Member States , on an emergency instrument whose name celebrates the concept of solidarity .
We improved that instrument .
We extended it .
I cannot grasp why those who have already benefited from the Fund are now withholding their approval .
For this reason I make an urgent appeal to the Council to reconsider its decision and finally adopt the revised version .
We are a community based on solidarity , Mr President , and no one knows when or where the next disaster will occur .
It will then be your responsibility ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( EL ) Mr President , it goes without saying that any substantial natural disaster management action by the EU has to be effective in prevention , response and regeneration .
Yet what we find here is that , owing no doubt to pre-conceived ideas or to some fixation , there is a reaction against the EU getting involved in prevention .
There is a very obvious reaction within the Commission itself , just as there is on some of the benches here , because some people think that the EU has no part to play in the matter .
I strongly object to this attitude .
Without prevention we can achieve nothing .
The sight of President Barroso flying in at the end in a helicopter , holding a cheque from the Solidarity Fund , is not what the EU 's practice of solidarity is all about .
Practice of solidarity means a comprehensive response framework .
Mr Barnier has outlined a similar one , but it is still festering somewhere in the labyrinthine depths of bureaucracy .
We have made our diagnosis clear and are now writing out the prescription .
( HU ) Under the previous agenda item , mention was made of the point that the majority of Europe 's natural disasters are water-related : drought , floods , forest fires .
One of the roots of the problem lies in traditional flood defence methods ; to be more specific , it lies in the fact that if flooding occurs our main priority is to remove water as quickly as possible , but then a few months later when we have droughts or forest fires we are surprised to discover how useful it would have been to have had proper storage to capture the rainwater that fell when the floods or extreme precipitation events occurred .
It would therefore be very important , and to some extent it could address - in other words help to prevent - the problems mentioned here , if we managed to realign the focus of water management as a whole to the principle that every drop of fresh water is a valuable resource that must be saved for more difficult , drier times .
It would be especially important , particularly in the new Member States , to promote this to the level of Community policy , so that , as a Community policy , we could develop it using Community funds and thereby mitigate the damage that results from floods , drought and forest fires .
( CS ) Although I speak as a Member representing a country that is not going to experience serious problems with fires until we feel the full impact of global warming , I understand the importance of solidarity among European countries .
Having listened to similar debates several times before , I firmly believe , as a former manager , that it is high time we had a common strategy focusing on prevention , on how to provide help when a country needs it .
It is not a question of money .
It is a question of capacity and targeted management , targeted aid that does not depend solely on financial means .
I am also calling on the Council , all the presidencies and of course the Commission to make every effort to ensure that we in this House do not stand here empty-handed and can vote on whether we help today or in a week 's time , whether the disaster is big or small .
( PL ) Mr President , I am one of the five called under the catch-the-eye system .
I wanted to say that there are two things we can do as regards natural disasters .
The first is to prevent them to whatever degree we can , for example , flooding , and then when they occur we have to look after the people affected by these disasters .
One of the activities is psychological counselling .
We can see someone who has lost everything they had through flooding , their house , whatever they had ; they continue living , but are destitute , and they experience an enormous sense of loss .
I know from experience that the work of psychologists is very important at these times , so I believe that such disaster relief groups should include and provide funds for psychologists to go into action immediately in order to help these people .
Mr President , I thank all the speakers for their very positive contributions .
The Commission is committed to helping substantially towards strengthening the Community 's disaster response capacity .
In the Communication it issued in March , and through measures that are now in preparation , the Commission is adopting an integrated approach .
Firstly , we are examining all aspects of disasters : prevention , preparation , readiness , immediate response and long-term restoration .
Secondly , we are examining all types of disaster , both natural and man-made , within the EU and outside it .
Thirdly , we intend to integrate all the Community resources by improving coordination between EU agencies .
As for the points raised , first of all , Parliament and the European Commission agree on reforming the Solidarity Fund .
Unfortunately , the Council rejects this reform .
The Commission , however , does not intend to withdraw its proposal , and has high hopes that the Council will be won over .
As for the directive on forest fires , my departments are working on a communication on disaster prevention , and one option to be assessed is to institute legislation specifically on forest fires .
The Commission was the main driving force in adopting the Eurocodes on safe buildings .
These are the European standards for the earthquake stability of buildings ; they are now being incorporated into national legislation and are being enforced accordingly .
I am a very keen supporter of Mr Barnier 's proposals .
May I remind you , however , that the Council 's unanimous approval is required .
We all know that at present there is no unanimity among the Member States .
For this reason , the preparation of our proposals is taking longer than we would wish .
Let me simply remind you that under the Lisbon Treaty , a qualified majority in Council would be sufficient .
We have already financed Red Cross programmes for the provision of psychological relief , and further programmes are in preparation at technical level .
Lastly , the Commission notes the strong interest and increased role of the European Parliament in the field of disaster management .
I look forward to excellent collaboration with Parliament and the Council in defining the limits of subsidiarity in order to promote and further develop the European dimension in disaster management .
I have received one draft resolution submitted under Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 June 2008 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
The forest fires in Greece , Italy and Spain during the summer of 2007 and the floods in Romania and Great Britain have led to an increase in the calls formulated for improving the efficiency of the EU response capacity in case of disasters .
The frequency of disasters related to climate change has been increasing and requires multilateral and coordinated reactions to mobilize all available resources , taking into account aspects such as rapidity , efficiency and financial yield .
The actions proposed by the Commission , which will contribute to increasing the EU response to disasters include the strengthening of the Monitoring and Information Centre ( MIC ) , improving the European Civil Protection response capacity and a better coordination between the UN and the Red Cross as regards the provision of humanitarian assistance .
It is also intended to set up a European Disaster Response Training Network , early warning systems and the use of the European emergency number " 112 ” , which is not very well known in all Member States .
In Romania , only 30 % of the citizens know that this number can be called in case of emergency from any EU country and national authorities need to continue their efforts to promote this number in order to respond rapidly to problems related to climate change and other problems .
1 July 2008 , 40 years of Customs Union
The next item is a statement from the Commission on celebrations to mark 40 years of Customs Union on 1 July 2008 .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , whenever we speak about international trade or European integration , we have to think of customs , which is responsible , at the EU external borders , for the correct administration of all the measures designed to tackle the dual challenge which customs is facing today : to facilitate trade while also protecting European citizens and the environment .
During the last 40 years , European customs has done its best to work efficiently together like one single administration .
It has often been the avant-garde in European integration .
It is truly remarkable that a policy which does not very often hit the front pages has nevertheless managed to play a pioneering role in opening new paths both for the economic development and the integration of the Community .
Today the role of customs remains important , difficult and , regrettably , not as highly valued by the public as it should be .
However , the correct work of customs forms the basis for the success of our single market and the free movement of goods , persons , capital and services .
Customs action touches the very core of Community work and impacts on the daily life of our citizens , often without people realising it .
In order to raise our citizens ' awareness about the crucial role of customs , I have launched an EU-wide communication campaign on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the Customs Union .
Member States ' customs authorities have backed this idea .
Last week I visited three main points of entry for goods at the EU 's external borders - the Port of Rotterdam , Frankfurt Airport and the Röszke crossing point at the Hungarian-Serbian border - with a view to highlighting the everyday work and the high motivation of our customs officials .
This is the subject of a news package now available to the media in order to inform the public in the coming months .
Coming back to the core issues , customs today have to meet five strategic objectives :
The first is to protect the financial interests of the Community and its members .
In 2007 the total amount of custom duties transferred to the EU budget amounted to EUR 16.6 billion , which represents 16 % of the Community budget .
The second is to facilitate legitimate trade and to support the competitiveness of European companies : the modernisation of the Community Customs Code and the introduction of eCustoms are two instruments to this end .
The most recent concrete achievement was the introduction of the Authorised Economic Operator concept as of 1 January 2008 .
The third is to protect the safety of our citizens against terrorists , drugs and counterfeited and pirated goods that can even endanger their health and life , by controlling the supply chains used for the international movement of goods .
The fourth is to maintain , develop and enhance cooperation between the customs authorities of the Member States , between customs and other government law enforcement agencies and , furthermore , between customs and the business community .
The fifth is the cooperation between the European Union and third countries - cooperation with other target countries for fake goods and terrorist devices , like the US .
Our approach is based on exchange of information , cooperation on risk analysis and risk management , the mutual recognition of security standards , findings of security controls and the Customs-Trade Partnership ; but also on cooperation with countries of origin of counterfeited and pirated goods , like China , where 60 % of the fake goods come from .
In 2005 , we signed a customs cooperation agreement and established a Joint Customs Cooperation Committee which meets annually .
Last year we launched a pilot project on Smart and Secure Tradelanes between European and Chinese ports and recently we have started to develop a programme of action to be signed at the December EU-China Summit .
We need to establish similar cooperation with other countries like India , Turkey , the United Arab Emirates and others .
Since 1993 , once a consignment is cleared by a national customs authority , it is free to circulate amongst all the other Member States .
This means that customs have one single opportunity to control goods and seize any illegal traffic .
The result is that the Customs Union is as strong as its weakest link .
By this I mean that it would be very easy for traders to spot the point where controls are less accurate or less strong and divert the illegal consignments to these points .
It underlines the responsibility of the customs authorities of Member States with external borders .
In view of the ever-increasing international trade and this responsibility to combat counterfeiting , customs activity remains high .
I will give you some figures to illustrate the workload in 2007 : 183 million customs declarations were processed , which means around 5.5 customs declarations every second ; 1 545 million tonnes of seaborne cargo and 3 million tonnes of airborne cargo were handled ; 43 cases of fake goods were found and seized , which amounted to 79 million counterfeited and pirated articles , and the trend is upwards .
We will only be able to meet the dual challenge that customs are facing if we rethink our working methods .
This means , for example , moving from the current transaction-based approach of customs formalities and controls to a system-based approach focusing on the internal control systems and supply chain of the economic operators .
Of course this does not mean abandoning the control of individual shipments but basing these controls on risk analysis .
Such a new approach implies new working and control methods and a common risk management strategy for all EU customs services .
It will also offer a platform for working with the Member States on the most appropriate operational structure to be put in place in future for an efficient functioning of the Customs Union .
New working methods also imply that all national customs authorities are well equipped with skills , competences and resources that can maintain and increase their efficiency and effectiveness .
To reach these objectives , the Commission proposed , in its communication on a strategy for the evolution of the Customs Union , the development of a strategic plan .
This long-term planning should allow national authorities to forecast their needs for resources , training and equipment so as to permit the developments to be made in a synchronised and harmonised way throughout the 27 Member States .
This permanent channel of communication will also help us to ensure a simultaneous implementation of the new measures .
On the eve of the 40th anniversary of the Customs Union , I am asking for your political support for the Commission 's initiative for a strategy on the evolution of the Customs Union .
I am glad that the text of the resolution to be voted on Thursday takes into account most of the Commission 's ideas about the major axes of evolution of the Customs Union on closer cooperation , addressing security and enhancing the efficiency , effectiveness and delivery of customs for the benefit of the internal market .
I would not like to conclude this statement without thanking the European Parliament for all the support it has given to customs throughout the years .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , on behalf of my group I would like first of all to congratulate the Commissioner on his leadership of the customs function within the Commission .
I should also like to say that we have a very important opportunity this evening not only to recognise , as he says , the considerable achievements of the Commission and indeed all the customs authorities across the Member States on this 40th anniversary , but also to look forward .
I just want to reassure him that from our side of the House we will certainly give full support to the strategy that he is talking about .
You will see from the resolution that we have also called upon Member States in particular to declare their support for it and to put the necessary resources behind that very important project .
As he said in his speech , the customs forces are the authorities whose services are very much the unsung heroes of the internal market , but they are certainly not forgotten in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
As he will know , we have taken particular interest in the dossiers , but not only that : just as he has done over the last week , on our missions around the European Union and now further afield , particularly in China recently , we have also regularly been to visit customs authorities to get a sense of their priorities and the problems they are facing on the ground ; so we are much engaged with that .
I just want to make a couple of points today about the things that we need to do .
It seems to me that one of the tasks we need to engage in together is to get businesses to cooperate much more with customs in dealing with counterfeit and illegal products .
Customs need information to be able to stop shipments .
They need intelligence .
I think businesses are not sufficiently aware of the importance of that , of giving that information .
Secondly , given the increasing scale of trade , particularly from countries like China , we really have to ask Member States to look seriously at whether they have the resources to deal with very large inflows of goods that are coming in and to inspect and deal with counterfeits and products that are trying to evade the customs system . But thank you very much indeed , Commissioner , for all that you are doing in this field .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , since we are aware that the general public are increasingly sceptical of the European Union , it is particularly important that we celebrate such symbolic days , and this 40th anniversary of the Customs Union is , of course , a red-letter day .
As you indicated yourself , Commissioner , it is noteworthy because major steps towards integration were taken forty years ago , when the foundations were laid for the single market and for the free movement of persons , goods and services .
I believe it is important that we keep telling people , showing them clearly , how they benefit from the European Union and what we achieved back then to make it possible .
For this reason I will continue to speak in glowing terms about that event , because it was truly a good thing .
The work you mentioned that you do with China and other countries outside the European Union is also important to our economy as well as to consumers in the European Union , for we naturally want safe products and secure services that we can develop .
That is very important .
In the most recent directives we formulated for the Customs Union , we also legislated for modern technology , introducing the electronic customs system .
I believe this points the way forward .
If we manage to highlight such positive aspects of the policies of the European Union and make people clearly aware of the benefits they derive from the European Union , we shall begin to restore public confidence in the Union .
That is what we should be doing together .
May I express my sincere thanks to you , Commissioner , for the work you are doing in this context in the European Commission .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when Europe is facing difficulties , with rising doubts and declining enthusiasm , we are about to celebrate an undeniable success , the 40th anniversary of the Customs Union .
Between 1968 and 2008 , customs have served as an example of resourcefulness and adaptability .
You may remember the closing of border controls between Member States in 1993 .
Customs authorities managed to redeploy their forces and to do so in a modern way .
They have a complex role to play because they have to respond to global challenges .
While ensuring that the European Union and its citizens are secure , while ensuring that the logistical chain is secure , they must also maintain the right balance between controls and facilitating legitimate trade with a view to improving Europe 's competitiveness .
In order to succeed in their task , customs managed to readjust radically thanks to a new customs code that is both simpler and more far-reaching as a result of the new technologies that will provide them with a paperless administrative environment , and also as a result of cooperation .
That cooperation , which underpins the customs union , must apply as much to international bodies such as the WTO and the WCO as to the new administrations and industries .
The results of that cooperation are particularly evident in seizures of counterfeits .
Unfortunately , there are limits to international cooperation and at present we can only deplore the US Congress 's unilateral decision on 100 % scanning of container cargo in EU ports .
Customs need our support in order to engage in realistic discussions .
We must listen carefully to the initiatives that have been announced in the strategy for the future of customs union and be prepared to support any measure that will make them even more efficient , especially in combating counterfeiting and organised crime .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Mrs Gebhardt mentioned , celebrating forty years of the Customs Union makes people aware that the European Union has honoured part of the pledge it made forty years ago .
In the intervening years - and my political group , Commissioner , has supported all the legislative proposals you have presented to the European Parliament in recent months - the Customs Union has protected the financial interests of the European Community and its Member States far more effectively than the Member States alone could have done .
It has facilitated cross-border investments within the Union in a way that the Member States could not have managed to do if left to their own devices .
By modernising the Customs Code and introducing the electronic customs system , to which you referred , we have done a great deal to ensure that such investment activity will be further simplified in future .
I must add , however , that businesses have been left to bear the cost of conversion , and that is an unsatisfactory state of affairs .
I believe the customs system faces formidable challenges in the coming years .
That is why I believe it is important , Commissioner , that your strategy addresses these challenges efficiently and effectively and provides responses .
In my constituency , as you know , there is a problem with customs clearance at the Swiss border .
I hope we can continue in future to resolve the many little questions of detail that confront our businesses from day to day as constructively as we have managed to do in the past .
Over the next few years - and this is the challenge to which your strategy must respond - the customs system will have to focus far more sharply on the security interests of the European Union than it has had to do in the past .
This , of course , includes protection against counterfeit products and piracy , but there is an increasing need to create even closer links between the tasks of the customs service and aspects of the fight against global terrorism .
In the realm of global trade , as Mrs Fortou pointed out , there will be an increasing need to deliberate , within the WTO and at other levels , on ways in which customs administrations can play an effective role in the protection of external borders .
My last point is that blanket scanning does not seem practical from our perspective in the light of the concept of a single transatlantic market .
I wish you continuing success .
Mr President , as chair of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection with responsibility for customs policy , I certainly welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate to mark 40 years of the Customs Union .
The IMCO Committee , as has already been said , attaches great importance to our customs work , because it is the pragmatic and practical face of the European Union 's work .
Without doubt the Customs Union has helped increase the competitiveness of EU business by simplifying and getting rid of unnecessary rules for business and legitimate traders .
175 million customs declarations are handled annually , with an average customs clearance taking only two minutes .
But there is still more to do .
SMEs need more help to minimise the difficulties they face when trading in Europe .
Paperless customs , centralised clearance and a single window will facilitate and support our SMEs , but it must of course be rigorously pursued by Member States if we are to reap the benefits .
This is also an opportunity to step up and reinforce our commitment to fighting the influx and flood of pirated and counterfeit goods .
Fake goods and fake medicines not only undermine EU business , they are a grave and ever-present threat to our consumers ' health and safety , an issue which the Consumer Protection Committee is deeply concerned about .
So , working with third countries and in particular China , we want to improve the interception of dangerous and illegal goods ; but ultimately we need to make our Customs Union work better .
Member States are called upon this evening to take their responsibilities more seriously for implementation and enforcement and to back this up with serious resources .
Commissioner , you can continue to rely on us in the IMCO Committee to work with you to improve the Customs Union as a cornerstone of the internal market and of course as a central element for the functioning and success of the EU economy .
We must ensure that our 27 Member States work together more closely : that they liaise , share information and make Europe work better and more smoothly for legitimate business ; and that we do crack down on the serious and growing problem of counterfeit and pirated goods entering our market .
( PL ) Mr President , the Customs Union is a vital part of the internal market of the European Union , which cannot function properly unless common principles are applied to its external boundaries .
Apart for the obvious function of collection of duties , the Customs Union plays an enormous role in protecting the health and safety of our citizens .
Over the last months we have devoted a considerable amount of time within Parliament to debating issues such as product safety , especially with regard to the safety of toys , and to issues of counterfeiting .
It is important for all of us to obtain goods that fulfil set criteria , especially as regards not being dangerous to our health or life .
I would like to remind you that , despite generally accepted opinions , counterfeit goods do not affect just exclusive and expensive products , but also car parts and everyday products such as foodstuffs and medicines .
Many such products are imported into the European internal market from third countries .
Statistics give an idea of the scale of this issue .
In 2007 customs authorities seized about 128 million counterfeit goods .
This was an increase of 70 % as compared to 2005 .
For medicines , it was an increase of 380 % .
Of course there may be various causes for this increase .
It could be caused by an increase in the quantity of counterfeit goods coming into the EU , but it could also be a result of improved detection by the customs authorities .
We should remember , however , that standards by themselves are not enough if there is no effective monitoring at our borders , and , particularly , if monitoring is not carried out in the same manner at every point in our external boundary .
For the fight against the flow of counterfeit goods into the EU to be effective there has to be improved cooperation between customs authorities and the supervisory authorities in the EU Member States , as well as cooperation with customs authorities in third countries .
This improved cooperation has to keep up with technological change .
For this reason it is very important that the customs authorities throughout the European Union have proper equipment that will enable them to carry out their duties effectively .
( CS ) Forty years ago , the Customs Union was the key to European prosperity because it offered the opportunity to establish the single market .
Today we are facing new problems as a result of the globalisation of trade .
We know that no more than 0.5 % of the huge volume of foreign imports can be checked in European ports , and that there are counterfeit goods in one in every three containers .
Goods that do not meet our technical and safety standards represent a further threat .
I want to stress that we have to provide European consumers with better protection against such goods .
More effective coordination depends on rigorous implementation of new modern legislation that is ( or was ) our great present for the anniversary of the Customs Union .
We have also enshrined in our legislation the right to dispose of dangerous goods as well as counterfeit goods .
This will mean a great deal of work for customs officials and it is a perfect present for them . However , there are many other avenues to explore : closer cooperation with companies , more effective coordination between Member States through e-customs and the recent option of cooperation with third countries .
We have also hopefully managed to improve slightly the conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises .
( PL ) Mr President , the Customs Union created on 1 July 1968 was the first step towards strengthening economic integration in the then six Member States .
We can acknowledge this to be a success in the history of European integration .
In celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the existence of the Customs Union it is worth noting that this is an excellent example , that it is possible to work effectively within a community of 27 Member States since , after all , there is not just one customs authority for the European Union , but there are 20 national customs authorities with differing areas of responsibility and various types of organisation that work together on the basis of a joint European policy and within the legal framework that sets out the relevant regulations and procedures .
The customs administrations in 27 Member States have to work as a single administration .
Forty years ago the objective of the Customs Union was to abolish duties at internal borders between Member States and to make the idea of a common market a reality .
Today the customs authorities work together to protect the external borders of the European Union and take steps to combat smuggling , to seize dangerous counterfeit goods as well as carrying out other responsibilities , which also , and here I would like to congratulate the Commissioner , were taken into consideration in the European Commission strategy for the evolution of the Customs Union presented in April 2008 .
Mr President , the Customs Union is a wonderful thing but it would be even more wonderful if it was adhered to by all countries concerned .
I am of course referring to Turkey , which , despite much pressure put upon it by the EU , continues not to implement or ratify the Ankara Protocol with respect to Cyprus , thus effectively imposing an embargo on all shipping and air transport with Cyprus .
I ask you , why is the EU letting Turkey make a mockery of our rules and regulations ?
Why is Turkey allowed to get away with such unacceptable behaviour ?
Why does the Commission not force Turkey either to implement the Customs Union fully or be excluded from it altogether ?
How long must we put up with such disrespect and ridicule from a candidate Member State that wants to think that it is European ?
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to pay tribute to your work and that of your administration on this dossier , which is a credit to the European Union .
I also thank my colleagues and my political group for supporting an amendment I tabled concerning the need to pay attention to SMEs , which regard the difficulties in applying import and export procedures as one of the main non-tariff barriers to trade .
I do think , however , that we need to go further than the cooperation proposed in the resolution .
At a time when the Lisbon Treaty is proposing protection of the citizens as one of the Union 's objectives and the WTO is in big trouble , we need to go further because , as the Commissioner said , the customs statistics are alarming and counterfeiting continues to put our health and safety and our economy at risk .
The time has come to go further and to consider unifying customs administrations to a degree that goes far beyond the current cooperation , whose limits are clear today .
I have received one draft resolution submitted under Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 June 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - There are many reasons to mark the 40th anniversary of the Customs Union .
The far-reaching abolishment of customs among the Member States of the European Union is without a doubt one of the most important achievements of the Union .
It has been of great benefit to both businesses and European consumers .
A lot of responsibility is placed in the hands of the customs control officials on the external borders of the Union .
Counterfeit products , illegal trade in drugs and other harmful substances and smuggling of endangered species or products are challenges met by the single market with ever fewer internal border controls .
Europe has one of the world 's largest markets of counterfeit products .
The existence and the trade volume of these products seriously violate intellectual property rights .
More decisive measures to correct the situation should be identified and put into action .
Answering these challenges is above all a question of more harmonised and determined cooperation among the customs authorities of different Member States .
However , all in all , the development of the European single market has been an undeniable success and deserves to be celebrated as one of the key factors contributing to the wealth of the whole of the EU .
European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ( debate )
The next item is the report prepared by Mrs Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ( 2010 ) - C6-0469 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , as well as the draftswoman for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , Mrs Geringer , for having done such excellent work .
The European Year 2010 will play a significant role in the development of social Europe .
The chosen approach , that is , one year during which the centralised and decentralised methods are combined , is an approach that should provide the best support for political cohesion between subjects and various levels of governance , and offer a certain flexibility when taking into account the specific situation of individual Member States .
The European Year 2010 will give the European Union and the Member States the opportunity to renew their political commitment , and will stress that poverty and social exclusion have an impact on the social and economic development of the Union and on our citizens ' dignity .
The aim of the European Year 2010 will be to show that it is possible to fight poverty and that that fight can succeed .
The European Year 2010 will also offer a platform for the debate on European values and on respect for these values as a key factor in developing public policies at both Union and Member State level .
It will help to ensure that the people affected by poverty and social exclusion are perceived in a different light .
The Commission has always insisted that this concept , this approach must be preserved in the text .
I think that most of the amendments tabled by the European Parliament go in that direction .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , according to the Joint Report on Social Protection and Social Inclusion for 2008 , 16 % of the population of the EU is still living below the poverty line , and 19 % of children are at risk of destitution and social exclusion , despite all the commitments made by the Member States in 2000 to drastically reduce poverty by 2010 .
Poverty does not affect only women , children and certain social groups that are always particularly vulnerable .
Far from being eradicated , poverty is actually reinforced by international developments in the energy and food production sectors , and by internal disparities in the less prosperous regions of the Union itself .
In these places there are chronic structural disadvantages , such as remote , island and deindustrialised regions and others .
Poverty and social exclusion are a threat to development , competitiveness and the social model .
They also violate human rights in a Europe that wishes to become a model of respect for human dignity and the promotion of equal opportunities for all .
The Commission 's proposal for a European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion in 2010 , with a significantly higher budget than that allocated to previous European Years , is an important step in promoting solidarity , social justice , and greater economic and social cohesion .
It is our ambition that 2010 should be a milestone year for recognising the multidimensional nature of poverty and social exclusion .
This recognition embraces not only material poverty but also access to health services , housing , social protection , education , training , employment and quality of life .
We must accept that those who endure poverty have a right to live in dignity and participate in social and economic life .
We must affirm the common responsibility of the European agencies of the Member States , and of the social partners and all citizens , to increase social cohesion .
The year 2010 will lay the foundations for effective structures of collective responsibility and for a fair redistribution of wealth .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats took the lead in the proposals and accepted amendments to enable the cooperation of all the political groups in the European Parliament .
We have thus strengthened the Commission 's proposal by broadening the definition of vulnerable categories and adding issues such as meeting the needs of families with specific problems , single-parent families and large families , addressing the specific problems of people with disabilities and the homeless , and promoting active integration and access to culture and recreation .
This , of course , does not detract from the primary objective of improving the financial situation of individuals and families by allowing them access to decent , permanent employment .
Good employment provides the satisfaction of participating and the self-sufficiency necessary to meet the needs of the more vulnerable members of society , such as children and old people .
As MEPs , we have paid close attention to the correct enforcement of Community legislation on equal opportunities .
We have attended to the shaping and application , at national , regional and local level , of integrated , coordinated policies .
These have been developed by public and private bodies with the participation of those affected , in order to maintain the principles of good governance , subsidiarity and proportionality .
Factors contributing to the success of the Year for Combating Poverty will be the strengthening of the open method of coordination , the coordination of actions between existing European programmes and the results of previous European Years , the active participation of civil society , and correct evaluation of the proposals and results by the European Commission .
The question of the participation of NGOs and the level of funding for their actions has been the subject of conciliation between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
We are glad the Council has accepted a proposal to append to the decision an additional statement from the Commission on encouraging the participation of small and medium-sized NGOs , and the possibility of fully funding their actions by national agencies .
I would like to thank the responsible officials , colleagues , and fellow Members for their contribution to the preparation of the decision .
author of the draft opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( PL ) Mr President , raising the quality of life of the citizens of EU Member States lies at the heart of European integration .
Despite this , statistics show that 78 million people in the EU are below the poverty threshold , and the majority of these are children , women and the elderly .
This means that , in addition to economic measures , the European Union must also undertake social initiatives , which is something that the European Parliament has noted on many occasions .
In its resolution of 15 November 2007 , Parliament emphasised that strengthening social cohesion and the elimination of poverty and social exclusion must become political priorities for the European Union .
The Commission 's initiative to make 2010 the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion fits perfectly into this context and could make a significant contribution to directing political attention and encouraging widespread activities to further strengthen social protection and social integration .
The budget that has been allocated for this initiative - 17 million euro - is a record amount , but it is the implementation of projects on the national level that is a key element to making this initiative a success .
For this reason we need to call on Member States to participate in this initiative and to allocate appropriate human and financial resources for this purpose .
Amendment of the agenda : see Minutes
European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ( continuation of debate )
Continuing the debate on the Report on the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , we now move on to speakers on behalf of the Groups .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , with all this focus on export growth and globalisation gains , one group seems to have been overlooked .
I refer to people living in poverty , of whom there are 78 million in the EU , including 19 million children .
Is it a matter of learning to live with this state of affairs ?
Certainly not !
Young people who cannot cope with school and drop out are part of this group , as are older people who , despite having worked for decades , receive small pensions that cover only the bare necessities .
They feel marginalised , and in actual fact they are often left to struggle on their own .
The result is that daily life imposes severe mental and physical strains in the form of housing without security of tenure , problem estates , the risk of indebtedness , alcohol and drugs - a life without dignity or self-esteem .
The annual poverty reports in our Member States should set alarm bells ringing .
Last year I listened to a debate from the visitors ' gallery of the German Bundestag .
The subject of the debate was the lower classes .
It gave rise to weeks of heated public debate .
That is what the victims of poverty need : they need people to be aware of them , to take them seriously , to show them how to break out of the poverty trap .
Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou has drafted a very good report - I can say that on behalf of the PPE-DE Group and on a very personal level too , Marie - which gives us the green light for the designation of 2010 as the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
If the European Year does not merely yield analyses of the situation but enables the endangered target groups to become actively involved and to obtain a forum through which their voices can be heard , if institutions present tangible successes instead of only announcing good intentions , if educational experts outline motivating teaching methods that have resulted in more pupils successfully completing their schooling , and if welfare benefits are identified which have demonstrably and sustainably reduced the risk of poverty , many people who still feel marginalised today will finally become aware of their rights as stakeholders in our society .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( CS ) I first of all wish to thank my fellow Member , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , for her good report and pleasant cooperation .
I want to mention two aspects .
Many of our documents use the expressions ' decent work ' and ' decent jobs ' .
The fact remains , however , that more and more jobs fit the description of menial jobs , in other words unskilled , badly-paid work .
The number of people living in poverty or suffering from in-work poverty is not falling , which is proof that more and more employers are employing people illegally .
The recently adopted draft Working Time Directive , which introduces the possibility of working like people do in some Chinese industrial zones , is a further blow that will surely result in an increase in the number of poor people .
The other issue I want to mention relates to the need to take into account , at last , the fact that the trend towards the privatisation of public and social services in some countries of the Union is going unnoticed .
The privatisation of public and social services also leads to an increase in the number of people living in poverty .
I should say that my amendments , which highlight this fact , are regularly rejected .
I would like us to actually start doing something , instead of just churning out more pages and setting deadlines .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , let me begin by emphasising that I very much approve of the idea that political efforts to combat poverty and social exclusion should be brought into particularly sharp focus throughout Europe in 2010 .
Allow me , nevertheless , to make a few critical comments .
The way in which proposals for improvements have been brushed aside , mostly under pressure from the Council , for the sake of reaching agreement at first reading has greatly annoyed me .
I have called for more funds to be allocated to this important initiative in the 2010 budget , since combating poverty and social exclusion is an unequivocal goal of the Lisbon Agenda , a goal which , sadly , has not been achieved at all .
I also wanted to ensure that the ample financial resources disbursed by the European Commission were subjected to closer scrutiny , particularly in the context of the European Year in 2010 , in order to establish whether they served as an instrument of fairer distribution or whether they might actually be helping to make the rich richer and scarcely ever reaching those below the poverty line .
I am another of those who would have welcomed a discussion within the EU institutions on the introduction of an unconditional basic income , especially on the question whether that would be an appropriate weapon with which to combat poverty and social exclusion .
I very much regret that these proposals were immediately shot down .
I support the initiative for a European Year , but I find it all too non-committal and too devoid of implications in the field of social policy .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the announcement that 2010 is to be the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion is a very good initiative from the Council .
We should remind our citizens that the elimination of poverty is one of the principal objectives of the European Union .
This will , without doubt , increase people 's trust in our European institutions , I am thinking specifically here of the new Member States .
In my own country , Poland , accession to the EU in 2004 is still , unfortunately , associated in many people 's minds with an increase in poverty , particularly for people living in the countryside and in small towns .
This resulted in the low turnout to the elections for the European Parliament and in the results of these elections .
The European Year for Combating Poverty will be an opportunity to review the situation in this regard and to mobilise Member States to undertake concrete steps to combat poverty and social exclusion .
From superficial observations of society , it would seem that the quality of life of many individuals and families in both the old and the new EU has recently undergone considerable changes , but unfortunately these changes are for the worse .
It has become ever more difficult , for example , to find housing .
We need new and current statistical data in this regard .
In a world that is becoming ever more globalised in nature and ever more difficult to control , the responsibility of the state towards the citizen should become greater .
The state should make sure that citizens feel safe , at least at the most basic level .
I think that the principal benefit from this European Year will be to inform everyone of the existence of the problem , to raise awareness and to increase solidarity , and this includes financial solidarity , with poor and excluded persons .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Left Group in the European Parliament approves the report presented by our honourable colleague and hence endorses the goal of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
The report very clearly spells out the wide implications of poverty and social exclusion , not only as a social problem but also , and more especially , as a personal problem for those caught in the poverty trap .
Several references have already been made to the 78 million people , including 19 million children , who are living in poverty within the European Union .
If serious efforts are to be made to combat poverty and eradicate it as a social problem , however , specific binding political strategies are essential .
Political aims and a guaranteed individual right to live in freedom from poverty and social exclusion are on the agenda .
These , however , are precisely the things for which the European Union makes no provision .
The main political strategies of the European Union have nothing to do with combating poverty .
Economic growth and job growth do not reduce poverty .
Even the Union 's richest Member States are registering growing numbers of people who live below the poverty line or below the at-risk threshold .
In Germany in particular , recent years have seen a fall in the level of low incomes but a rise in the number of people who earn them .
Employment in the EU , in other words , does not automatically lead to the prevention of poverty , and I am sorry to say that awareness of this fact within the European Commission and among the Member States has not generated any specific packages of measures involving objectives such as the introduction of a minimum wage above the at-risk threshold or the solution of the problem of basic social security to which Mr Kusstatscher referred .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I commend Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou .
I feel that the issue of child poverty needs to be urgently addressed .
Underlining the statistics in relation to the number of children at risk of poverty - 19 million in Europe - a greater emphasis needs to be put on enshrining the paramount importance of the family and , emanating from this , defending family life .
The institution of the family merits unconditional respect and protection .
It is the natural setting for children .
In developed countries we find that poverty is increasingly a family phenomenon rather than a regional one .
A child 's economic status is closely linked to that of their parents .
Parental unemployment is a cause of child poverty .
In Ireland , although families often earn a reasonable income , mortgage , health and car payments can absorb the majority of that income and leave little for raising children .
Other issues , such as parental addiction , leave insufficient funds for a secure childhood .
Separation and divorce also disrupt family finances to the detriment of children .
It is imperative that families be efficiently supported , both economically and socially , in order to alleviate the shameful modern predicament of child poverty in Europe .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I note that the report we are discussing today refers expressly to eradicating rather than merely to combating poverty , as was actually proposed .
I am therefore pleased that my observation has borne fruit , and I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , for that .
The European Union has become accustomed to reacting very rapidly and with great solidarity to help the victims of natural disasters throughout the world , for example , but it still prevaricates a great deal when it comes to helping the victims of economic and social catastrophes within the EU itself .
I say this because I find it rather difficult to understand why a report that addresses the issue of poverty makes no reference to rising food prices .
This shocks me , because we all know that the poorer a family is , the higher the percentage of its budget that is spent on food .
I therefore think it would be useful to make some reference to the recent Commission communication on the increase in the price of food products , for example .
I also believe , meanwhile , that we should not restrict the eradication of poverty to EU territory alone .
This battle has no boundaries - we are talking of values which are essential to human dignity .
Throughout its history Europe has always been defined more by its expansion throughout the world than by its own identity .
In the 21st century , of all the tasks the EU could perform for the good of humanity , the eradication of poverty will perhaps be the most noble of all .
That is why I hope this issue will be promoted strongly in 2010 .
( SV ) Thank you very much , Mr President , Commissioner .
Let me begin by thanking Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou for an excellent piece of work .
Let me also say that I think the initiative to make 2010 the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion is an excellent one .
Just as Vladimir Špidla said , such a Year may increase awareness and knowledge of the structures present , but that is not enough .
It must be followed up by action , as some Members have previously pointed out .
The situation is quite good in the EU generally , but at the same time poverty is not diminishing .
Rather it is increasing , and , just as others have said , a great many of those affected are women and children .
The approach is the Open Method of Coordination , but measures are needed in a large number of areas , not just a few .
Employment is of course important , but so are education , social security systems and a regional policy which devotes attention to neglected areas .
There is a need for action targeted at special groups , such as persons with functional disabilities and persons from other parts of the world who are suffering greater poverty than others .
I hope that this Year , besides increasing knowledge and awareness , may also be the starting point for concrete measures to reduce poverty in the EU .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion will be the high point of the 2005-2010 social agenda .
The Committee on Social Affairs has adopted a set of common indicators for the process of social protection and integration , which will ensure comparability of data .
Despite the fact that the European Union is aware of the problem of poverty as well as of the importance of measures to increase social cohesion , disparities in income continue to accompany economic growth in EU countries .
As a result , the poor gain little from this growth .
In effect , this means there is a decrease in the level of social cohesion .
This situation is accompanied by other factors that also have negative consequences : almost one-fifth of children in the European Union are at risk of poverty .
At a time of demographic decline we should take particular care of children , particularly in families with many children that are experiencing the most difficulty .
However , it is particularly these families that are subject to discrimination through high VAT rates on children 's products .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , in particular , for drawing attention to the issue of combating poverty .
( SK ) Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome the report by Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , as well as the Commission 's determination to continue to fight poverty .
The great extent of poverty is probably one of the most notable contradictions in prosperous Europe .
It is no coincidence that all the other Members have mentioned the high figures , the millions of people who live at risk of poverty , but the most striking thing is the high number of children who are born into and live with the risk of poverty .
Consequently , it does not come as a surprise if these children leave school early , if the percentage of early school leavers is strikingly high .
Another striking statistic is the very high number of children , running into the hundreds of thousands , who are homeless or live in institutions .
The problem is that poverty as well as social exclusion are inherited .
Consequently , for socially excluded people , the opportunity to get an education and to participate in lifelong learning remains an unattainable goal .
Let us hope that the European Year for Combating Poverty provides sufficient incentive for strengthening the principle of solidarity in national policies .
When we consider future changes in the population structure , the implementation of this principle will indeed be even more complicated .
Analyses of some public spending and insurance systems show that in some Member States these systems carry financial or even social risks , which can lead to poverty becoming even more widespread .
Without any doubt , the present rapid increase in the prices of oil and food will place a burden on the budgets of the people in the lowest income bracket .
This means that there are more than enough reasons to make sure that the European Year for Combating Poverty not only draws attention to poverty but also helps to create specific accountable national bodies that could facilitate the coordination of the various policies used to combat poverty and social exclusion .
( ES ) Mr President , I also wanted to congratulate the Commission and , of course , the rapporteur , who have provided the opportunity for this debate and to take the first steps towards making 2010 a significant year in the fight against poverty .
As discussed in Lisbon , this is one of the European Union 's objectives and we have often said , and many Councils have said , that there must be a significant reduction in poverty by 2010 , but there is unfortunately not much sign of that happening .
We must therefore make additional efforts and use this opportunity to reiterate that the increase in the creation of wealth is not benefiting all of us equally .
Some sectors of the population are especially vulnerable and need protection from poverty , because it is very difficult for people to escape poverty once they become poor .
We therefore need a horizontal policy that provides decent jobs and educational opportunities , not only as part of this programme , but as part of all European Union programmes , so that solidarity remains at the heart of the Union and is not only addressed by economic policies .
( PL ) Mr President , it could be said that the data that we have collected really minimise the scale of the problem .
This is because they speak of poverty in the European Union at the time before the accession of Bulgaria and Romania .
After the accession of these two relatively very poor countries , the level of poverty in the EU has significantly increased .
We should not hide this fact .
Furthermore , it is not every seventh person in the EU Member States who is below the poverty line , but the true percentage is considerably above 16 % , in fact it is over 20 % .
In this regard I would like to make an urgent call that the financing from the European Union for all the projects that we have discussed should be over 50 % .
This is important particularly from the point of view of the poorer countries .
Limiting the amount to 50 % is , in reality , a decision to restrict the real fight against poverty .
( Applause )
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner Špidla , ladies and gentlemen , it seems absolutely essential to recognise the inalienable rights of the socially most vulnerable groups , and the practical recognition of such rights will involve the strong commitment of public and private social stakeholders .
The various dimensions of social cohesion must be protected by means of EU and Member State commitment to eradicating poverty and combating social exclusion , promoting concrete action at the most varied levels .
Full and realistic monitoring of poverty and social exclusion is also required , Commissioner , which means that reliable and comparable indicators showing the development of the various social , economic and cultural dimensions of that phenomenon are essential .
Ladies and gentlemen , poor women and single-parent families are particularly vulnerable to poverty and exclusion , and must therefore be given special attention and the corresponding support .
In conclusion , Mr President , after thanking the rapporteur , I would say that 2010 will have to be a particularly effective year for combating poverty and social exclusion , a battle that must also be given a much needed higher profile .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw attention to three issues in this debate .
Firstly , according to the latest European Commission report , in 2004 there were about 100 million EU citizens , that means 20 % of the whole population , who were living on less than 60 % of the average EU income , meaning they were living on less than 15 euro a day .
In the new Member States , such as Poland , Lithuania , Latvia and Slovakia , this is true of almost 80 % of the population .
Secondly , solutions that are often put forward by liberal economists , that significant differences in incomes are important for economic growth , should not be adopted in the economic and social practices of EU countries .
In 2006 the countries with the lowest disparities in income were Denmark , Sweden , Finland , Slovenia and the Czech Republic , and these countries have for many years enjoyed stable annual GDP growth , which is quite different from those countries that have the highest disparities in income , such as Latvia , Lithuania , Portugal and Greece as well as , unfortunately , my own country , Poland .
Thirdly , I would like to express the hope that 2010 , as the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , will make all our decision makers aware that poverty and social exclusion have a destructive effect on economic growth and social development .
( Applause )
( RO ) Dear Commissioner , dear colleagues , we are well aware of what the Commission reminds us : there is a huge number of Europeans who live in poverty , including extreme poverty .
Those who do not know this should accept the blame for the fact that a rich society , which is based on the principles of justice and solidarity , like ours , operates in such a way that a country of poor Europeans would have more seats in this Parliament than Germany .
Poverty is not an abstraction ; it is a way of life affecting women and children in particular .
Women , including employed ones , come across increased risks given the structural salary gap , their concentration in poorly paid , weakly unionized sectors and in the informal economy , given their prevalence among single-parent families .
Poverty is inherited .
The economic poverty of parents favours the cultural poverty of children , by reduced access to education , the political poverty , by low participation in or exclusion from decision-making , the social poverty , by low participation in civic activities and isolation .
It creates deeper inequalities than those derived from the different purchasing power .
Minimum coherence between statements and actions forces us to do more than make citizens aware .
Political decisions are necessary in order to remedy the situation .
In the Union , we cannot speak of a lack of resources , but sometimes of their unfair distribution , of rules perpetuating exclusion .
It is a joint responsibility , including of companies that , for their own interest , should go beyond the stage in which the financing of a foundation for protecting stray dogs in the neighbourhood is the only expression of social responsibilities .
( PL ) Mr President , declaring 2010 to be the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion will not solve the problems experienced by the 80 million people in the European Union who live below the poverty line .
Appointing committees , increasing bureaucracy , meetings and sittings will , likewise , not give them any food .
In order to combat poverty you have to approach the issue of creating and distributing wealth in a different way .
You have to state clearly that globalisation encourages excessive wealth creation for some and rapid impoverishment for others .
Unfortunately there are more and more of these others .
The problem of poverty in the EU will continue to grow and there are several reasons for this , including unfair distribution of wealth , problems of food distribution and rising food costs , a general increase in the costs of maintaining a family , the demographic situation in Europe and the world , continuing inequalities , the backwardness of certain regions due to historical reasons and a failure to produce a proper model of how to help the needy .
Finally , as we are not in a position to solve the problem of poverty as a whole , then let us at least provide children and young people with free education and extra meals as required .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I want to highlight one particular aspect and I will speak in Polish :
( PL ) Mr President , we are trying to help poor countries in Africa and Latin America with little effect , but there can be no justification for failing to help the poor within the European Union .
There are regions where people are very poor , especially children .
I would like to point out an issue that will have serious consequences in the future , namely the phenomenon of Euro-orphans .
These are the children of migrants who travel from one country to another within the EU , often abandoning their children to their fate .
I believe that , in future , the psychological consequences of this problem will cost us dear .
For this reason we should do everything we can to eliminate this problem now .
( RO ) Honourable President , eradicating poverty and social exclusion is one of the major objectives of the European Union .
For this reason , the year 2010 should be decisive in implementing the European strategy in this field .
Of the 78 million citizens who live at risk of poverty , 19 million are children .
Unfortunately , there are still no European programs and funds designed for improving the situation of children .
It is true that the European Union provides funds for fruits and dairy products in schools or money for the education of pupils , but I think we need a coherent strategy and actual programs designed for children coming from poor families .
At the same time , we should also focus on the other categories of disadvantaged people , and in particular young people , for whom we have to establish policies and allocate important amounts of money from the structural funds .
Moreover , it is important to emphasize the fact that , at present , we cannot create the premises for sustainable social development if we don 't have the necessary financial resources .
I believe the allocated amount of 17 million Euros is insufficient in relation to the social inclusion and poverty fighting needs Europe presently has .
Last , but not least , the fight against poverty and social exclusion should be connected to the existing programs .
Both the European Social Fund and the Progress European programmes , should be used for financing the priorities of the European Year for Combating Poverty .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate you on this excellent proposal .
I also thank Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou for her very good report .
I am sure we will vote for the resolution unanimously .
Yet I wonder .
Here we have another European year , this time against extreme poverty .
It is now 20 years since , on 17 October , the international community celebrated the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty .
Looking round at the moment of celebrating 17 October in front of the European Parliament in Brussels , I see myself there with my colleague , Iñigo Méndez de Vigo , who leads this Parliament 's delegation with the Fourth World .
As I take the floor here , I would ask you to note this date in your diary .
I hope that on 17 October the European institutions will mark their strong solidarity with the slogan for that date : ' Wherever men and women are condemned to live in extreme poverty , human rights are violated .
To come together to ensure that those rights be respected is our solemn duty . '
( SK ) In all , 78 million people in the European Union live at risk of poverty .
Rising prices of commodities , energy and food further multiply the risk for the most vulnerable groups .
Quality employment significantly reduces the poverty risk .
However , often even those people who are employed live at risk of poverty .
The amended Lisbon Strategy promotes equal opportunities for all as a vector for social and intergenerational solidarity and the creation of a poverty-free society .
Consequently , I welcome the initiative to make the problem of poverty more visible and the effort to establish a single coordinated policy .
The campaign to fight poverty should raise public awareness and produce a long-term effort to fight the phenomenon of poverty .
In this sense we have a lot to learn from the Scandinavian countries .
They have proved that one of the most effective means of poverty reduction is an active labour market policy combined with the establishment of decent working conditions and strong social protection .
( LT ) I welcome the Commission 's proposal to designate 2010 the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Poverty is a problem both in the EU and worldwide .
I would like to highlight some acute aspects of poverty and social exclusion on which we should focus much more attention than we used to .
First of all , simply by eliminating child poverty we would be able to escape the vicious circle of generations condemned to a life of poverty and social exclusion .
Secondly , nearly 10 % of workers experience poverty because of low wages , part-time employment and low qualifications .
It is essential to promote quality employment based on educating employees .
Thirdly , it is vital to promote solidarity within society , making all its members aware of the issues of poverty and social exclusion .
I would like to encourage all EU institutions and Member States to provide the members of society with more detailed information on combating poverty and social exclusion in order to increase the sense of common responsibility and help disperse the prejudice of being a financial burden on society .
( PL ) Mr President , poverty is a very complex problem and it can adopt various forms .
It varies depending on the country .
In Europe we are not talking of people dying of starvation , but , in the main , low income , poor housing conditions , poor health , often alcoholism , feelings of alienation or lack of any prospects are the greatest problems .
Poverty is a dangerous phenomenon , particularly among children , because , in many cases , it is hereditary .
Children brought up in poverty have a more difficult development path and , without outside help , are condemned to failure and to share their parents ' fate .
For this reason it is important to take all possible steps to break the cycle of poverty being handed down from one generation to another .
Strengthening social integration , reducing poverty and combating social exclusion are some of the challenges faced by the EU , particularly when we take demographic changes into account , by which I mean an ageing population and an influx of migrants .
( PT ) It is not sufficient to establish a European Year for Combating Poverty when around 20 % of the European Union 's population is threatened with poverty .
What is happening - exacerbated by social inequalities , rising numbers of poorly paid workers with insecure jobs , thereby increasing the number of people in poverty , and rising fuel and food prices - requires other policies to ensure that children , women and families are socially included .
Measures are needed that make work more attractive , increase employment with rights and guarantee high-quality public services , decent housing and public and universal social security .
A European strategy of solidarity and social progress to replace the neoliberal policies of the Lisbon Strategy and the Stability Pact must therefore be approved as a matter of urgency so that we do not have even more poverty in 2010 than we have at the moment .
( ES ) Mr President , first , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur and the Commissioner for this initiative .
Social exclusion and poverty are two sides of the same coin and are features of a society with very needy people , a society that is not socially cohesive .
At the end of the day , ladies and gentlemen , progress is a question of ethics .
The year 2010 will be the year for combating poverty .
We already know that the eradication of social exclusion and poverty will be a long and complex task , but if we make the most of each euro invested in this programme , if we are capable of reaching the groups of people that need most help , if we are capable of awakening the conscience of public opinion , we will be creating a new European citizenship .
This is the big issue .
Last week , the citizens of Ireland rejected the Treaty of Lisbon .
Demagogic propaganda drawing on a wide range of opinions have wrought havoc in Irish society , provoking unfounded fears of globalisation and a certain amount of confusion about the construction of our common home .
As well as making 2010 the year for combating poverty , we must also make it the year of European citizenship .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his opinion .
I hope the common guidelines in the strategic framework document will indeed guide the national committees in planning effective action .
As the Commissioner himself has emphasised , the key aim must be to include all those affected by poverty both now and in the future .
Personally , I believe that poverty cannot be eradicated once and for all because it may return after a natural disaster .
We have talked about the disasters in Greece and other countries owing to flooding or fires : poverty might reappear or it might be brought back by the international situation .
We must therefore always be ready .
For this reason , we place special emphasis on prevention ; this explains our Day for the Eradication of Poverty on 17 October , as Mrs Záborská has pointed out .
We have included this date in our report .
These , then , are not measures with little or no binding force ; we want to see them matched to every national need and we believe that dealing with poverty means combating the first great enemy to the peace and prosperity of every community .
The Commissioner is in any case a historian and knows that the Emperor of Byzantium , an empire that lasted for 1 000 years in Europe , supported the fight against poverty in every speech he made .
He considered it the most important enemy of the state after the various foes he did battle with on his borders .
We too in the EU must fight poverty both internally and externally .
We must achieve those famous Millennium Goals , so that we can also address the problem of economic migrants and illegal immigrants who come here because they compare their own situation with ours .
I am sure , then , that with good planning we shall have good results and I thank you all for your excellent words .
( applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou for an excellent report and particularly for drawing attention to the issue of poverty prevention .
I am in favour of designating 2010 as the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
In discussing the above-named report I would like to draw attention to the importance of finding a route out of poverty through concrete measures and not just by talking about it .
In Europe 78 million people live in poverty and 19 million of these are children .
We have to remember the importance of the family , which should be protected and given social and economic support in order to eliminate the enormous poverty among children in Europe .
At this point it would be worth mentioning the cause of poverty .
Poverty is caused by a significant increase in the prices of food and energy , which primarily affects families with many children as well as the elderly .
According to the European Commission , about 14 % of Poles , Greeks and Portuguese in permanent employment live in poverty .
I thank the Rapporteur for the spirit of cooperation in drafting this report .
In Europe , one out of six people lives below the poverty threshold , a figure that does not include the statistics in Romania and Bulgaria .
Although in most Member States , the difference between women and men , as regards poverty , is increasingly shrinking and the average difference is 2 % as regards poverty and persistent poverty , I would like to draw your attention to the reality in the new Member States .
In Romania and Bulgaria , the number of women at risk of becoming victims of poverty is more than ten percent higher than the number of men .
Women are also much more exposed to social exclusion .
We should not ignore the fact that the ideas of solidarity , social justice , and eradication of poverty are challenges regarding not only the countries in the European Union , but also its involvement on the world economic and political scene .
Therefore , I would like to welcome the inclusion into the final text of the matter regarding the difference between men and women , in a more general article .
I also consider important the correlation of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion with the Millennium Development Goals and , in particular , the International Day for the Eradication Poverty .
in writing . - ( HU ) Poverty is a complex , relative and multi-faceted problem : it raises economic , social and cultural questions .
Nevertheless , we must take action to combat poverty because in 2006 no less than 16 % ( 78 million ) of the total population of the twenty-five Member States of the European Union were living below the poverty threshold .
When the Lisbon Strategy was launched in March 2000 , the Council of the European Union called upon the Member States and the Commission to take steps ' to make a decisive impact on the eradication of poverty ' by 2010 .
It is an important step that we now have a measure for poverty , since in order to tackle the problem it is important to identify its exact nature .
I welcome the fact that we have designated 2010 as the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
I am sure that the Year will help to promote the exchange of best practice and see the launch of new initiatives in every field , especially in connection with poverty prevention , monitoring , financial mechanisms and combating child poverty .
It should be noted particularly that , according to the empirical evidence , women are much more vulnerable to the threat of poverty than men , and this is especially true in the case of women who are multiply disadvantaged .
It is vital that the principle of equal treatment is also applied in the fight against poverty , and therefore also in the European Year of Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Genuine equality for men and women is a fundamental precondition for reducing the risk of poverty , since women are less likely to fall victim to poverty if they have appropriate and adequately remunerated work that they can combine with their family commitments .
The Constitution of the International Labour Organization stipulates : " Poverty anywhere constitutes a danger to prosperity everywhere ” .
For this reason , I emphasize the importance of the amendment regarding the prevention and fight against poverty by carrying on multidimensional policies at a national , regional and local level , which would ensure active participation of citizens in the society and on the labour market .
The reforms in the field of social protection and the active inclusion policies have decisively contributed to accelerating economic growth and creating more jobs in Europe .
In the first quarter of the year 2008 , Romania had one of the greatest economic growths in the EU , increasing by 8.2 % ( while the European average is 2.5 % , according to Eurostat ) , but , nevertheless , people with low education levels , without any qualification , especially in the rural environment , children , young people , people with disabilities and the Roma have a significant risk of poverty .
I congratulate the Rapporteur for her activity and I consider it necessary that the policies drafted by the Member States , following European recommendations , aim at the beneficial reconciliation between the citizen 's economic competitiveness and social welfare .
The impact of cohesion policy on the integration of vulnerable communities and groups ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Gábor Harangozó , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the impact of cohesion policy on the integration of vulnerable communities and groups .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Commissioner Hübner , ladies and gentlemen , there are regions , and people living in those regions , that are unable to avail themselves of the opportunities we seek to provide for them out of Community resources in order to enable them to catch up with the European Union average as quickly as possible and put an end to the poverty in which they are living .
I initiated this report in order to investigate the reasons why we have been unable to bring about development in these regions , and to make recommendations with a view to changing this situation and putting an end to it .
As the European Commission 's Fourth Progress Report on Cohesion states , cohesion policy functions very well at national level in some countries .
In practical terms , more vigorous development and positive progress towards cohesion have begun to take place in countries that have already acceded to EU membership and are receiving cohesion funds .
If we look at slightly lower territorial levels , however , we can see that inter-regional disparities are not diminishing to the same extent .
I would like to cite Hungary as an example : in Hungary , per capita GDP in the central region has reached 110 % of the European Union average ; in four out of Hungary 's seven regions , however , per capita GDP is less than 45 % of the EU average .
In these cases the disparity is at least no longer increasing .
In many instances , however , as the Fourth Report on Cohesion also states , territorial disparities within regions are continuing to increase .
What could be the reason why some regions are able to use the available opportunities to their advantage , while others are not ?
If we look a little more closely , we find that there are some very serious underlying structural reasons , structural reasons at the territorial level .
In territories where little development is taking place , the human capacity for generating appropriate projects is clearly lacking , the basic infrastructure for getting investment into these territories is lacking , and appropriate education and proper healthcare are lacking .
There are several micro-regions , for example in Hungary , where the life expectancy of the male population is more than 15 years lower than the national average .
What should we do about it ?
Since the problem we are dealing with is a highly complex one , and is clearly concentrated in certain micro-territories and micro-regions , I believe we must assess whether it is right to examine cohesion policy at inter-regional level only , at the level of the regions .
Would it not be better instead to examine whether we need more focused , more precisely targeted measures at the level of the micro-regions where the worst of the problems are ?
From now on our first point of departure must be to examine the nature of the statistics we are using as a basis for our decision making .
I was aware of this problem while preparing this report , but I cannot give you any concrete basis for statistical comparison , as there is a lack of comparable micro-regional statistical data throughout the EU .
From now on we must examine whether it is appropriate , although these are primarily rural areas , to tie rural cohesion into agricultural policy .
Would it not be much more appropriate to deal with the problems of rural areas in the context of cohesion policy and using cohesion policy instruments , allowing agricultural policy measures to play a purely complementary role ?
At this juncture I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their exceptionally constructive work in helping to produce the report .
At the same time , I would also like to point out that , following the several weeks of negotiations , and after I had accepted the report of the PPE-DE Group containing a very major amendment on a vital point of the report , the PPE-DE Group then proceeded to vote against its own point .
For me this raises the question : what is it that we want ?
Do we simply want to state that a problem exists , and do nothing more , or are we prepared to face up to the problem and to make recommendations regarding how to change our policy , and to focus more closely on identifying areas where we can actually do something to solve the problem ? Thank you very much for your attention .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Harangozó for his report and also for his efforts to achieve a consensual position in his committee on the difficult topic of vulnerable communities and groups .
To avoid economic growth being accompanied by social polarisation in our society , cohesion policy targets social exclusion , in particular the integration of vulnerable communities and groups , and it will remain a cohesion policy goal in the future .
It is also true that problems identified in the report are at the frontier between territorial cohesion , on the one hand , and social cohesion challenges on the other , and social polarisation and social segregation problems , when concentrated on some territories , become territorial cohesion issues .
We face social exclusion in the poorest territories of the European Union , but we also have pockets of social deprivation in the richest cities of the European Union .
The report calls on the Commission to present a comprehensive definition of territorial cohesion in the framework of the forthcoming Green Paper on territorial cohesion , and I can confirm that the Green Paper to be published at the end of September this year will contribute to the progress towards a common understanding across the Union of the concept of territorial cohesion .
The report also recognises that the notion of vulnerable groups and communities as such is certainly not an easy one and it should not be limited to the Roma communities only .
However , it is generally recognised that the situation of Roma communities deserves special focus in Europe .
To address the multi-faceted problems of Roma exclusion , we need an integrated approach , and Parliament discussed it in depth in January when adopting a resolution on a European strategy on the Roma .
In the package on the renewed social agenda , the Commission will present at the beginning of July its working document on Community instruments and policies for Roma inclusion .
I share the report 's opinion on the need to make greater use of the synergies and complementarities among European policies and also among various financial instruments available .
The Commission paid much attention to this when negotiating operational programmes of the cohesion policy with the national and regional authorities .
As to the issue of making available comparable intra-regional data for all regions in the European Union , with special regard to social indicators , while essential , I share the report 's view here : it is a more complex one .
As Members will be aware , Eurostat does not produce data , but manages data provided by the national statistical systems .
We have just completed the second edition of the Urban audit , covering the period up to 2004 and we clearly see how limited the availability of territorial data is below the NUTS 2 classical regional level .
To address this challenge and also using the context of preparations of the Green Paper on territorial cohesion , the Directorate General for Regional Policy worked on improving the quality of research on regional policy , including its statistical bases .
As a result , the expenditure 2000-2006 is today broken down to the NUTS 3 level , to 20 categories of expenditure at this level , and is available for Objective I regions , Objective II , Urban , Interreg and Cohesion Fund .
Rural audit is still a challenge ahead of us .
Unfortunately , I must admit today that reliable data does not yet exist on where particular excluded groups are concentrated , hence it is impossible to cross-match our newly available information on what and where cohesion policy resources are spent on with the location of such groups .
I consider that the margin of progress in this area , as it seems today , is rather in specific research , using qualitative analysis .
Once again , I thank Parliament for bringing to our attention all those important issues , and I am looking forward to the debate today .
draftsman of the opinion for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( PT ) As draftsman of the opinion for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I reiterate the need to support rural areas , including mountain regions , where women play a central role .
Their work must be valued and they must also be guaranteed decent incomes .
Well-paid productive activities and high-quality public services must be provided in order to retain young people and prevent rural depopulation .
Particular attention must be paid to family farming and to small and medium-scale farmers by reforming the Common Agricultural Policy , which is currently being done , to make it fairer , to combat the rural exodus and to support agricultural products .
I also stress the need to support all less-favoured regions , areas with permanent structural disadvantages , the outermost regions and areas subject to industrial restructuring , relocalisation and company closures in order to reinforce economic and social cohesion and the social inclusion of vulnerable communities and groups .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( RO ) Honourable President , Madam Commissioner , dear colleagues , first of all , I would like to thank the Rapporteur for the work and efforts made to conciliate different points of view .
We all agree that vulnerable groups and communities deal with many difficulties in their development and require special attention within the cohesion policy , as well as the other available financial assistance instruments .
I have supported , during all the work stages , the need to structure the report into two distinct parts : one referring to vulnerable communities , from the point of view of ethnic membership , and the second one referring to vulnerable communities determined by certain geographical handicaps .
Unfortunately , our request is not reflected into the current form of the report .
Our group has three amendments , of whose approval our vote depends , namely the elimination of recital Ee , whose content is identical to that of recital I , explaining the concept of a vulnerable area or zone by listing them , as well as eliminating paragraph 17 .
We hope we will have the Rapporteur 's approval in this respect .
Finally , I would emphasize two more ideas : the problems of vulnerable communities from any point of view , either ethnic and / or geographical , could be treated more efficiently if there were cooperation in this field between the local , regional , national and European authorities .
At the same time , the role of the educational system and the public , social and transport infrastructures is indispensable for integrating vulnerable groups and communities .
I end by specifying that our final position is conditioned , as I have already mentioned , by the acceptance of the three amendments and , especially , the elimination of paragraph 17 , which was voted in the Commission .
If these amendments are accepted , we will obviously support the report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for his work in producing the report that has been presented to us today .
I would agree that there is a need for a micro-regional based approach focusing on intra-regional disparities and on the most sensitive areas .
In some cases , intra-regional disparities play an even greater role than differences between regions .
We should remember that the objective of , and the assumption behind , European regional policy is the reduction of development differences between individual areas within the European Union , and the phenomenon of territorial exclusion has not yet been taken into consideration in policy instruments .
In the new Member States , social segregation and failures as regards the provision of equal opportunities occur most frequently in rural areas , while economic and social initiatives in the regions are concentrated on dynamic centres , principally on urban centres .
Resources to combat poverty and social exclusion vary depending on the country , but , in order to create an EU that is territorially and socially cohesive , we have to implement additional measures aimed at unleashing the potential that is latent in economically backward areas .
on behalf of the ALDE group . - ( RO ) Honourable President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the Rapporteur for his work .
The cohesion policy is vital for the communities in the underdeveloped regions and sub-regions .
The social-economic aspects , such as poverty , lack of infrastructure , administrative capacities , deindustrialization , low education and training level , high employment rate , poor living conditions , as well as reduced access to services of general interest transforms these communities into vulnerable groups , which represent an ever greater challenge for the cohesion of the European Union territories .
Thus , a relation of interdependence results , between the need to reduce social-economic disparities between regions and the need for social integration of vulnerable groups , a relation that should naturally lead to a constructive process involving a territorial approach both at a national and a European level .
Honourable President , I believe that the absence of statistics regarding the spreading of these groups and their degree of social exclusion , as well as the incapacity of the indicators for measuring inter-regional disparities to supply viable data , prove , one more time , the need for the Member States and the Commission to cooperate more closely in order to obtain a real image of the situation of vulnerable regions and groups , as well as to set up concrete programmes and strategies for territorial development and overcoming social exclusion .
I also believe that Member States should take a first step by identifying these vulnerable groups and setting their priority in the strategic national plans and , afterwards , by developing mechanisms for evaluation and monitoring .
We should not forget that , most of the time , migration is a consequence of poverty and the migration phenomenon itself generates instability and conflicts .
For this reason , honourable President , we believe that vulnerable groups should benefit , from all Member States , from social assistance , equality of opportunities and , more than that , from specific programmes allowing the development of the regions where they come from .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Harangozó for working on this difficult issue , even though this report does not look at all the issues relating to situations , persons or environments that are excluded or at risk .
Despite the fact that a considerable part of the European Union budget is allocated to the implementation of its cohesion policy , serious disparities still remain .
If , for example , we consider per capita GDP : in the wealthiest regions this is nearly 10 times higher than in the poorest regions .
We have to bear in mind that significant differences also exist within regions .
Poor districts are also to be found within large conurbations .
In addition , this is also a significant issue in many rural areas .
This poverty can pass down from one generation to the next .
Let us therefore protect children and families from this phenomenon .
What is needed here , above all , is the creation of equal opportunities , particularly with regard to education , healthcare and housing .
This will be the proof of social and territorial cohesion , which have not yet been properly defined .
The prospects of groups living in spatial , cultural and communications isolation are significantly poorer .
These are issues involving both technical and social infrastructure , as well as jobs and the creation of a climate of internal activity in these societies .
Let us help our fellow citizens , who are subject to discrimination in one way or another , so that they can regain their belief in escaping from a lowly position in society .
In addition , we must break the stereotypes that undervalue these groups .
This relates to many people who are disabled or homeless , as well as to gypsy societies that have been discussed here .
This type of segregation goes against our common solidarity and is a symptom of a failure to respect human dignity .
Let us remember that we often have to deal with families with many children , as well as immigrant families , in these types of environments .
In addition , we need a common policy for creating equality on various levels : on the regional , national and EU levels .
We also need volunteers and non-governmental organisations .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am grateful to Mr Harangozó for his attention to vulnerable groups .
Cohesion policy has been making an important contribution to improving conditions for vulnerable groups for a long time now .
Take , for example , Ireland , once a country with very vulnerable groups : very high youth unemployment , rundown towns , underdeveloped countryside , with virtually no opportunities .
For many other countries , too , social exclusion is to be replaced by employment , education and participation .
That is the direction we are going in and it is extremely successful .
My second point : I have seen it said in particular that we know too little , have too little information .
I agree that that could be improved , especially by the Member States , the regions and the towns themselves .
Mr Harangozó wonders why the life expectancy of Hungarians is 15 % lower than average life expectancy in the EU .
I do not know either , but I have visited hospitals .
Eating and drinking habits are extraordinarily bad , and the European Community can do nothing about that .
I think that for people to take responsibility themselves in the regions is one of the most important bases of our policy .
Finally , what is the underlying reason for the EPP being against NUTS 4 ?
We are against it because in 2004 we opted for strengthening of the policy up to 2013 , for more substance , more focus .
We even decided to include the whole external border , as it were , in the policy on Interreg areas on the external borders .
That tends to mean that we will be fragmenting , we will be dissipating our efforts , and that should not be the direction we take in this area in the future .
That would be a mistake .
I am therefore asking you once again to delete the article concerned .
Otherwise I accept the challenge the rapporteur has also set out , to have an intensive debate with each other about territorial cohesion with each other in the next sixth months .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by adding my thanks to the rapporteur for having taken the initiative of drafting a report stating that one of the European Union 's fundamental objectives is to reduce social , economic and regional inequalities .
The cohesion policy has made an effective contribution to reducing these inequalities , but a lot remains to be done , as discussed in the fourth report on cohesion .
There are vulnerable groups of people at risk of succumbing to social exclusion and absolute poverty in all regions , including the most prosperous .
An integrated approach is needed when addressing deficiencies in equal opportunities .
Member States and regional administrations need strategies to revitalise vulnerable areas , develop their infrastructure and promote genuine development opportunities in accordance with their specific economic potential , while maintaining services of general interest through local administrations strengthened by the decentralisation of the public sector .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the targeted , issue-specific nature of the Harangozó report represents an extremely significant move by the European Parliament to reach out to vulnerable communities and groups , and integrate them smoothly , through a European cohesion policy .
As an initiative it meets with my full approval , and I acknowledge the effort made by the rapporteur , but I beg to differ with the way the issue has been elaborated .
Certain aspects of the report still have no substance , despite the conscientious effort made by my fellow Member .
Some of these aspects deal with vulnerable communities and groups representing a broad spectrum of society and micro-communities , not just the Roma .
The European Parliament has already given its attention to this category in a special report , the scope of which should have been broader in order to cover both the social and geographical aspects .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has insisted on the usefulness of this broader approach , but has not been heeded .
The report remains one-sided and often takes a short-sighted approach to this issue .
I am bearing in mind the mountain and island regions especially , as no-one can doubt the vulnerability of their communities .
They are not mentioned anywhere in the report .
I do not approve of constantly avoiding definitions or specific references to things and situations .
Let me also point out that vulnerable communities and groups exist not only at inter-regional but also at intra-regional level .
They need material and technical support , technological and scientific know-how , education , training and an administrative base .
There should be an emphasis on decentralising the public sector and extending transport networks .
Here , too , voluntary action might play an important role in these groups and might contribute towards activating and demarginalising them .
Despite the rapporteur 's undoubted effort , I cannot say that the overall fabric of the report is satisfactory .
It is notable for its ambiguities and lack of clear organisation in its sections .
If we wish to contribute towards solving the problems faced by vulnerable groups , the texts we prepare must be clear-cut and explicit and must take a global view of the issue .

Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleague Mr Harangozó on his own-initiative report .
Special attention to vulnerable groups under the EU 's cohesion policy means we have not forgotten that the main priority of this policy is to contribute to the well-being of our citizens .
The regional dimension of this issue is clear .
Nevertheless , in order to be able to identify the specific needs and location of the vulnerable groups , it is necessary to analyse the development strength of the small territorial units .
Although we could find that vulnerability is a problem at lower levels - in the poorest regions , for example - it has a bearing on the whole territory and touches upon all social categories living there .
That is why the policy , strategy and actions to address the problems of vulnerable groups must be comprehensive , based on a common approach on behalf of our institutions at European , national and local level .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to congratulate Gábor Harangozó on the excellent job he has done and for his thoughts on this complex and delicate subject .
I wanted to play an active part in the opinion drafted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on this report , for the most vulnerable people are often concentrated in the least developed rural areas and in areas with permanent natural disadvantages , which means that agriculture and rural development policy have a major role to play there .
Cohesion policy must , in my view , seek to maintain income-generating agricultural and non-agricultural activities in rural areas , in order to maintain a population that is often tempted by rural exodus , but also to welcome new arrivals .
It is important to promote family farming , which creates jobs , and equal access to public services as also the provision of public services in order to respond to the needs of disadvantaged families , communities and groups .
In short , we must make the rural environment attractive and fit to live in .
We can achieve that aim by ensuring a linkage between the various policies conducted in these areas and targeted at these fragile groups and , therefore , drawing more on the complementary nature of the various available financial instruments .

( SK ) I would like to thank Mr Harangozó for his excellent report , which deals with issues that have not been very prominent to date yet represent a dormant source of what are clearly rather significant problems .
I would like to touch upon two concrete areas covered in the report : revitalising vulnerable communities , consisting mainly of people in rural and peripheral areas , and developing the micro-regions that are lagging behind , have an irregular situation in relations to the individual countries ' specific characteristics and are almost absent from the current statistics .
Both of the above-mentioned areas are neglected due to the fact that they are not clearly identified .
We must clearly define the highly vulnerable communities ( both economically and socially ) that exist in the European Union , we must analyse the types and locations of the underdeveloped micro-regions in the EU , and we must find solutions to these problems .
They are both difficult to see against the background of the global successes of the cohesion policies .
We do not want the cohesion policies to be compared to Emmental cheese , which looks very compact on the outside .
( SK ) The report in question correctly highlights the relationship between solving social issues and regional development , and the need for Europe to show solidarity and implement the cohesion policy in this area .
Personally , I devote a lot of my time to the problems involved in supporting regions that are lagging behind , especially in Slovakia .
Preserving a strong and attractive European countryside is crucial for economic as well as cultural and ecological reasons .
I support the call to the Commission to increase , within the framework of the forthcoming Green Paper on Territorial Cohesion , the funding needed to deal with regional problems .
As part of this process , it will be necessary to ensure that the regions play an active role and to cooperate closely with the NGOs .
In this context , I would also like to say that the social activities carried out by churches and religious societies merit special praise .
I know from experience that their services on behalf of underprivileged social groups and regions are very effective and often indispensable .
Therefore , we have to see these services as an integral part of the European effort to help vulnerable groups and support them adequately at European level .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to point out that with this report we are expressing our conviction that , 20 years after it was formulated , cohesion policy must continue to bring the solidarity of the Union not only to the most disadvantaged regions and countries , but also to the most disadvantaged communities and groups among our citizens .
We must strengthen cohesion policy not only with financial resources , but also with suitable mechanisms and procedures making it possible to track down and address complex , multi-faceted social and economic disparities at local level .
The challenges faced by our regions today are such that they do not allow us to leave the problems of poverty and social and territorial exclusion unresolved .
Coordinated action is needed at all levels , as is an integrated approach , with resources and policies working together to deal with the problems .
( PL ) Mr President , at present , economic growth is concentrated around capital cities and large urban areas .
Other areas , including rural areas , develop much more slowly , and this means that they are much more susceptible to problems .
The objective of cohesion policy should be to help these areas and to support territorial cohesion .
For this it is essential to improve infrastructure , to increase the attractiveness of these areas to investors , to maintain public services and to improve housing and quality of life .
What is very important for the development of rural areas is to create communications infrastructure ; primarily this means roads , and also sewage treatment plants , as these create the necessary conditions for flows of investment and the creation of new jobs , which makes it possible for people to remain in these areas and to live decently .
To date , the Common Agricultural Policy has focused principally on food quality , food safety and competitiveness , but it has been less involved in rural development outside of the area of agriculture .
It is vital to have better coordination between cohesion policy , rural development policy and employment policy .
( PL ) Mr President , point N of the report is right to point out that poverty and exclusion have a strong territorial character .
Taking into account the principle of solidarity , which is generally respected in the European Union , together with the content of point N , I would like the allocation of resources from European funds to support the integration of economically disadvantaged areas .
Unfortunately , this year , this principle has been breached in my own country .
Funds allocated to infrastructure improvements and other aid funds are being directed mostly to wealthier areas that are already well developed .
This is often a consequence of better preparation by the persons who apply for these funds .
I hope that the document we have been considering will help to eliminate these irregularities throughout the European Union .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think this was a good discussion and I would like to thank all those who contributed to the debate , which showed that the integrated policy approach is the best way to address effectively the problem of different vulnerable communities and groups .
The link between cohesion policy and rural development policy seems particularly important here .
I also share Members ' concern that , in cases where there is a territorial concentration of problems related to vulnerable groups , a territorial approach to policy is justified .
Social inclusion should not be dissociated from territorial cohesion .
I also appreciate Members ' emphasis on intra-regional disparities .
As many Members have pointed out , developing good-quality , reliable intra-regional statistics would be of much help in this context .
As I said in my introductory remarks , the Commission intends to invest further in developing such a database .
We are now building a rural audit in the same way as we did an urban audit in the past .
Good cooperation with Member States on this issue will be essential and I count very much on Parliament 's support in this context .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank Commissioner Hübner , not only for her response to this report and to the debate , but also for the ongoing work aimed at making this policy better and more effective .
I appreciate her efforts enormously and thank her also for her frankness concerning my report .
I would like to respond to a number of questions that have been raised .
First , I think that if we take the problem seriously , then we should do as we did when we took seriously the need for the Lisbon process and the importance of ensuring implementation of the Lisbon process within cohesion policy , which led to the introduction of a system of earmarking cohesion policy funds in order to support the Lisbon process .
In the same way , we can take action to combat the territorial concentration of poverty , if we want to .
If we decide to .
I would also like to say to the PPE-DE Group , above all to Mr van Nistelrooij , that if we delete point 17 , the report would state that we agree that there are micro-regions that are unable to avail themselves of the opportunities we provide for them .
We agree that these are micro-regions , but why would we want to delete from the report the very point in which we urge the Commission to examine whether it might therefore be more effective to provide cohesion assistance to these micro-regions at micro-regional level ?
I still do not understand why we would need to do this .
I would like to say to Mrs Petre that I consider this to be a regional policy report .
A regional policy report is not the place for a discussion on ethnic groups , and I do not understand why we should be discussing ethnic groups in any case .
In the case of Romania , if we were to look at the matter from an ethnic perspective , which groups would she want me to include in the report ?
The Roma , who live in very poor circumstances in certain areas ?
The Csangos , who also live in dire circumstances in one particular area ?
Or the Romanians of the highland regions ?
We cannot decide on this basis ; we need complex indicators , a complex approach and integrated implementation .
Thank you for your attention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I would like to welcome this report by Mr. Harangozó on the impact of the cohesion policy on the integration of vulnerable communities and groups .
There is a growing voice calling for account to be taken of the difficult prospects facing districts or areas whose population has been on the periphery of decision-making and of mainstream economic development .
From my own constituency I know the difficulties facing not only disadvantaged urban areas , but also peripheral areas in the border counties of Ireland .
These rural areas frequently face difficulties in securing investment in business or infrastructure .
The ending of the " rural exodus ” mentioned in this report should be a priority for politicians .
The role of those farming on small- and medium-sized farms in sustaining rural communities is correctly spelt out by Mr. Harangozó .
Rural communities should not be demoted in the cohesion policy and a greater interlink between rural development and regional development in fighting social exclusion must be implemented .
Remoteness from communication and transport networks is a practical problem which must be tackled .
in writing . - ( PL ) Cohesion policy , on which about 33 % of the EU budget is spent , is of vital importance to all EU countries .
Poland is pleased to participate in any actions relating to the full economic integration of society in Europe and to minimise disparities at the micro-regional level .
I believe that the measures taken under the cohesion policy are fundamental to promoting sustainable development and eliminating unemployment , poverty and social exclusion , which constitute grave social and economic problems in Europe .
Cooperation between all European countries and the exchange of experiences are of particular importance in this regard .
The problems that are slowing down the EU 's sustainable development , including low incomes , poor infrastructure and low social mobility , relate principally to rural areas .
The situation is aggravated by the growing exodus of people from the countryside and the increased social exclusion in these areas .
In addition , among the problems faced by European cohesion policy at the beginning of the 21st century , are issues that are external in character , such as , for example , the growing development differences between the European Union and the USA .
In the years 1995-2005 productivity growth in Europe was much lower than in the United States or in Japan .
This has a significant effect on reducing the competitiveness of the European market .
I would like to thank Mr Harangozó for drawing these issues to our attention .
in writing . - ( HU ) In the interests of stimulating employment , growth and competitiveness , the European Union must use the enterprise and labour potential at its disposal to the fullest possible extent .
In view of the fact that most of the nearly 10 million Roma living in Europe are affected by structural and / or absolute unemployment or participate in the grey or black economy , integration of Roma people could have a decisive impact on the outcome of the Lisbon Agenda and cohesion policy .
The report notes that cohesion policy has helped the poorest regions to close the gap in their economic and social development .
Much more is needed , however , both in quantitative and in qualitative terms .
The European Commission and Member States must work towards ensuring the coordination and complementarity of the available financial resources ; European Union financial instruments , meanwhile , and primarily the European Social Fund and the European Regional Development Fund , must be deployed to support a large number of individual programmes , from providing micro-credits to businesses to investing in infrastructure development .
To ensure that these programmes are successful and that the funds reach their intended target , it will be vital to identify and eradicate obstacles of both a general and a specific nature .
Lagging regions that are battling with complex problems are unable to raise the counterpart funds necessary in order to obtain the Community assistance to which they are legally entitled .
In the case of Roma people , meanwhile , the disadvantages they face as a result of a low educational level and generations of unemployment are multiplied several times over .
Policy coherence for development and the effects of the EU 's exploitation of certain biological natural resources on development in West Africa ( debate )
The next and last item is the debate on the report by Frithjof Schmidt , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on policy coherence for development and the effects of the EU 's exploitation of certain biological natural resources on development in West Africa ( INI / 2007 / 2183 ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by translating the title of my report .
When we speak of ' biological natural resources ' , we are referring to timber and fish .
Timber and fish are the key resources for the social and economic development of the West African region .
It follows that we are also speaking of deforestation .
We all know how alarming this development is .
Of the forestry that existed in West Africa fifty years ago , only about 13 % is still standing today .
This means that 87 % of the land that was once afforested has already been cleared .
We all know what impact this has on climatic trends and the desertification process .
We have equally alarming statistics on overfishing in that area of the Atlantic and the grave problems it is creating .
We are all familiar , of course , with the images of overloaded canoes landing on the Canary Islands with cargos of migrants from West Africa .
The connection between the trends I have described and the increased migration to the European Union from West Africa is obvious and incontrovertible and is also a subject of political debate , of course , within our societies .
The European Union is the main market for timber and fish .
We ourselves say that we buy some 80 % of these products .
For this reason , it is prudent , and indeed essential , to review the coherence of our development policy , our fisheries policy and our policy on trade in timber in order to establish the extent to which they interact fruitfully or whether their aims may also be mutually obstructive in some respects .
In the case of both products there is a need to prevent illegal plundering and to establish sustainable resource management .
In the case of both products there is a need to ensure that the needs of the local economy and local consumers take precedence over international trade .
If we do not achieve these aims , any self-sustaining development will be undermined , and the success of any development cooperation will be put at risk .
That is why it is so important to conduct this coherence review in order to ensure that the other policies we pursue do not impair and undermine our development policy .
We know the instruments with which we can improve the situation .
We need better monitoring of fish stocks and forests and better surveillance of the timber and fishing industries .
We also need the establishment of the appropriate infrastructure for research into stock development and for the control and surveillance of economic activities .
We have known this for a long time , and indeed that is the political course we have been steering for some time too .
In this context we must focus our efforts chiefly on combating illegal logging , illegal fishing and trade in illegal products .
We must do that locally in West Africa .
To that end , we must support our partner countries in West Africa , which includes helping them to gain access to the EU market .
We must develop our monitoring systems .
One of the vital tasks in the realm of development policy is to redirect our efforts towards a sustainable conservationist approach to logging , forestry management and fishing .
Allow me to deal with one more point and refer to a conflict concerning the report .
We stated in the report that we must improve the conditions for joint ventures between companies in the European Union and African partners and that we must provide for the protection of investments .
I find that right and proper , and these are necessary measures , but we must ensure that they do not create excess capacities which undermine the pursuit of our other measures , such as those designed to combat overfishing .
It is absolutely imperative that we resolve this conflict of aims .
For this reason we added this statement to the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries as an additional point .
I am anxious that the procedural conflict about who is entitled to make additions to what and where and when such additions can be made should not obscure the substance of the addition .
It is of prime importance , in my view , to uphold the principle that no new excess capacities should be created .
As you know , there has been a motion to delete this point from the report , but we must not allow that to happen .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Schmidt , on this report .
Policy coherence for development is an important issue , and let me assure you that reducing the adverse effects and fully exploiting synergies between European policies and development is an integral part of our efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
Other policies apart from development policy can in fact contribute significantly to development , and this naturally has a direct impact on the effectiveness of our aid .
As you rightly state in your report , tropical deforestation is a matter of concern for us all and I consider that a distinction should be made here between two aspects : deforestation and climate change on the one hand and combating illegal exploitation of forests on the other .
In Bali , the international community clearly identified the destruction of forests as one of the main causes of climate change .
In keeping with the spirit of the UN Climate Change Conference the Commission intends to contribute EUR 5 million in 2008 to the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility , which is run by the World Bank .
An additional EUR 60 million will be earmarked up to 2010 to finance the Global Alliance against Climate Change , an initiative we launched last year to underpin the efforts of the poorest countries to adapt to climate change .
Lastly , several countries including Ghana , Cameroon , Mali , Sierra Leone and Cote d 'Ivoire have also included measures on the management of natural resources and governance of this sector in their national programmes for the 10th European Development Fund .

West Africa is also an important partner of the Union when it comes to combating the illegal exploitation of forests , as are Cameroon , Ghana , Liberia and Cote d 'Ivoire , which export considerable amounts of timber to Europe .
Two of these countries , Cameroon and Ghana , are at this very moment finalising a voluntary FLEGT partnership agreement with the Union , and Liberia should be embarking on similar negotiations very shortly .
In relation to fisheries policy , as you rightly emphasised , the new fisheries partnership agreements have brought about greater coherence between the common fisheries policy and development policy ; these new agreements are no longer confined to offering fishing opportunities to Community vessels , but also make it possible to embark on a dialogue with other partners in order to help them introduce a real sustainable and responsible fisheries policy in their waters .
In addition to the financial compensation granted under the fisheries agreements , which often contribute significantly to our partner countries ' revenue and hence to their macroeconomic stability , these agreements form an essential political and legal basis .
This enables the Community to facilitate the development of their fisheries policies on the basis of dialogue and in the light of the priorities our partners have established in their fisheries policies .
Where I cannot agree with you , however , is the statement in the report linking immigration and fisheries agreements .
Even the countries concerned - take for instance Senegal , in the person of its minister of state , Mr Djibo Ka - have publicly rejected the accusations that the presence of Community vessels is having a significant impact on resources and on the decline in profitability for non-industrial fishermen who are often the people most affected by illegal immigration .
We are indeed working with fishermen , NGOs and private partners in Europe and in these countries precisely to try and reduce as much as possible all negative interaction and unfair competition between our fishermen and the most vulnerable fishermen in these countries .
At the moment there is no European fleet competing with the non-industrial fleets of these countries in West Africa , although the same cannot be said of other foreign industrial fleets .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries . - ( ES ) First , I regret the unacceptable conduct of the Committee on Development , which is under the impression it is not subject to the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament .
It has circumvented the strengthened cooperation procedure set out in Rule 47 and corrected the Committee on Fisheries ' statements on issues that are strictly within the latter 's competence .
It has also behaved in a completely untrustworthy way from the start of this report by obstinately trying to usurp the competence of the Committee on Fisheries on the issue of Fisheries Partnership Agreements .
While the Committee on Fisheries has issued an opinion that consciously sought to be completely respectful to the sensibilities we know this issue awakens in the Committee on Development , the latter has , as it intended from the beginning , intervened in purely common fishing policy matters .
Mr President , some committee chairmen have a tendency to think they can do no wrong and that the Rules of Procedure do not apply to them , although they should be their most prominent defenders .
The result is sterile confrontation between committees that damages the credibility of the whole institution .
I hope that this case serves to stifle these temptations to abuse power and that all those who are interested in learning about the role played by the Fisheries Partnership Agreements in the development of the villages and national fisheries of West Africa can make an analysis based on a comprehensive and uncensored report .
By presenting this amendment on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , this rapporteur wants to show our willingness to get back on course , although we have announced that if the other political groups do not support the amendment , we will ask for the report to be returned to the competent committee for the fund .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Schmidt for a very thorough and detailed report .
If our development policy is really to be cohesive , then we need such detailed reports on issues relating to various aspects of development work .
Of course , cooperation with other committees needs regulation , but , if we are to speak of policy cohesion , then clarification is needed regarding how individual parliamentary committees should work together .
The analysis of the exploitation of natural resources in West Africa by the European Union provides a real , rather than a half-hearted , assessment of the role of the European Union in this African region .
We should be aware that the use of natural resources has very concrete , and , sometimes , very painful and complex social consequences .
In this context it is very worrying that fish resources in West Africa are being over-exploited , which could pose a danger for local development since these resources provide food security in this region .
It is true that African nations often do not concern themselves with sustainable use of natural resources and , if they do , then it is to an insufficient degree .
For this reason , we should view our activities in this region from both economic and ethical standpoints .
I can understand that many politicians prefer to see European fishermen on the west coast of Africa rather than in the streets of Brussels .
However , we must be careful not to act hypocritically because we cannot speak of a cohesive development policy without a sustainable fisheries economy in West Africa .
Similarly , we should not try to export our own social problems because , even if we could export them , they could well come back to haunt us in the form of migration problems .
I also have the impression that we are using a kind of blackmail on ourselves by saying that , if we take our fleets from West Africa , other fleets may take our place and they will have even worse standards than those used at present .
This is a dangerous way to think and I do not believe that we should use such arguments .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , if we fish out the sea off the coast of Mauritania , that causes the very poorest people to come to Europe as immigrants , because they can no longer see any future at home .
It is our poorest areas that have to deal with that , not the well-off areas .
Then Europe loses the support of its voters , especially those on very low incomes .
For that reason , too , cohesion policy is an absolute necessity .
It is sad in very many ways , but also entirely understandable , that Ireland has rejected the Lisbon Treaty .
The Lisbon Treaty is a real step forward for development policy .
It is the first text to establish coherence properly .
The Union should not take away from the poor countries with one hand what is given with the other .
The policy of the Union on agriculture , fisheries , trade should not run counter to development policy .
Certainly it relates to several policy areas , but this is not a question of rivalry between committees in this Parliament .
That is an unimportant detail .
The Treaty of Nice only required the Union to show itself a coherent force in the world .
That turned out not to be enough .
The agricultural policy shamelessly allowed our surpluses , such as sugar and grain , to be dumped on the world market with export subsidies .
Fortunately those are now more or less a thing of the past .
It is only in the Lisbon Treaty , though , that supporters of the poor countries can find a legal basis enabling them to safeguard solidarity with the poorest people in the world .
Ireland nevertheless voted against it .
It was mainly the people with the lowest incomes who said no , because the poorest in Europe do not identify enough with this European Union .
Too much insecurity , too many risks for them , they have to put up with the consequences of this incoherent and anti-social policy .
As the rapporteur , Mr Schmidt , has made crystal clear , the task is thus to show solidarity with all citizens of Europe and in the developing countries , whilst respecting the environment .
That is no small task .
There is a strong temptation to trade one of those solidarities against the other .
All the same , they are not opposed .
Solidarity with developing countries is necessary for genuine solidarity with people on low incomes in Europe and the rest of the world .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) When EU countries exploit the natural resources of poorer countries , they leave large footprints behind them .
Fisheries in West African waters are close to being exhausted , trade in illegal timber is destroying the environment , and the exploitation of other natural resources has proved to have huge consequences in a poor and politically unstable region .
Our activities have effects on the local population .
The report seeks more cohesion between the EU countries and wants the European Parliament to have more of a say .
But many special interests are represented in this Parliament , which means that a European aid policy is bound to fail .
The international work should be conducted by the United Nations and other organisations .
If we really want to change the world as we say , we must resort to other measures .
What the EU should do is to review and reform its own policy .
The EU must cease to subsidise failed European agriculture , end the hidden protectionism which characterises its trade policy and abandon its immoral fisheries agreements .
( PL ) Mr President , according to the resolutions passed by the European Union , most Member States concentrate their aid activities on subsaharan Africa , which also includes the states of West Africa .
This region has the greatest development needs .
Poland , too , supports the European Union 's standpoint as regards development policy and supports the realisation of the Millennium Development Goals in this region .
There is growing support in Polish public opinion for aid to developing countries .
Last year this stood at 77 % .
At the same time we are aware of the need to increase the efforts made by individual Member States to fulfil their obligations and to increase the cohesiveness and effectiveness of European development policy .
At present a very important issue , in view of the existing divisions here , is the preparation of a common standpoint of the European Union and of the Parliament for the conferences in Accra and Doha .
Africa , as a region with the largest number of developing countries , has little experience of protecting its own biological resources .
On the other hand , it is very important for Europe to have access to African mineral resources , and this is a policy that it is pursuing together with China and the Russian Federation .
It is vital for European partners to improve their commercial attractiveness and to make development aid less dependent on democratic reforms in Africa .
In particular , access to EU food markets is important to African nations .
We should give them this access , before Brazil , the USA or Australia .
What is needed is greater complementarity , cohesion and coordination in the aid programmes of the EU and of individual Member States . As regards the use of natural resources in West Africa , it is necessary to have an effective system for assessing the extent of this use , as well as better controls over it .
I would like to thank Mr Schmidt for drawing attention to all these issues .
Mr President , according to the report , timber and fish are two of West Africa 's most important resources .
As the EU is the main destination of these products , it is up to us to play a significant role in promoting their sustainable development .
The EU is now considering granting Morocco advanced status , which allows for greater trade opportunities , a deeper political dialogue and cooperation on foreign policy and security matters .
We are not opposed to this agreement in principle provided that Morocco agrees to end all human rights abuses in the illegally occupied territory of Western Sahara , that Morocco agrees to a free and fair referendum for the people of Western Sahara and that the fisheries partnership agreement is reviewed and the Saharawi population of Western Sahara are allowed to live as equal citizens of their Moroccan counterparts .
There are many reasons why Morocco is not qualified to be given advanced status .
In particular , by granting Morocco an advanced status the EU will certainly strengthen Morocco 's illegal occupation and make the political process towards a free and fair referendum more difficult .
In addition , granting advanced status to Morocco would be going against the United Nations mission to organise a referendum on self-determination in Western Sahara .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the discussion at this very late hour has clearly indicated the importance we all attach to this issue , so once again I thank Parliament for the report .
As has rightly been pointed out , timber and fish are two key products for the economic and social development of West Africa .
Let me emphasise strongly once again that ensuring that the exploitation of these natural resources is consistent with development goals must remain a priority for the European Union and for the countries of West Africa .
As I explained in my initial presentation and would like to reiterate now , the Commission is committed to this objective , and the resolution Parliament is going to adopt tomorrow will be an important contribution to our work .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , the first thing I wish to do - and this may come as a surprise in the light of her intervention - is to express my thanks to Mrs Fraga Estévez , for we personally cooperated very constructively on the report and resolved numerous problems too .
We should keep that separate from the institutional conflict which exists between the Committee on Fisheries and the Committee on Development regarding the interpretation of the Rules of Procedure .
The latter has something to do with the fact that , as a result of the ICEI study , we have been allocated the new task of performing coherence checks .
The Council decided that measures in 12 policy areas were to be checked for consistency with development policy .
These policy areas are always part of the remit of other committees . This naturally keeps causing institutional conflicts .
It is a problem , but I would nevertheless like to thank you for our good personal cooperation on the substance of the report .
Commissioner , I believe that the Commission has been on the right lines with the FLEGT process and with the new Fisheries Partnership Agreement since 2002 .
That is a sound basis for further progress , and I would like to encourage you to proceed resolutely along that path towards the promotion of sustainable development .
There is still a lot to be done here .
This sound approach must be further developed . In so doing , you can surely rely on the support of this Parliament .
Let me say one final word on the link between migration and overfishing .
I need hardly say that it is not the sole cause of migration , for which there are many reasons .
There are , however , clear indications that overfishing does play a part .
And the European Union , among others , is involved in that overfishing .
The International Organization for Migration has just provided very tangible evidence of this link in relation to Senegal .
To that extent the President of Senegal would be very ill-advised to close his eyes to the reality within his country and off its shores .
We should examine these matters more critically and address and resolve these problems together .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.05 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Decision on urgent procedure
First of all , we shall vote on the request for urgent procedure on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the period 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2012 - C6-0199 / 2008 - .
Mr Morillon has the floor to give the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries .
( FR ) Mr President , this request - some here in this House are bound to recall , Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council - relates to the fact that at the end of last year we had to renegotiate the practical arrangements for the implementation of this partnership agreement with the Republic of Mauritania .
This renegotiation required close collaboration between the Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid , Louis Michel , and Commissioner Borg , and I applaud this .
It resulted in the setting up of a Joint Committee , which has , in agreement with the Islamic Republic of Mauritania , come up with an agreement that now satisfies both parties : the European Union and the Republic of Mauritania .
That said , it is now a matter of being able to pay the emoluments due to the Republic of Mauritania from 1 August .
In agreement with all the political groups , we are asking the Commission if the vote on this report could take place not during this part-session , but during the July part-session . This is simply to allow our appointed rapporteur , Mrs Fraga Estévez , to explain the exact terms of this report to us on the afternoon of Wednesday 25 June , so we can vote on it on the morning of Thursday 26 June , therefore making it possible to put it on the agenda of our next plenary in July .
I think this should be satisfactory to all three partners and , of course , to the Republic of Mauritania .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Weber , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals - C6-0266 / 2005 - .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I am in fact delighted that we are here today and talking about the return directive , which is practically the first document that we have succeeded in producing together - Parliament and Council - in the area of migration .
Previously we have not had such an experience , and I must say that exceptionally great efforts were made , both by the Council and by Parliament , and especially by Mr Weber , in arriving at the point we are at today .
The positions that we coordinated in the Council took up a great deal of time .
We needed more than two years to coordinate certain basic principles on the basis of which we will actually be able to begin the political trialogue .
We started the political trialogue almost at the end of last year , and continued it this year , and the approach we selected and which was also supported by the rapporteur Mr Weber , for which I thank him , was that first we had a majority opinion of the Member States and attempted to harmonise texts , and only then did we seek a qualified majority in the Council for support of the text we harmonised .
Certain points were extremely difficult , or rather hard to secure , and one of the areas of extreme importance - both for Parliament and of course for the Council - is the period for which we may detain or restrict the movement of persons who arrive illegally in the territory of the European Union .
It needs to be said very clearly : just ten countries have a period of less than six months .
Just ten countries out of 27 Member States have a period of less than six months , and all the other countries will have to adjust their legislation to the period of six months , which we propose in this directive , which signifies major progress in our available options and of course in the area of restricting movement .
It also needs to be said that this has involved exceptional progress and a process of standardisation on the basis of which all countries will be bound to operate .
To date each country has operated according to its own legislation , and of course I hope very firmly that we will be able to achieve an appropriate consensus here today in Parliament , and complete a first reading and vote at first reading .
In practical terms the hardest thing of all in our talks was the issue of offering legal assistance to persons .
Here in the Council we heeded and took on the arguments and views of Parliament , albeit with great difficulty , through negotiations right up until the final day , the final negotiations relating to this point ended practically on the morning before the Council of Ministers , and we were also able in the Council of Ministers to persuade ministers to adopt the kind of rules desired by Parliament , even though this will involve a significant increase in work and also in investment of finances that individual Member States will provide .
The point is , we need to be aware that the situation of illegal migration varies greatly - from the Mediterranean , where there are major daily problems , and even more so in summer , to certain countries that are far from migratory flows and which of course can react to migration in an entirely different way .
I must say that I am of course pleased that we found compromises which will help to improve the situation for migrants , that we focused on the most vulnerable groups of migrants - families and children - and that we are providing them with significantly greater rights than in many national legislations at this moment , and this seems to me extremely significant progress and an extremely significant achievement for the negotiators from Parliament when we debated these issues .
However , I must of course say a few other things .
I must say that the compromise reached in the Council was achieved with great difficulty .
The negotiations , in which I personally , along with other ministers , was involved up until the final day , were extremely difficult and arduous , and there is now an unequivocal , firm view in the Council that this is a text that is acceptable for the Council .
Any kind of revision or amendment to this text will signify a disagreement on the part of the Council , which of course will mean non-adoption of the directive at first reading .
What are the consequences of this ?
We will not have common standards , we will not improve a situation that we all wish to improve , and the process of adopting this directive will be prolonged and dragged out significantly .
Being very optimistic , we can assume that for at least the next three years we will not succeed in coordinating a return directive , and of course in this way we will also significantly exacerbate the situation for all those for whom we could significantly improve matters .
However , that is not the only consequence if this directive is not adopted .
Another consequence is that it will affect other directives we adopt in the co-decision procedure , for which the method of negotiation such as was implemented in this procedure could be a good example and could contribute significantly to improving work primarily with directives on the green card and on certain other rights of workers that come to the European Union .
I think the path that we have mapped out is the right one and that in this way we will be able to function .
In conclusion , in view of the constructive and fruitful cooperation I would like to thank , in addition to the rapporteur Mr Weber , all shadow rapporteurs , who were present the entire time at all political negotiations , and of course the Vice-President and his staff from the Commission , who helped us on many occasions to find compromise solutions .
Mr President , I in turn would like to thank Dragutin Mate , our President-in-Office of the Council .
I would first like to say that this dossier is genuine proof that the codecision procedure works , even in the case of complex and difficult dossiers .
The European Commission recommends an integrated approach to migration , and this coherent approach requires consolidation of the legal immigration channels , the local integration of immigrants and an effective and generous asylum system .
Obviously , if we accept this regulation of the conditions of entry of third-country nationals into the European Union , we also need to provide rules that apply to those who do not meet or no longer meet the conditions .
If not , our migration policy would lose its legitimacy .
We need to recognise that there is a risk of a vicious circle here .
By doing nothing about illegal immigration , we complicate the lives of those who are at risk of being exploited by unscrupulous employers and we also complicate the integration of legal immigrants .
I therefore believe that we have to break this vicious circle through the balance which Mr Mate spoke of .
The directive introduces into Community law the applicable provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights .
Its adoption will allow us to apply the Community control mechanisms aimed at monitoring compliance with the acquis .
Whether it is a question of the priority given to voluntary return , the rights of illegally staying persons threatened with return , the retention of these conditions , the protection of the best interests of children , respect for family life within the framework of return or respect for the principle of non-refoulement , the directive reduces the number of grey areas and makes it possible to combat more effectively the exploitation of children to which illegally staying third-country nationals are subject .
The directive imposes on Member States the obligation either of making the decision to repatriate or of offering the right to stay to a third-country national .
This approach means that legal certainty can be improved for all concerned .
The directive therefore also has the advantage of offering the Commission the possibility of monitoring its implementation and I can assure you that the Commission and I myself , as the person responsible for this dossier , will ensure compliance with the fundamental principles as regards respecting migrants ' rights .
In particular , we will evaluate the impact of certain provisions on detention , the ban on re-entry and legal assistance .
As Mr Mate said , the directive will force all Member States to pay particular attention to the rights of children .
The implementation of these rules should comply with the European Convention on Human Rights and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child .
The Commission will be monitoring this in particular to ensure that the specific situation of these most vulnerable people is adequately taken into account .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to extend particular thanks to Mr Weber , as well as to the shadow rapporteurs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for the extremely important work that has been done in order to produce a directive that I believe provides effective control while paying great attention to human rights .
The Commission 's ambition is to introduce this coherent European framework for a return policy that is both effective and respectful of rights , and is also under democratic control .
If you will allow me , by way of conclusion I will refer to the three statements that make up the compromise agreed with the co-legislators as set out in the annex to the compromise amendment by your rapporteur , Mr Weber .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vice-President , we have been debating this Directive on returning illegally staying third-country nationals for two and a half years now .
Before going into practical matters , I would like to express my thanks .
This was a complex and very emotional topic that many people in Europe feel very strongly about , and it involved using a new procedure , the codecision procedure , so thank you .
Within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs we had the support of a large majority for our suggestions for a solid , workable proposal .
As a parliament , we are capable of reaching consensus .
Thank you for working together fairly and thank you also to the Slovenian Presidency of the Council because , in the entire two and a half years , it was the only Presidency that really brought any momentum into the debate .
Now to the point : we are not talking about asylum , as people keep on claiming .
The Asylum Directive is quite another legislative matter .
We are talking about people who are currently in Europe illegally - millions of people staying illegally in Europe , whose illegal status we want to change .
The slavery that exists in this area today must be brought to an end in the European Union .
This can be done by legalisation , by issuing a legal residency permit , but it can also be done by returning the person to their own country .
Today I would like to address those in this Chamber who are still sceptical , those who are still asking questions .
Accusations have been made in connection with the duration of the period of detention pending removal : six months , which can be extended by a further 12 months .
People say there are countries that have 30 days , or 40 days .
The Council of Ministers has undertaken not to use the Directive as an argument for allowing conditions to deteriorate ; in other words , high standards should be maintained .
Why does nobody see that we have nine Member States in the European Union that currently have no limit to the detention period ?
We are improving the situation in these states .
Why does nobody see that we have written a whole section , a whole article especially for children and families , in order to set minimum standards ?
It particularly serves unaccompanied children , who are especially in need of our help .
We have defined minimum standards here .
Why does nobody see the requirement to guarantee access to health care and access to education for children ?
Why does nobody see the key statement expressed by the period of detention pending removal , which is that we want to keep it as short as possible and that a person may be detained only if a return is legally possible ?
This means that the tactic of wearing down the authorities that is currently practised will be prohibited in the European Union in future .
Why does nobody see that we have legal aid , that the NGOs have access , that there is the right to lodge an objection ?
This Directive represents major progress .
We have limited the countries to which people can be removed .
The European Parliament has enforced the principle of voluntary departure , so that what does not currently exist in all Member States will , in future , be a principle .
I read in the newspapers that the Council of Europe has made criticisms .
All the Council of Europe 's guidelines on return are now included in this Directive and will therefore achieve force of law in future , so why is the Council of Europe criticising its own guidelines ?
We are making great progress with this Directive , including on the five-year re-entry ban .
Please - think back . It was the Commission that proposed the requirement for a five-year re-entry ban to be declared .
We managed to have that requirement deleted .
As the European Parliament , we were able to ensure that a better regulation is now in place .
There will be a lot of criticism here again today .
Many Members will rise to speak and will describe how dreadful the detention centres are , how dire the situation is inside these centres , how inhumane return by the European Union is these days .
We have discussed this for two and a half years now , and I thank you for the exchange of views , but today I say bluntly : if you vote against this Directive , if you vote against this trialogue result , you are preventing the European Union from making any progress in improving the standards of these human rights .
Therefore , I would ask , please , that we show ourselves capable of acting .
Particularly in the light of the fact that the citizens of Ireland have rejected the further expansion of Europe , we have the opportunity with this dossier , in this topical area , to show for the first time , thanks to codecision , that we are capable of acting , and that we want a strong , humanitarian Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to start by offering my sincere congratulations to my colleague Mr Weber .
This proposal for a directive is a strong and decisive step towards the common immigration policy that we need .
The directive is an essential legal instrument for safeguarding the fundamental rights of immigrants and a prerequisite for making progress in regulating legal immigration .
The proposal establishes the voluntary return of immigrants who are staying illegally in the Member States as a priority preferred objective , providing them with the necessary resources to ensure that they are returned to their countries in an appropriate way and at no cost to them .
The alternative of forced return is considered as a last resort , and always with strict respect for fundamental rights .
Legal and language assistance for immigrants and the opportunity to appeal against the return decision before a judicial or administrative body created for that purpose are examples of how the proposal has sought to make forced return subsidiary to voluntary return .
Establishing a maximum detention period is an essential element of the directive .
It is hard to understand how in the European Union today there can be places where immigrants can be detained indefinitely , but no Member State can use the directive to tighten up their immigration laws , especially with regard to detention periods .
In addition , there is a clear distinction between return and asylum .
Clear legal guarantees are established regarding the detention order .
The new Article 15a establishes more and better conditions for minors and their families and , finally , the directive offers the possibility of the Court of Justice having competence in this field .
For all these reasons , Mr President , and once again appreciating the efforts of the rapporteur , the Council and the Commission , I ask for the return directive to be supported .

Mr President , today we are debating one aspect of the introduction of a European immigration policy and there is already one observation we wish to make : here we are , constructing a Europe closed in on itself , despite the fact that to try to combat illegal immigration we should be setting up tools that allow migrants to arrive legally .
My group does not accept the compromise that the Presidency and the rapporteur laboriously arrived at , not because we are opposed to a European return policy but because we feel that the result is very inadequate as regards protecting fundamental rights .
In fact , we have always said we are in favour of a return directive because we have witnessed too many horrors on our visits to detention camps .
However , we do not want a directive at any cost .
I have heard it said that this directive would allow people to come out from underground .
This is a serious misunderstanding since this directive merely lays down rules for organising returns and under no circumstances does it give the right to stay .
The rapporteur feels this compromise is balanced because it confers a number of rights .
However , these rights conferred by the text , such as access to education for minors and access to legal aid , are not really mandatory .
Furthermore , the directive will not bring about improvements as regards detention in the European Union .
For example , bringing the detention period to eighteen months appears to be an improvement in nine of the twenty-seven Member States .
However , of these nine Member States , three will not be affected - the United Kingdom , Ireland and Denmark - because they are not participating in this directive .
There will be few improvements in countries such as Malta , where the majority of those in detention are asylum seekers , who are not covered by the directive .
Greece 's detainees are mainly people intercepted illegally crossing an external border .
These people are also excluded from its scope .
That is why the Socialist Group in the European Parliament tabled a limited number of amendments aimed at establishing a human dimension to this text .
This is the first codecision of the European Parliament on the fight against illegal immigration and that is why we have a duty , as MEPs , to champion clear legislation that is not subject to different interpretations by Member States or rulings by the Court of Justice .
That is also why I am calling on the European Parliament to make use of every legislative power at its disposal to allow the adoption of legislation that will improve the lot of detainees .
That is our duty as MEPs .
This will not excuse us from thinking about a wider , more philosophical question : does the Earth belong to all human beings ?
Should some of these people really be assigned to living in poverty ?
Do you not think that is the real issue ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , negotiations with the Council have been long , intensive , complicated and tough .
The starting point for most Member States was : ' How do we get rid of this directive , as we do not want any European standards on the return of illegally staying third-country nationals ? ' .
Clearly Council and Parliament had a very different understanding of what should be a serious return directive with sufficient safeguards .
Parliament had to fight for each and every single word and comma .
To everybody , and to the PSE Group in particular , it should by now be crystal clear that the compromise package puts in rules where none exist at present .
Member States with more favourable conditions in place should maintain these , or introduce them if they wish to do so .
National parliaments have a role to play to ensure this in the implementation of the directive .
Moreover , we also secured a political declaration from the Council that this directive will not and cannot be used as an excuse to lower existing standards .
Experiences with 10 other asylum and migration directives do show that the fear that there is a tendency among Member States to use the transposition of such directives as a pretext for making their national law more repressive does not materialise .
At present , no EU legislation exists as regards the return of illegally staying third-country nationals .
With the adoption of the package , Community control mechanisms will become available .
Infringement procedures , competence of the European Court of Justice , Commission reporting , EP monitoring : all these will be available .
Three years of debate have shown that there is no more room for manoeuvre and it is obvious that at second reading no further improvements will be made .
Yes , it is unfortunate , I admit , but it is true .
Council will start tabling a list with many ' no-go ' proposals .
Pandora 's Box will indeed be opened .
Clearly the current political climate in most Member States will not be of any help .
So how to put in place common minimum rules where none exist at present ?
How to make sure that Community control mechanisms will be available ?
How to make sure that COE guidelines are made legally binding for all Member States ?
At this stage , the fundamental question is : do we want a directive or not ?
Do we want a directive which is not perfect but undoubtedly a first step in the right direction , or do we not want a directive at all as we consider the current situation to be satisfactory ?
Even now , many Member States would be relieved if the directive died out due to Parliament 's fault .
So , what an irony that those Members of Parliament trying to break up the compromise package are effectively supporting those Member States not wanting to have any European safeguards on return in the first place !
The compromise package should be seen as a very modest but important first step .
The return policy cannot be looked upon in an isolated way , but should be seen as a necessary part of a total package on migration , including legal , as well as asylum .
Indeed , in my view , after almost three years of debate and negotiations , it is high time to take up our responsibility .
( Applause )

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to start by expressing thanks to the rapporteur on this issue for the integrity and openness with which he has approached the questions .
I should also like to thank our colleagues , where we have tried our best to find a common approach , recognising the need to treat people as individuals in the process of return and the need for due process and clarity in the law .
Discussions with the Council have shown clearly the shortfalls existing in some Member States for their own citizens at present , especially in relation to legal aid - crucial if people are to have access to the law and some defence against those who have the power - and also where effective systems are not in place to adequately represent lone children and young people in their own right .
This has created certain problems in the discussions with the Council .
I regret that , after such long negotiations , my group cannot accept the negotiated position because , while we do not object in theory to such a directive , it certainly does not meet the standards that we set at the beginning .
Why not ?
Because for us it entrenches many of the problems we have been fighting in our own Member States .
One of the issues is the length of detention .
While the proposed directive puts limits on that , we know what long periods of detention do to the mental health of individuals and to children who are detained .
We have seen it for ourselves , and the research is there .
We have seen the conditions in which many people are kept and while the proposed directive makes clear that detention centres should not be prisons , it is not always clear to us what the difference is between those centres and prisons .
We also have questions about the entry ban , and Article 9 makes clear it should be the general rule for anybody who is returned involuntarily .
So Member States signing up will have to answer questions like that of one my constituents , Serwa Nouri Yousef , who has refugee status , who is now eight months pregnant and whose husband has been forcibly returned to Iraq and is now missing .
Under this directive he would also face an entry ban .
So what happens to family life , despite the claims to humanitarian protection ?
We also have questions surrounding Article 3 ( c ) about where people should be returned to , and feel that , if the reference to ' other arrangements ' includes the metaphorical handshakes that we have seen in the past between Mr Berlusconi and Gadafi , this is unacceptable as such accords are made outside of written public agreements .

Mr President , the problem we are discussing here today has to a large extent been triggered by EU Member States .
If we look at the speeches made by representatives of certain political parties represented here , it emerges that these circles have in the past called for a law enabling the liberalisation of the regulations on the entry of people from outside Europe .
Today , too , we often hear voices in this House calling for legal regulations that strike at the traditional family , or at the Christian traditions of Europe .
All we need to do is wait a few more years , and we shall be hearing mass calls and resolutions summoning us to save the identity of our continent , as what once made Europe an example to the whole world is dying out .
The suggestion included in the proposal relating to the setting-up of new offices to deal with returns is not the way forward .
These tasks should be implemented within the framework of functioning institutions that have in any case already been expanded .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this directive is a disgrace and an insult to Europe 's legal culture .
It is totally unacceptable and liable to cancel out the culture of welcome we have had for thousands of years , and the deep roots of a European identity that has been forged through the practice of hospitality .
The directive is yet another monument to Fortress Europe , the materialisation of a reactionary utopia seeking to obstruct the freedom of movement of men and women .
The right to mobility cannot be checked by shutting men and women up behind barbed wire or inside a foul detention centre .
Mr Mate , we are talking about 18 months - the maximum detention period - not 6 months , as you said .
That is 18 months without having committed any crime !
I would like to refer to the words of Archbishop Agostino Marchetto of the Council of Migrants of the Italian Episcopal Conference , when he said that a person cannot be detained for a mere administrative infringement and also that persons cannot be kept in inhuman and degrading detention centres such as those visited by this Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Furthermore , this directive is an inhumane directive because it makes provision for return to a country of transit .
Libya is likely to become a mass deportation destination for migrants .
It makes provision for the detention and expulsion of unaccompanied minors , it lays down a re-entry ban , thus systematically infringing the right to asylum , and provides for discretionary legal aid .
That is the true nature of this directive .
What is more , the directive is being imposed by governments .
In this Chamber we have been party to the dictatorship of the Council , which has said to Parliament : ' like it or lump it ' , even issuing threats against the idea of any sort of continuation of the debate on immigration .
The European Parliament is passively submitting to this decision .
I appeal to the dignity of European Parliament .
This is not co-decision .
What we are looking at is giving assent to the Council .
The truth is that governments want to activate immediately the EUR 700 million allocated by the Return Fund .
That is the true nature of the directive .
What we ought to do , though , is to listen to society , to those outside this Parliament , the heads of state of third countries , Amnesty International , the churches , the European Episcopal Conferences , the trade unions and the Council of Europe : all of them are telling us not to adopt this directive .
Even the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , which according to the Treaty of Amsterdam should be consulted on all matters relating to asylum and immigration dealt with by the European Commission , is telling us not to adopt this directive .
Repressive policies like these are the real cause of the European Union 's greatest tragedy : deaths at sea .
Yesterday 150 died , and over the last ten years there have been 12 000 such deaths .
The European Union is staining itself with an unacceptable crime and this directive makes it further complicit in these killings that have turned the Mediterranean into a graveyard .
It would probably be a good idea , as a tribute to these martyrs , not to adopt this directive .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) When all the doors are closed , you can always find a way in at the back .
Each year many thousands of people try to get into the EU , which is building higher and higher walls around its territory .
These attempts are becoming more and more desperate , and the media regularly report on how many have paid with their lives .
Today 's debate is about those who have succeeded in getting in , whom we are now want to throw out .
Many human rights organisations criticise the proposed directive , including Caritas and Amnesty International .
We must listen to their warnings , since the proposed directive breaches human rights .
No European added value is created when we decide that persons who have not committed any crime can be detained for up to 18 months .
Longer periods of detention will not result in more people returning .
It is merely an inhumane and expensive solution to a complex problem .
The consequence of a ban on re-entry to the EU for up to five years will be an increase in illegal immigration .
Desperate people are forced to turn to people traffickers , and we shall read more and more of the misfortunes befalling refugees , which in turn will feed hatred towards our part of the western world .
The human rights organisations have warned us .
It is now up to us to put our foot down and defend human rights , and to do it at national level !
( NL ) Mr President , the seriousness of the situation regarding the total lack of firm action against the scourge of the millions of illegal immigrants in Europe has become clear from the hysterical reactions to this Returns Directive on the part of politically correct left-wing opinion-formers .
I am sorry , but this is not a returns directive .
It even obliges Member States to provide free legal assistance to illegal immigrants to contest their expulsion .
In addition , at least seven Member States are obliged to shorten their detention periods .
Furthermore , the Directive actually puts the two options - expulsion and regularisation - on more or less the same level , as though it were a case of a neutral choice , whereas the mass regularisations carried out in various Member States in recent years have acted as a massive pull factor and also placed a heavy burden on the other European countries .
In summary , I wish this were a real returns directive , which would stop the pull factor for illegal immigrants once and for all , but unfortunately it is not .
I am far from convinced that this will be even an initial small step in the right direction .

( MT ) I would like to start by congratulating my colleague Mr Weber on his very useful work on this legislation , this compromise that we have managed to reach .
Mr President , the result of last week 's referendum in Ireland shows that the people feel that the European Union is not addressing their worries sufficiently , and if we also look at the ongoing surveys , like Eurobarometer , for example , we find that immigration is among the greatest worries of EU citizens ; EU citizens want more of Europe , not less , but the answer that we have given so far is not good enough .

Therefore , the European Union will not be taken seriously in the field of immigration if it does not show that it is capable of giving a clear and effective answer in this field .
What is this directive 's point of departure ?
The point of departure is that it applies to anyone in a state of illegality .
If you are in a state of illegality , the answer can only be that you need to go back to where you came from .
That is the aim of this legislation , and anyone voting against it will be saying and sending out the message that illegality can stay and we can accept it .
This is not and should not be acceptable .
For those who have to be sent back , this compromise puts forward a series of conditions , which vary according to detention , treatment , use of force , health services , and other factors .
What we have before us is a compromise . It is not perfect , but it is a good compromise to take us forward .
We want to show that we are capable of giving an answer on this compromise .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to address the Council , because it is not our directive or the Commission proposal that we are debating , but the way in which the Council has emptied it of all meaning .
This directive reflects the common direction that the debate on immigration is taking in Europe .
The fact that it has been unanimously approved by the Council does not diminish but heightens the message it represents .
It is a message that speaks to us of a Europe built on the principle of mistrust .
The issue is not the advisability of a directive that creates a joint , shared system .
The issue is what this directive lays down .
The day after the death of 150 illegal immigrants who drowned in the Mediterranean , you are asking us to tell the survivors that from tomorrow those who , like them , are already in our countries will be faced with a provision stipulating up to 18 months of detention .
We are approving a devastating legal principle that provides for the possibility of depriving an individual of liberty for up to 18 months through an administrative measure and without any crime having been committed .
What we would never tolerate in our countries if it were applied to a European citizen , we permit and support for illegal immigrants .
The 18 amendments that restore signs of political civilisation to this measure , tabled by our group , are an attempt to restore dignity in legislative terms to a provision that we believe to be humiliating not only for the European Union but also for our Member States .
If they are not adopted , there will be many votes against this , including mine , Mr President .
I do not believe that there is a broad consensus , Mr Weber .
There is no consensus on the discretion and judgment that we are giving our countries regarding the way in which the most significant points of this directive will be dealt with .
This Parliament is not the guardian of abstract rules .
It is a Parliament to which the treaties attribute the duty to protect specific principles , specific principles relating to the law and political civilisation .
The Council is asking us to renounce these principles in order to move swiftly .
We believe that on this point there is a fundamental mistake .
Here you are not asking us to move swiftly , you are asking us to make the wrong move : wrong for immigrants , wrong for Europe , wrong for our Member States , and it is a responsibility that we do not wish to share with you .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that today we are debating a very delicate issue - one on which Parliament is divided - and at the same time a very sensitive , if not tragic issue , since it can potentially have fundamental consequences for the conditions of existence and even the lives of those seeking to come to Europe , even if illegally , in search of a future that their country cannot offer them .
I will not repeat what other speakers have already said , but I would like to highlight four particular points .
The first is aimed at my colleague and friend , Giusto Catania .
It is unjust , Giusto , to speak of Fortress Europe as if it let no one on to its territory and as if it were insensitive to the poverty of millions of people .
According to official figures , there are now between 1.5 and 2 million immigrants entering the European Union legally each year , either through regularisation , family reunification or recognition as political refugees .
It means that if we continue at this rate for the next 30 years - and I have no objection to that - between 45 and 60 million people will enter the European Union legally .
Secondly , this directive , despite its inadequacies , and I accept that it has some , is not a regulation . In fact , it is practically a framework directive , which leaves each Member State room for manoeuvre in its assessments - apart from the minimum standards it fixes and the limits it sets that cannot be exceeded - and it offers each Member State the possibility of having legislation that corresponds to what the democratic majority in these countries decides .
The directive also states that the Commission should report to Parliament every three years and that the Commission may propose amendments .
Read the directive !
Thirdly , and I am talking to some of my socialist friends here , we need to stop broadcasting major untruths .
The directive does not establish detention as the rule .
Article 14 of the directive provides for the possibility of detention in specific cases and it also puts extremely tight legal controls on them .
Just read Article 14 , paragraph 2 .
Saying that detention is the rule , and that it is imposed on the Member States , is simply not true .
You should not stir up public opinion .
There are enough real problems , without coming up with problems that simply do not exist .
My fourth and last comment , Mr President , is a message for Mr Weber and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Despite all the deficiencies , which I acknowledge are there , I will be voting for the directive . However , I would ask the PPE-DE Group not to try to use procedural manoeuvres to settle issues that are in essence political and that could divide Parliament .
Whichever way Parliament votes this morning , I think it should be respected .
( FR ) Mr President , there is something that is really bothering me .
Why did the rapporteur , Mr Weber , decide to deny the European Parliament 's powers by doing his utmost to get us to adopt at first reading a Council common position - moreover one that was basically unacceptable - at a time when we are having difficulty convincing citizens of the value of giving the European Parliament strengthened powers ?
You must explain this decision to me , Mr Weber .
I really hope that tomorrow we will all live up to the expectations of European citizens and show that we are safeguarding the protection of human rights and the values of the European Union .
Why ?
I do not think we can accept that unaccompanied minors may be locked up and expelled to countries where they have no family , no ties and no legal representative .
This is an absolute violation of respect , in all circumstances , for the best interests of the child .
Nor do I believe we can accept migrants having to suffer the traumatic and destructive conditions of 18 months ' detention when they have not committed any crime .
This is an excessive deprivation of liberty , described as such by the case law of the European Court .
Nor can we accept migrants being returned at the whim of re-entry agreements to countries where they have no ties and where , Mr Weber and Mr Deprez , we have no means of guaranteeing their physical or psychological safety .
We have no way of guaranteeing the principle of non-refoulement , even if it is writ large in your text .
I therefore call upon all Members to reject tomorrow what is actually only an extension of the repressive , near-sighted policies of the Member States .
Europe needs a different ambition for international immigration .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , making expulsions secure and discouraging illegality and exploitation : that , in brief , is , in my view , the aim of the ' return ' directive .
I would therefore like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work , which laid the groundwork for the compromise reached with the Council .
The text is balanced , and is based on some fundamental assumptions : finally giving ourselves a common immigration policy .
We have been talking about it for a long time - too long .
It means equipping ourselves with common rules , which are vital for fully protecting the rights of legal immigrants , who constitute a very positive resource , provided that an implacable line is taken against illegal immigration .
There are some other distinctive points that I particularly wish to stress : in the first instance , voluntary return is promoted ; faster deadlines are set for return in the case of risk of escape or danger posed by the individual and , above all , a fixed timetable is finally laid down for the period for staying in detention centres in order for all the requisite checks to be made .
This is not an insignificant achievement .
I would like to point out that , up until now - as many of my fellow Members have already said - every Member State was free to decide whether or not to impose a time restriction on length of stay .
Also , special attention should be paid to human rights , particularly for vulnerable individuals and especially for minors , on the grounds of the best interest of the child .
This is a revolutionary point , that takes due account of what actually happens in detention centres .
Finally , the ban on re-entry valid throughout the EU : I see these as common , fair and transparent rules that could form part of a strategy , or of a pact for integration as the next President-in-Office of the EU has termed it , that would see controls at the Union 's external borders stepped up , that would draw up a new policy on asylum , that would give renewed impetus to diplomatic collaboration , but also and above all to development cooperation with third countries .
Finally , on a European code for the integration of legal immigrants , Europe should shoulder its responsibilities , it should be authoritative and credible , it should become a Europe of rights and rules that are complied with .
We have a duty to adopt this text which , of course , could be further improved .
Everything can be improved upon .
In any event , the Member States can do so , but after three years it would be awful to block it for further months or years , in order to find another , infinitesimal compromise that in any case would always be considered a step backwards .
While we live in our golden world , which is actually made up of infinite compromises , there are so many people who are being exploited , who are dying in cruel and inhuman ways , as happened yesterday in Italy .
Let us , please , have more responsibility and fewer words !
( SV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Friday is World Refugee Day , when attention will be focused on the situation of refugees across the world .
To approve Mr Weber 's report would be a cynical step in the wrong direction , which is why the GUE / NGL Group will vote against the report .
We are opposed to the building of ' Fortress Europe ' .
The consequence of the proposals in Mr Weber 's report is that the EU will not only build ever higher walls against refugees , but will also lock the gates and throw away the key .
Instead of undermining human rights , the EU countries should work to restore the right of refugees under the Refugee Convention to the provision of legal means of getting into Europe and to the assurance of at least an elementary degree of respect for human rights .
Neither the citizens of third countries nor those of Member States should be subjected to infringements of personal freedom or be given custodial sentences for administrative offences .
Mr President , this proposal would make it much more difficult for Member States to remove illegal immigrants and return them to their own countries .
To what extent will it affect the United Kingdom and particularly my constituency , London ?
London already bears a disproportionate burden of legal and illegal immigrants and asylum seekers .
It is stated that Britain has not opted into this area of Community law and the inference is that it will not affect us - but is that true ?
Once illegal immigrants have been allowed to stay in Member States , they can then travel to other EU Member States .
They could only be excluded on the grounds that they pose an actual threat to security , public health or public policy .
And who in the UK , I wonder , is going to enforce that ?
The British immigration and asylum systems are in total chaos .
If Britain indeed is opted out of this legislation , then European illegal immigrants may not have entry by the front door , but this proposal gives them the key to the back door .
Then of course there is the whole issue of the Lisbon Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Human Rights .
Could human rights legislation be used to enforce parts of this proposal in Britain ?
Who knows ?
For that will be decided not by the British Government or Parliament or courts , but by the European Court of Justice .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take the opportunity to protest against the unwise and inexplicable words of Vice-President Barrot , yesterday , concerning the possibility of considering illegal immigration to be an aggravating factor in criminal offences , as proposed by the Italian Government .
I do not think this has any basis in the law and certainly it would not meet with a favourable reception from the public .
On the Weber report , I would like to say that I think illegal immigration should be considered as ipso facto presenting the possibility that people will abscond .
It is fairly clear that an immigrant , since he enters a country illegally , has a liability to abscond .
I would also like to say that it is necessary for the Commission and this Parliament to consider the importance , in the last analysis , of making those countries from which these immigrants come - such as Libya in the case of Italy - pay .
They should pay the huge costs that illegal immigration is creating at the moment .
Mr President , Mr Weber truly deserves to be congratulated and thanked for his hard work in dealing with a complex , emotive and sensitive subject .
The aim of the returns directive is to bring in basic common standards on how to treat illegal immigrants .
Special emphasis has been placed on the human rights aspects of this case .
We are fully aware that many illegal immigrants are victims twice over .
Firstly , they are cheated in their home country , often handing over their life savings and more to ensure passage and work in the European Union .
However , rather than finding a land of plenty , they find themselves modern-day slaves in Europe .
If caught within the Union they are frequently incarcerated , and until this directive comes into force could find themselves detained for long periods of time while their case is dealt with .
Under the directive , voluntary returns will be encouraged ; incarceration will be permissible only in cases where there is a clear threat of the illegal immigrant absconding and in other justified cases .
Maximum periods of detention are set , legal protection - especially of particularly vulnerable groups - is enhanced and NGOs will have access to the much-criticised detention centres , which will open them to greater scrutiny , as well as ensuring additional services and support for the detainees themselves .
I have a suggestion to my colleagues who have spoken against this directive : this week after the vote , rather than standing up and explaining to an emptying Chamber why they voted against , maybe they would care to explain directly to those illegal immigrants without protection in many states , those detained indefinitely without access to legal assistance .
Maybe they can tell them that they voted against the directive because they had their best interests at heart .
( EL ) Madam President , I am very deeply concerned that for three years the Council of Ministers has been blocking progress by haggling over provisions .
These provisions concern the protection of fundamental rights , including those of illegal immigrants , and should be considered non-negotiable .
Something is therefore going very wrong with some European governments .
In Europe , it should be a non-negotiable requirement that nobody can be detained for 18 months , especially when it is not because of something they have or have not done , but because authorities in their country of origin , through no fault of their own , are refusing to cooperate with the procedure for their deportation .
It should be a non-negotiable requirement that when the ultimate repressive measure of imprisonment is decreed for any of our wretched fellow human beings , they must , without any exceptions or loopholes in the law , at least have the right to legal aid and to a judge 's decision on their imprisonment .
It should be a non-negotiable requirement that unaccompanied minors should not be deported to third countries .
If they cannot ultimately safely return to their countries , let us keep these children ourselves and protect them here in Europe .
At the same time , European solidarity should be equally non-negotiable .
Those countries , particularly in the south , that have the largest influxes of immigrants ought to receive substantial financial assistance from other countries to enable them to guarantee the aforementioned human rights .
Vague declarations of probable future support from the Commission are not enough .
However , despite the serious efforts of the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs in Parliament , none other than these self-evident requirements have become bargaining points in the Council .
The end result has obviously been to some extent positive , at least with regard to countries that do not at present offer any protection .
On some key points , however , the same countries have imposed on the others a ' lowest common denominator ' compromise .
In many respects , it is extremely problematic and ambiguous because its enforcement is left to the discretion of governments which , Mr Deprez , have shown a lack of sensitivity on their part .
This is a harmonisation that ultimately does not harmonise or conform to the basic European principles and values .

( DE ) Madam President , my thanks also to the rapporteur , Mr Weber , although he might like to overlook me and particularly my colleague Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , who , together with the other rapporteurs , have pushed this difficult process forward over the last three years through rough seas and into calm waters .
At this point I would just like to be allowed to say that I find it mischievous and dishonourable for people to link the tragedy of deaths in the Mediterranean with this Directive , as , realistically , they have nothing to do with each other .
This must not be allowed !
This Directive creates legal certainty for people where there is none .
The lot in life of people currently living in undignified conditions , who do not know when they are going to be returned to their countries , and do not have access to judicial authorities , will be improved .
It sets minimum standards for 27 Member States , and for one third of the Member States , which have no standards at all , this is better than the current situation .
It is the first step towards an urgently needed common asylum policy and Europe-wide respect for human dignity .
I believe that everyone who wants to take that step with us should take that responsibility seriously and vote in favour of this report .
( FR ) Madam President , echoing the previous speaker , I remain personally attached to the old European idea of harmonisation while improvement is being made : that is to say , harmonisation upwards .
Consequently , I wonder why alignment with the most protective rules is being rejected for these people in difficulty .
I think it should be pointed out that Council declarations are not legally binding and that if we are so aware of a risk of alignment downwards , then we should include a legal mechanism in the body of the directive itself .
I also think that to help countries in difficult circumstances - particularly financially - in terms of legal aid , a European Solidarity Fund is required and should be set up .
There is a second comment I would like to make on the procedure .
Mr Barrot , we have here a twisted codecision procedure .
I am one MEP among 780 .
This is the only time today when I have the chance to speak and to table amendments , and if we do not want detention to be the rule , then , Mr Deprez , you should read Amendments 82 and 95 , which specify , for example , what is meant by risk of absconding .
Read the amendments and vote for Amendments 79 and 98 , which specify the conditions under which unaccompanied minors can be expelled from European Union territory .
The amendments tabled aim to improve the text and I think Parliament cannot be confronted with a quasi-assent procedure , which is effectively what is happening at the moment .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European policy on immigration has a fundamental defect : its single point of departure is a concept of defence of human rights , when it is also necessary to think about protecting the rights of peoples , their liberty , their safety , and their right not to be invaded .
With its do-gooder amendments , the left is setting out a non-policy for the return of illegal immigrants .
There is pure demagogy from the institution of the European Ombudsman .
Do we want to give the ombudsman to the illegal immigrants too ?
A serious policy is one that combats the interests of globalism , that wishes to uproot peoples from their territories because it considers them either as goods , or as slaves , or new consumers .
We are against this .
If the Mediterranean is a graveyard , the moral responsibility lies with those who opened up the gates to illegal vessels .
We have always denounced , for example from Lampedusa , this gross trade in human flesh .
It is a disgrace .
If these amendments by the left were to be adopted , the European policy on the return of immigrants would be finished before it even started .
( EL ) Madam President , the proposal for a directive is unacceptable and cynically conceals the real inhumanity of the EU and its policy .
You are legislating on the 18-month detention of wretched immigrants , including under-age children , in concentration camps where the living conditions cast shame on human civilisation .
You also prohibit any further entry , even legal entry , into EU territory for a further five years .
Voluntary return is an absolute joke , as it is nothing less than coercion .
You tell them that they must either leave voluntarily , or go to prison and then get deported after 18 months .
You treat those who are victims of your own policy as criminals .
You bomb Afghanistan and complain about refugees .
You plunder the countries of the Third World and complain about the economic migrants who make capitalists ' wallets bulge .
With these new measures you will , among other things , increase the profits of slave traffickers and trafficking rings because the harsher the measures , the higher the prices .
You will make the situation even worse for immigrants and other workers , who will be forced to work without any rights under these new coercive measures based on the threat of deportation .
You can be sure that workers , third-country and European nationals alike , will not accept these measures .

( PT ) Madam President , Vice-President Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , do we need a European approach in these areas or not ?
We usually all say yes .
How do we approach this issue ?
There is a large majority in this House that would have it that we have to regulate legal immigration and fight illegal immigration .
A return policy is a vital part of this strategy , as Commissioner Barrot has already stated .
We have a directive on minimum standards .
Do we want more ?
Do we want better standards ?
I am sure we would all want to have better standards , but we came up against the Council 's intransigence and therefore the political question is this : is it better to have these minimum standards or no standards at all ?
My answer is : I believe that it is better to have these minimum standards , and I would like to congratulate my colleague Mr Weber on his work and the negotiations he has conducted .
Let me give two specific examples : the re-entry ban , which is set for five years .
Others would prefer different time limits , I am sure , but there are currently Member States with no restrictions , as is the case with Austria , Denmark or France .
The case of detention ...
Nine Member States have no maximum detention period .
Only six have shorter detention periods than those provided for in this Directive .
One of these six is Portugal , my country , which sets a two-month period and has already stated that it will stick to this .
In other words , it does not intend to make use of the Directive to water down standards .
Lastly , Madam President , I should like to underline what Commissioner Barrot has already said about children .
Here we have to be particularly careful and ensure that the Directive is applied in a humane way .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this directive is a step forward towards a common immigration policy .
This is a necessary step that needs to be accompanied , from now on , by other steps as part of an overall European approach .
We need to develop legislative and financial instruments that will enable us , decisively , to open our doors to legal immigrants and help them to integrate into our societies .
In the same way , we need to block illegal immigration and illegal work and help to dismantle the mafia-style networks that traffic human beings .
All of this will only be achieved through close cooperation with the countries of origin and transit .
We therefore urge the Commission to make use of its power of initiative , and we ask the Council to adopt as soon as possible all the directives that are still pending , because without a general set of measures , citizens will not understand this directive .
Its aim is to bring together 27 different legislations in order to ensure efficient return procedures as well as dignity and respect for the fundamental rights of immigrants .
Through our amendments , the Socialist Group wants to bring the directive into line with the most advanced and protective legislations .
We Spanish socialists are placing a particular emphasis on protecting and caring for minors , and we ask that they should have access to education and be received in special reception centres .
We also want to promote voluntary return and improve the legal guarantees of the procedure .
Ladies and gentlemen , to conclude , I would like to welcome the rejection of the proposal from the rapporteur , Mr Weber , who was seeking a short cut in the procedure , which would have weakened the power of codecision and the credibility of this House .
In the current times we need a strong Parliament that shoulders its responsibilities .
Madam President , I have no hesitation in voting for this directive , not because it is ideal , but because it raises standards in some Member States .
And indeed , an assessment of the value of this directive comes , perversely , from the very fact that the UK is not opting into it .
It does not want to be constrained by the higher standards in the directive , not least the time limits and the conditions on detention , such as the separation of immigration detainees from convicted criminals , which does not always happen in the UK at present , and the fact that coercive measures must be proportional and respect fundamental rights and the dignity of the individual , all valuable elements in this text .
There has been a lot of disinformation and I am sorry that someone wrongly briefed the President of Bolivia who wrote in the British newspaper The Guardian yesterday .
Eighteen months is not the standard detention time .
The directive says it should not exceed six months except where , in spite of all reasonable efforts by Member States , the removal operation is likely to last longer due to a lack of cooperation by the person concerned or delays in getting documentation from a third country .
I think that the provisions on taking account of the best interests of the child , on family life , on the state of health , on the principle of non-refoulement and on special provisions for unaccompanied minors are particularly valuable and will help migrants under threat of removal .
The provisions on reasons for detention and appeals and judicial review are crucial .
But while intending to support this imperfect but necessary directive in order to raise standards , I must stress that it is only one part of the picture .
We must have a fair refugee acceptance system and a proper legal immigration policy .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a disgrace , an absolute disgrace to seek to deport more than 8 million people , on the basis of the concept of administrative detention .
If this decision is taken , as it unfortunately could be , it will be the end of the protective Europe .
Many of us Europeans suffered administrative detention under dictatorships , and this is the concept that is going to prevail for the deportation of 8 million people .
The unsupportive Europe is therefore going to be consolidated .
The same Member States that are going to seek to revive this concept are those who in this financial year have , for the first time , reduced aid for international cooperation .
It is not going to be possible to achieve the Millennium Goals , and this is going to be our contribution , from the old Europe , the old Europe with values of solidarity , to famine and the food crisis .
The deportation of 8 million people with no sort of guarantee : a disgrace !
I believe in and call on the mobilisation of Europe , on those citizens who reject this type of legislation .
( RO ) Dear colleagues , the European Commission has found that , in 2006 , there were approximately 8 million illegal immigrants in the European Union .
The Union can no longer ignore this problem .
We have to find solutions ; we cannot play with the lives of those people , but it is certain that the situation is not going to resolve itself .
The instruments recently proposed by the Commission for the control of illegal immigration cannot generate a positive effect unless the problem of illegal emigrants is also solved .
We live in a Europe in which internal borders have been eliminated , a reason why we need this directive so that we could take a first step toward a common policy on repatriation of illegal immigrants .
There are NGOs that consider that the European Union has adopted ever more repressive policies in the field of immigration and appreciate the return directive as a " directive of shame ” .
I understand the concern of these NGOs for protecting the interests of people without papers , but I urge these organizations to look at the situation from a realistic angle .
What solutions would there be for the illegal immigrants entering through Malta , the Canary Islands , Greece , Italy or , recently , through the external Eastern border and who are trying to settle in the European Union ?
There is a risk of these immigrants becoming victims of black-market labour , illegal trafficking or even terrorist radicalization .
This threat is real and this is exactly why it is important to regulate their situation either by repatriation or by granting them asylum or a permit to stay .
The negotiations with the Council have led to solutions that can be accepted without reservation , especially in sensitive fields such as the protection of vulnerable people and unaccompanied minors , the conditioning of repatriation to the countries of origin or countries where the European Union has concluded bilateral agreements in this field .
I believe the efforts submitted by the rapporteurs and the Council should be appreciated and the directive should be approved in the form presented at this first reading .
( DE ) Madam President , I am going to set my notes aside .
I had prepared a lot of other things to say , but I must point out that we have certainly not achieved all we can here .
I , too , hoped for more or better regulations .
I am in two minds : one that wants to have the best and one that , here at European level , must make a decision , including about minimum standards that should apply in countries that have no standards at all .
Each of us should look at how things are in our own country , at what is happening there , what standards our country has .
Are they really all that great ?
As the European Parliament , we can set only minimum standards .
The fact that the Council has managed to come to any agreement at all borders on a miracle , because four or five states , including my own Federal Minister of the Interior , did not want to have any regulation at all and said they were happy with the way things were in their countries .
Now the challenge is for the national parliaments and the national governments to do considerably better .
Nobody is stopping them finding better solutions - where is that written ?
When I was a student , I learned that ' looking in the statute books makes it easier to find the law . '
Mr Deprez is right : if you read all the articles together , then what we can achieve here becomes clearer .
It is not as if we are going to find the philosopher 's stone .
Nobody has ever found that - quite the contrary .
However , I want to see this compromise used as the basis , so that in future , the European Union can do it better .
My colleagues in the Bundestag , the lower house of the German Parliament , and in each of the German federal states will have to play their part , as our country has an 18-month period of detention pending removal .
We have a re-entry ban that is much longer , and in many federal states there have been decisions that are not acceptable .
To say that it is a shameful thing - then all I can do is advise that this is not the way ahead . Just to oppose it all the time - heavens above , that has never provided any help at all to the people who have to work in this area and those who are stuck in the countries that do not have any guidelines .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur , Mr Weber , wondered why this Parliament did not see some of the positive measures introduced by this proposal for a directive .
The rapporteur , however , is talking to us as if this Parliament were faced with the final vote , with the final reading , with the obligation of exercising ultimate responsibility for adopting or rejecting it .
That is not the case .
We are at first reading .
It is therefore hard to understand why , in the face of the proposals for improvements which enjoy a broad consensus in this House , certainly from the right and the left , on further guarantees that may be given on minors , on third countries of transit , and on re-entry bans , we do not seize this opportunity .
You tell us that it is because the Council has decided , and the governments have decided .
This - as Mr Jonckheer said - is an abnegation of our powers as co-legislator ; this means - and I say this with all due respect for the work that has been done over three years of negotiations - that we find ourselves at the point of not exercising our power to improve the directive .
The governments of Europe need this Parliament precisely in order to make Europe not a place of fear and more effective instruments to protect against immigration , but a place of integration of immigration .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , many organisations and political parties are fuelling an absurd ideological campaign against this text , which they are exploiting and misrepresenting for political ends .
With this directive , we are offering people in situations of vulnerability safeguards to ensure that return takes place in full respect for their rights and their dignity .
It does not concern the right of asylum , Mr Catania .
I get the impression you have not understood this yet .
We will not let our citizens think that their representatives are responsible for a text wrongly labelled the ' Shameful Directive ' .
We do not need to be ashamed of a text that introduces new safeguards .
The real shame is those who are blind and cannot see , or do not want to see , the progress it allows .
Do we want to incorporate the principle of voluntary return ?
Do we want to allow Member States to maintain an unlimited period ?
Do we want justified decisions ?
Do we want legal authorities to control the conditions of detention ?
Do we want free legal aid , and NGOs on hand ?
Do we want to incorporate the principles of family unity , the best interests of the child , and medical assistance ?
All texts can be improved , but this directive constitutes progress in comparison to what exists today , where each Member State does what it wants , sometimes unacceptably - is this not so , Mrs Roure and Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I call upon you to vote for this compromise so as not to give way to the political manipulations of certain people on this text and so as to keep in mind the concrete improvements it brings .
( SV ) Madam President , let me begin by thanking Manfred Weber and all those who made possible this discussion on a first step towards common rules and procedures for returning illegal immigrants .
Compared with previous discussions in committee and in plenary , I think that on certain key issues things are moving in the wrong direction and towards a less humane EU .
To begin with : to keep people locked up for 18 months is not acceptable .
People can go mad , and these people are not felons or criminals but human beings looking for a better life for themselves and their families away from poverty .
Secondly : if the Council and the rapporteur do not believe in voluntary return , children will be wrenched away from schools and nursery classes , accommodation will be vacated without notice and we shall do more damage than was perhaps caused by all the stress of waiting for a decision , especially to children .
Thirdly : after adopting the strategy on the rights of the child in January , Parliament cannot now take a step backwards and lock up children or treat them as proposed .
This can leave children damaged for life , and I will not contribute to that .
Fourthly : five years is too long for people not to be able to return if they have reason to do so .
Not even in the best of worlds can people be lumped together into groups ; cases must be treated individually and they must be assessed and examined on their merits , for example as regards women and children in people trafficking .
Many organisations which monitor human rights have presented views , and they have concerns and think that the compromise is inadequate and the human approach insensitive .
The amendments of the Socialist Group are to be applauded . Thank you Madam President .
( EL ) Madam President , we need to ask a question : is illegal immigration a problem in the EU today or not ?
The answer has to be that it is a problem , and a serious one at that .
We must also ask whether this problem should be addressed at European level or continue to be the concern of each Member State individually .
The answer to the second question is no : the problem must be tackled by the EU .
We have stated our position on this .
Has a comprehensive , general EU policy been applied so far to tackle this problem ?
Here again , the answer , unfortunately , is no .
We are addressing the problem in a fragmentary way , and the debate we are holding today merely scratches the surface of this vast problem of illegal immigration .
Nonetheless , we can but proceed one step at a time .
Another question has to be asked today , when we are debating a compromise : is this a perfect compromise between the Council and Parliament ?
The answer is no .
Is it the one we wanted ?
Certainly not !
Is it a compromise we could discuss in the time available to us , with the satisfaction of actually getting somewhere ?
Again , the answer is no .
Parliament has been discussing the matter with the Council for two and a half years .
I congratulate Mr Weber on the work he has done and the result he has achieved , but it is not a result I am entirely satisfied with .
All the same , the question is whether the situation is improving .
The answer is yes , it is .
This raises the next question : can we manage to bring about some improvements as time goes by , instead of allowing the situation to stagnate ?
My answer is yes , we are in dialogue , and that can only be a good thing .
' The Earth belongs to all human beings ' is an approach that has moved me .
I am moved by the view that we cannot behave unreasonably towards these human beings .
We must , however , face reality .
Organised societies exist , and come what may , we have to protect human rights , while at the same time protecting the interests and rights of organised societies and organised states .
- ( PL ) Madam President , millions of people are staying in Europe illegally , and they are tolerated because they are a source of cheap labour , they do not acquire rights to a pension or to health care , and they cannot voluntarily pursue their rights through the courts .
I have no doubt that every person , regardless of his or her legal status , has a right to dignity and to humanitarian treatment .
That is why I am pleased to welcome the European Commission 's proposal that is intended to harmonise principles in this matter .
I have no doubt that all of us in this Parliament want transparent and clear Community principles and procedures relating to returns , expulsions and entry bans for illegal immigrants .
We have been waiting for them for quite some time .
Parliament has already spent two years working on these solutions .
Let us not forget that we shall have to wait a further two years for this directive to enter into force , as that is its implementation period in the Member States .
Although the directive gives rise to reservations on my part - our reservations regarding , for example , the detention period for immigrants , the holding of children without guardians and the ban on re-entry to the European Union - I want to ask whether illegal immigrants should continue to await a harmonised immigration policy , including minimum standards .
Must they witness a discussion that demonstrates that Europe is unable to come to an agreement on this matter ?
I think not .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , along with many fellow Members who this morning have participated and are now participating in the debate in this House , I experienced this phenomenon at first hand at the beginning of this parliamentary term , visiting many parts of Europe and many preliminary reception centres .
I understand that the phenomenon is complex , and that it has various facets .
Each of us , because of our culture , our character and our political position is liable to see it from a particular point of view .
We must , however , take into account overall , and I think that this is absolutely vital , the fact that here we are not talking about a few emigrants , as was the case 100 years ago .
We are not talking about small or isolated phenomena , but we are talking about immigrations of peoples .
We are talking about millions and millions of individuals who move , prompted by varying motivations , very few relating to asylum-seeking , very few to needs of a political kind , but very many in search of better living conditions and better working conditions .
I cannot , although time is unfortunately a tyrant , omit to thank Mr Weber .

I cannot omit to thank Mr Deprez , the current chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the former chairman , Mr Cavada , and all the Members with whom we have spent much time involved in working on this phenomenon .
I am of the belief that a law that can be improved is better than no law .
I am convinced that Europe is right to look after all but , above all , on this complex and serious phenomenon that we are experiencing , it is right to look after its own citizens .
( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by expressing particular thanks to our rapporteur for his tremendously hard work , and also for his perseverance in this extremely crucial dossier .
At the end of the debate it is very difficult to contribute any new aspects , of course , but I very much agree with those Members who have said that this Directive is only an initial , yet essential , step towards a broad migration policy .
We all face the same problems and challenges , and it is clear that our citizens will only accept and also understand legal migration if politicians state very clearly that illegal migration is not acceptable under any circumstances .
We have seen that one third of our Member States still have no rules at all in this field and so , in fact , any legislation that we adopt here represents progress for these countries with regard to the protection of the illegal migrants themselves .
I should just like to say to opponents of this Directive that there will indeed be little or no change in countries already offering sufficient protection and that , in addition , the Council has given clear assurances that the Directive will not be used to the detriment of protection going further than that of the Directive , which is the case in some countries .
Finally , it must also be made clear that Member States are at liberty to go further than the Directive .
As regards implementation and follow-up , I consider it very important that not only the Commission but also national parliaments bear a major responsibility for this , as it goes without saying that these expulsions must also be implemented effectively .
Finally , Madam President , I hope that the majority of the Members of this House will look beyond political dogma and manoeuvring and will be prepared to contribute to a realistic , resolute , clear , humane solution , not only in the interests of the EU but even more so in the interests of the illegal migrants themselves .

( EL ) Madam President , let me first congratulate my colleague Mr Weber on his excellent work and its results , and also Mrs Carlotti on the constructive cooperation we have had in the Committee on Development .
The countries of the Mediterranean face the problem of illegal immigration to a greater extent than others whose borders are not exposed .
For example , 112 000 illegal immigrants entered my country , Greece , last year , and 58 000 return decisions were issued .
These are record numbers for the EU , which therefore needs to adopt a common strategy to deal with this problem .
Accompanying measures must be taken to integrate immigrants , and decent conditions have to be arranged for the return of illegal entrants .
The EU must provide a return policy based on the principle of solidarity and the sharing of responsibilities with developing countries .
I endorse and support the enforcement exemption in the Directive : it is based on family relationships , children 's best interests and the state of health of the immigrants .
Children 's interests must be safeguarded by the appropriate social services department or by an advocate .
Lastly , the appeal by the Committee on Development against the detention of minors has been accepted , and I am sure that all my fellow Members will accept it .

( EL ) Madam President , as Mr Mavrommatis has said , 112 000 illegal immigrants entered Greece last year .
Most of them , however , did not want to stay ; they wanted to go to other European countries .
This means that the immigration problem is a European one ; it concerns us all , and we must address it jointly .
This is why Greece is in favour of a common immigration policy .
Certainly , Mr Weber 's recommendation does not altogether solve the problem , but it is a very positive step , so I wholeheartedly congratulate him .
If we continue with the policy mapped out in the Directive , I think that at some point sooner or later , we shall find ourselves in a better situation than at present .
No-one accepts the inhumane treatment of immigrants or the violation of human rights .
Greece 's only reservation has been about the obligation of Member States to provide free legal aid .
Do you know why ?
There are two reasons : firstly , the cost is enormous and prohibitive for Greece ; secondly , legal aid contains an element of unfairness .
If free legal aid is given to illegal immigrants , why not give it to poor , legal immigrants entering our country , and why not to our own poor citizens ?
I think that with the addition made to the article concerned , this issue has been resolved and Greece 's reservation has been lifted .
We shall therefore definitely support the proposal and recommendation .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , negotiations to reach an agreement at first reading have knocked back many of the advances achieved through the work of Parliament .
As it stands , this compromise text is unacceptable .
It is unacceptable to treat minors as adults , to leave them without access to education , to allow them to be sent back to a country far from their own relatives .
It is unacceptable to have common rules and procedures aligned with the lowest standards in Europe and to pull this directive down ; it is unacceptable to leave so many doors open to serious risks of breaches of human rights , to undignified detention periods , and to leave so many people without legal cover for such situations .
How can an enlightened Europe accept such a terrible thing ?
How can the dream of the creators of Victor Hugo 's United States of Europe be turned into a nightmare after so much hope ?
( SK ) The problems associated with illegally-staying immigrants in the EU call for transparent , clear and just rules .
Taking into account how topical this problem is - at present approximately 8 million illegal immigrants are living in the EU - and how complicated it is , I think that creating a common legal framework is unavoidable .
The directive makes it clear that illegal immigrants have to leave Europe .
However , we must consider the conditions under which this happens and ensure that human rights , in particular the right to personal freedom , are fully respected .
Since children are an extremely vulnerable group in this situation , I particularly welcome the fact that the key legal principle of the best interests of the child is explicitly mentioned in the directive .
We cannot limit the problem of illegal immigration purely to pragmatic coercive expulsion and a re-entry ban .
Ultimately , we have to apply a wider political dimension in terms of cutting down the incentives for illegal immigration to the European Union .
( FR ) Madam President , Evo Morales wrote to us about the directive on immigration that in France is known as ' sans-papiers ' .
A Latin American head of state writing to Europe is not really a foreigner , it is like a cousin writing .
Obviously , we are States with rules that must be respected ; otherwise disorder ensues and in the end everyone suffers .
However , since there is immigration from Peru to Chile , from Nicaragua to Costa Rica and from Mozambique to South Africa , immigration is global with global causes .
In a globalised economic market , immigration is the supreme stage of capitalist logic , where the person who has nothing to sell can sell only himself .
It may be necessary to have a ramshackle continental European legal structure for the effects of global migration , but immigration will eventually have to be dealt with on a global level , as is the case for food , pandemics and basic education , because it is already globalised .
That is known as ' regulating ' the shared areas of global co-ownership .
( RO ) The existence of uniform standards and procedures applicable in the Member States represents a requirement at the level of the entire European administrative system and not only regarding the return of third-country immigrants .
The drawing up of this report , which is undoubtedly of current interest and useful , provides me with the opportunity to raise again for discussion the need to implement interoperable systems for the issue of documents for the public at the level of administration in all countries .
The interoperability of systems for the issue of documents in all countries remains the main premise for limiting the risks arising from excessive authority and provides a functional formula for guaranteeing the use of rights arising from the status of Community citizen .
Appreciating the quality of this report , I would like to emphasize the fact that its effects will be maximized by rethinking the practical conditions of implementation , based on fundamental studies regarding the opportunity of an integrated electronic system of administrative procedures and services .
Maybe it is not too late to think about setting up a European electronic identity .
( RO ) Due to the Weber report , a balanced report , the Return directive will represent the first legislative initiative in the field of immigration to be successfully adopted by the procedure of co-decision between the European Parliament and the Council .
I am glad that both institutions , assisted by the European Commission , undertook and responsibly fulfilled their duties , establishing a reference for the future files .
The return policy should be regarded as an integral and necessary part of a complete and coherent Community policy in the field of migration and asylum .
More efficient rules regarding illegal immigration will make possible more liberal rules for legal migration .
I consider that , at present , clear , transparent and equitable rules have been drawn up to ensure an efficient return policy , as a necessary element of correct management of the migration policy , as agreed by the Hague programme .
( DE ) Madam President , we have been calling for an overall plan for all aspects of migration for years , and the Returns Directive quite clearly forms part of this package .
Legal immigration into the European Union can be regulated sensibly only if we do not continue to accommodate millions of illegal immigrants and put this situation on a par with legal immigration .
When Mrs Roure points to the ' right ' of illegal immigrants to escape poverty , I must remind her that there are 922 million people on the continent of Africa alone , most of whom live in poverty , and that there are 1.1 billion people in India , many of whom would like to come and join us in Europe .
That is the wrong way of regulating things .
Therefore , support this Returns Directive to open the way for us to have really good regulations for legal immigration at last so that we can truly help people .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I would of course like to add something to what I have been following closely and what you have been saying in your remarks .
Firstly it needs to be stated very clearly that here today we are talking about a return directive , we are talking about illegal migration , we are not talking about asylum , or talking about asylum procedures .
There are very big differences between these two things .
The directive concerning asylum has been in force since 2003 and is working .
Today we are trying to take a step forward .
It is important for us to take this step forward , and in its political declaration , which you can read on the penultimate page , the Council adopted a commitment whereby for those persons that fulfil the conditions for detention , but not everyone across the board , detention may be carried out for six months .
Moreover , in exceptional cases , where this is specifically provided , this will be extended for a further12 months .
This does is not an automatic process , as we have heard several times today from the floor , of 18 months .
This is not true .
Furthermore , in the political declaration the Council made a clear commitment , if I may quote : ' The Council states that the implementation of this Directive should not be used in itself as a reason to justify the adoption of provisions less favourable to persons to whom it applies . '
This means no country , and there are six such countries - I have spoken about this with all six ministers .
In the negotiation process within the Council , all six ministers insisted that this is less than six months .
Yet sadly there is a majority of Member States that have much longer periods , even unlimited , and quite a few Member States now have in practice and in theory the possibility of holding illegal immigrants for an unlimited period .
Here is where we wish to make progress .
Moreover , it is essential for us to make progress .
Here I would of course like especially to mention particularly vulnerable groups of children .
I would urge Parliament to look again at Article 5 , and once again at Article 15a .
It is clearly stated that conditions may not be worse for children , and that they must be afforded access to education and kindergartens .
They must be accommodated in special institutions that enable all this .
The restrictions are very strict .
On this point , too , negotiations were very tough , by no means simple .
I do not know if all Members can picture it , but here is just one tiny detail from the negotiations .
For one article , Article 14 , we negotiated for four hours , four hours over each word individually .
Member States have grasped that this needs to be resolved at EU level .
And what are you deciding about here today ?
Whether we will resolve this at national level , as has been done to date , or resolve this at EU level .
One Member put it very eloquently : illegal migration , it is a problem .
Is not a question of whether it is .
It is .
This area needs to be put in order , it needs to be put in order in the most civilised manner possible .
So we need to take the first step .
I know that for many people this is not a good compromise , but we need to be aware that for Member States , too , this compromise is on the margin of acceptability .
You need to be aware that very many Member States do not want a common policy in this area .
Member States , many Member States will be happy if they can regulate this in their own way , back home with their own rules , without the consent of the European Parliament and without the supervision of European institutions .
And the situation we have is worse than what we are proposing today .
For this reason I would reiterate that this is an important and decisive step forward .
So what is being decided here today ?
We are not deciding on the actual wording of these articles that are here , or o the success of the negotiations between Mr Weber and myself on the side of the Council and the Commission and Commissioners on the other side .
We are deciding on the integrity of integration policies .
If today we get to the point where we say NO to this directive on illegal migration , you can imagine how hard it will be to move on to decision-making , to joint decision-making about legal migration .
We will have to take this first step and if we do not take it today , the future and the method of adopting this is a long way off , a very long way off .
I can tell you here today in all responsibility that if the directive is not adopted at first reading , a large number of Member States will fall back on their original negotiating positions , which are extremely rigid and extremely firm .
Then , of course , considerable time will pass before we can again sit here and decide whether to adopt some common position .
Ultimately , a compromise will have to be adopted .
No extreme position will be adopted .
This is a cornerstone of democracy .
It is not just that someone 's word prevails , and of course I respect the opinion of all the non-governmental organisations , and all other institutions that have provided opinions and that are fighting to improve the situation .
It is right that they are fighting for this , but we must be aware that in the final analysis all of us , we in Council and you in Parliament , are answerable to our electorates and we know what kinds of difficulties arise in these areas .
As I have stated several times now in this concluding speech , this is the first step , a very important step , which we must take together on this path towards improving the rights of illegal immigrants and generally in terms of formulating migration policies .
Madam President , I am going to limit myself to contributing some additional information to this debate .
Firstly , the return directive , if it comes into existence , will not do so in isolation .
It will be part of a series based on the concept of a coordinated immigration policy .
Consequently , as a number of MEPs have mentioned , there will in fact be texts on legal immigration and texts to strengthen our asylum procedures and our reception of refugees .
There will also be , and already is , a coordinated policy involving the third countries that immigrants come from .
I am personally convinced that it is through partnership with a number of third countries that we will succeed in finding the ways and means of this coordinated immigration policy .
That is the first thing I wanted to say .
Secondly , I would like to remind you that the value of a directive - and this is very important - is to give us a legal framework to enable us to apply the Community mechanisms that will mean we can control respect for the acquis , namely infringement proceedings , jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice , the Commission report , and control exercised by the European Parliament .
The advantage of having a directive of this kind is that it opens up channels for much more effective judicial control .
The third point for Parliament to think about is that Parliament has still moved things forward , particularly through the articles concerning children .
The spirit of these new articles , Article 8a and Article 15a is that , as far as possible , children should not be detained .
If they are ever detained the added value of the directive lies in the fact that it forces Member States who have decided to do this to respect the minimum safeguards defined in Article 15a , which you have just mentioned , Mr Mate .
The fourth point I wish to add is that we also have financial resources that should be used .
We have a Return Fund of around EUR 700 million , which should enable us to provide help with legal assistance , healthcare and a number of problems of reintegration into certain countries of origin .
The fifth point I will borrow from Mr Deprez , who mentioned that the Commission would be responsible for writing a report within three years .
I want to stress that it is not just this report that will place an obligation on us , but everything that underpins this text : the desire to give the European Union procedures subject to judicial review , procedures that try to balance the need for legality , without which we would not get public opinion to accept legal immigration , against the need to ensure respect for the principles of the Convention on Human Rights .
I can tell you that if this directive is adopted , I will be personally involved in its implementation so as to ensure that we do not lose sight of this spirit .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank you for the reasoned debate .
With an emotional issue such as this , it is amazing that we are doing this so objectively .
I must say that , considering the breadth of topics covered here today , I am proud to be a Member of this Parliament .
There was one lapse : Mr Catania accused us all of being responsible for the mass graves in the Mediterranean .
I must reject this strategy of gaining political influence by appealing to popular emotions and fears .
All of us here are trying to do our best to help the people there .
I do not want to say any more about the content of the Directive , as this has been discussed thoroughly already .
I would like to say something about the process .
Our Chairman in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has spoken very wisely .
He advised the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to proceed fairly particularly in this process .
We have withdrawn our amendments .
We would like the amendments to be voted on , so we have made our contribution to that .
We prepared hundreds of amendments in the Committee on Home Affairs and organised large majorities there .
This meant that every Member who was interested in this issue could take part .
I would also like to say something about the NGOs .
I understand that they are not happy .
When we discuss environmental issues here , Greenpeace will never be happy with the result we achieve .
The task of an NGO is to exert increasing amounts of pressure , but already today I can tell you what will happen : if we pass this Directive , then tomorrow , the very same NGOs that are now protesting will make use of these legal opportunities and will be instituting proceedings with the European Court of Justice .
I also predict that the Members on the left , who are arguing against this Directive today , will tomorrow ask the Commission , or Commissioner Barrot , to implement what we have passed here .
They will try to create advantages for people on the basis of this legal foundation .
Therefore , I say : it is not an ideal situation , but we have made a great step forward .
One last thought : alas , Mrs Roure and Mr Fava from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament are not present .
They are outside , giving television interviews and trying to present their position .
They have not heard what Mr Mate said : that either we will take this step forward - many thanks , again , to the Slovenian Presidency of the Council - or there will be no progress for many years .
We will keep on saying that we need to make decisive progress , but we will not achieve anything .
Therefore , the question tomorrow is not whether the Directive is ideal or not . The question is simply ' does it take the European Union forward ? '
Tomorrow we can answer this question with a good , clear ' yes ' .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The proposed directive on the return of illegal migrants should be welcomed for its effort to adopt common standards and is a step in the right direction .
However , it falls short in providing some safeguards relating to refugee and human rights , and fails to address the specific needs and problems of Member States like Malta , which are being affected to a disproportionate degree relative to their size , population and resources .
Once again , I wish to stress and reiterate the point that this matter deserves a common European policy that addresses fundamental ' issues ' , such as a ) the adoption of ' burden-sharing ' policies amongst all the Member States b ) the revision of Dublin II c ) adequate financial support d ) an assessment of the viability , or otherwise , of developing centres such as job centres in countries of origin and transit e ) the development of a realistic return policy f ) the implementation of timely integration policy and g ) the fight against organised crime ( involving trafficking in people ) , xenophobia and racism .
The setting up of an agency specifically created to address all legal and illegal immigration would be highly instrumental in tackling these issues in a comprehensive and integrated manner .
in writing . - ( FI ) Madam President , the first challenge in this proposed legislation before us lies in the fact that it is our first attempt to establish Community-wide norms in immigration policy .
It will be a major effort to create a policy that applies to the Community as a whole .
Immigration policy , if nothing else , is something that is sensitive in terms of fundamental rights and human rights .
I agree with those who have said in no uncertain terms that there are some delicate points in the proposal for a compromise as far as fundamental and human rights are concerned .
As legislators , however , we need to look at the complete picture : maintaining the status quo is no option at all .
Firstly , this concerns custody terms .
In several Member States there are no time limits in the law on custody .
Moreover , the criteria for custody are often not adequately regulated either .
Secondly , many Member States impose unlimited re-entry bans .
For these reasons , many Member States would prefer to see the proposals for a compromise and , indeed , the entire legislative initiative fail in our vote .
It is crucially important that the directive should make the return process subject to the Community 's monitoring mechanisms .
In this way we will be able to guarantee that certain minimum standards will soon apply to all Member States .
I am grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Weber , for managing to negotiate major improvements to the Council position , with the result that our humanitarian obligations are guaranteed .
Of particular importance are the changes that have been made to protect children , families and minorities .
The text to be put to the vote tomorrow constitutes a clear step backwards , not only in relation to the Commission 's initial proposal , but above all in relation to the work done within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , of which I am a member .
We socialists are in favour of introducing minimum rules concerning the return of illegally staying nationals because we support a responsible , humane approach to illegal immigration and realise that some EU Member States are pursuing unacceptable policies in this area from the point of view of respect for fundamental rights .
We have no choice , however , but to point out that the compromise supported by the conservatives and the majority of the liberals does not bring any improvements in this area .
It does not apply either to asylum seekers or to those people intercepted at borders .
Above all , it gives Member States far too much leeway on key issues such as the rights of minors and detention periods .
Accordingly , the detention period could be extended to as much as 18 months .
Like many of my fellow Members , I refuse to support the possibility of locking up , for such a long time , people whose only crime is to have wanted to seek a better life in Europe .
That is why , if the amendments of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament are rejected , I will vote according to my conscience and against this text .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow we must vote on a text that Member States and the more conservative amongst us are billing as a compromise .
Do not be taken in , however : this text is not a compromise , but it is compromising .
What are the Council and the rapporteur proposing in this return directive if not for us to support Member States being able to lock up a human being , who has arrived illegally but is not guilty of any crime , for 18 months , and then banish him from European territory for a further 5 years ?
Parliament finally has the power of codecision on immigration .
Consequently we have not just the possibility of pulling our weight against the Council ; we have a duty to do so .
Let us not waste this opportunity : by adopting the directive as it is , we would be allowing the Council to unpick all the progress made right here on human rights during 3 years of negotiations .
I therefore hope that we will reject this text ; it is a real caricature of the withdrawal into ourselves and forgetting of our values that is such a threat to us .
We need a true European immigration policy , not one that consists of the illusory protection of a Fortress Europe .
A majority on the right of the European Parliament opens the way for massive removals .
The eight million people without a valid residency permit , many of whom have been living in EU Member States for many years , are faced with detention and deportation .
The Ministers of the Interior wanted to ' clear the decks ' before regulating legal immigration to the European Union in a unified manner .
Recently , the Parliamentary State Secretary at the German Federal Ministry of the Interior , Peter Altmaier , came clean with the television news and said that to Germany 's benefit , in future it will be easier to remove those people that Germany wants to get rid of .
According to the compromise text produced by the Council and Mr Weber , a Member of the European Parliament and of the Christian-Social Union of Bavaria , detention of up to 18 months can be arranged , children can be separated from their families and those deported can be banned from re-entering the European Union for five years .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , a left-wing group , protests against these inhumane practices .
This Directive is catastrophic for the European Union 's attempt to make a name for itself as a body that campaigns internationally for human rights .
In a joint appeal to Members , 44 regions of Africa and Latin America demanded that the draft legislation be rejected .
President Evo Morales of Bolivia had already reminded Members , in a powerful and emotional letter , that refugees from Europe had found sanctuary from poverty and repression , as well as friendship , in other continents for the last two centuries .
Adoption by Slovakia of the single currency on 1 January 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Casa , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision in accordance with Article 122 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the adoption by Slovakia of the single currency on 1 January 2009 - C6-0198 / 2008 - .
Ladies and gentlemen , let me congratulate Slovakia and our Slovak fellow Members on this success for their country and for the euro area .

Madam President , on behalf of the Commission , I would first like to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the rapporteur , Mr Casa , for the excellent work they have done in assessing Slovakia 's fulfilment of the convergence criteria for adopting the single currency .
With Slovakia 's entry into the euro area , this will have sixteen members , four of them from the group of countries that joined the European Union in 2004 .
This is the fifth enlargement of the euro area since the single currency was introduced in 1999 .
It is clear proof that it is open to all Member States meeting the conditions set by the Treaty .
Slovakia 's entry into the euro area represents the crowning of the remarkable progress made by the Slovakian economy over the last decade .
It will enable the country to benefit from the important advantages offered by Economic and Monetary Union , as set out in the report adopted by the Commission last May on 10 years of EMU .
This report also demonstrates that , to benefit fully from the advantages of the euro , it is necessary to pursue sound macroeconomic policies to protect a country 's competitiveness once the exchange rate is fixed irrevocably .
This includes fiscal discipline , a responsible wage policy and structural reforms , particularly as regards the functioning of the labour market .
Without a clear commitment to this , there is a danger that inflation could become a real and considerable problem .
This point is mentioned explicitly in Mr Casa 's report , with which the Commission is in complete agreement .
The Ecofin Council of 3 June approved the Commission 's report on Slovakia 's fulfilment of the convergence criteria .
The European Council meeting in Brussels on Thursday and Friday should , once Parliament 's opinion has been received , confirm the political support for Slovakia 's adoption of the single currency , which will be validated by the Ecofin Council in July .
Next week , the Commission will propose the definitive exchange rate between the Slovakian crown and the euro , which will also be formally adopted by the Ecofin Council in July .
In this respect I would like to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Mr Casa for the work begun some months ago to enable Parliament to give its opinion within the tight deadlines that our three institutions are given to make a sound assessment of the fulfilment of the criteria by the Member State concerned , and to leave it enough time to complete the practical arrangements for adopting the euro on 1 January 2009 .
We have an important moment ahead of us because in this Parliament we are once again discussing the enlargement of the euro area to include an ex-Communist country , a country that , like my own country , Malta , joined the European Union in 2004 , a country that needed to change its economy in order to be able to meet the criteria laid down in the Treaty .
This was not easy to achieve .
We have been in discussion for months with the Commission , with the European Central Bank , with the Slovak Government as well as with the whole of Slovak civil society to ensure that the process can truly help Slovakia to meet all the criteria laid down in the Treaty .
After the Commission issued its report , we , as Parliament , went through a process of discussion and consultation that was truly a very important moment , even for me , because I could see what the Commission was saying , not only what the European Central Bank or the Slovak Government were saying , but I could understand from the Slovak people how they perceive this historic step that they will take , God willing , next January .
As the Commissioner stated just before me , today Slovakia has a responsibility , because there is a queue of countries behind it , the majority of which , like Slovakia , are emerging from a Communist era and wish to enter this area that is so important for the European Union .
Therefore , the country that we are talking about today has a responsibility to remain durable as regards convergence , and especially as regards the inflation rate that was the subject of much discussion even in my report .
However , from the statistics we have before us today , it is clear that we have a problem throughout the area and we cannot single out Slovakia , because today we are talking about an inflation rate that actually increased in the 21 countries of the European Union .
Therefore , we must not only ensure that Slovakia maintains a durable inflation rate , but also see how the inflation rate can be reduced as much as possible in all the countries already in the euro area .
We know about the problems that we are currently facing , the oil problem that is not affecting us in a positive way , and we therefore have to consider how we are going to tackle this very important issue .
As I said , Parliament has visited Slovakia for the first time and I would appeal that delegations from this Parliament are sent to each country that is going to enter the euro area because this provides an opportunity to hear and learn more about how the economy is really faring in that particular country .
As for the Commission , I am slightly disappointed with the reassessment it carried out after the convergence report was officially published .
I do not think that this Parliament should be treated in the way the Commission treated it because we should at least have been consulted .
I understand that the reassessment cannot be published very far ahead because of the possibility of speculation , but this Parliament requires that when similar measures are taken after the convergence report has been compiled , we as Parliament should be consulted , even if it is not until the last moments of this decision .
In closing I would like to thank all those who assisted me in preparing this report , including the shadow rapporteurs from all the political groups , my coordinator and the committee chairs , who were always very cooperative on this report .
Lastly , I thank the Slovak people and wish them well with this historic step they are now going to take .
We should vote in favour of this important step , not only for their sake , but also for the sake of the whole of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur .
I have been having a few additional thoughts about Slovakia 's accession to the euro area over the last few days .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will be voting in favour of this report .
Based on the events surrounding the change from the koruna to the euro , we again submitted relevant amendments and compromise proposals because this change , which was more than the allowable 15 % fluctuation , led to a dispute in Parliament too .
All we can do is ask of the Commission - and not just ask , but actually insist - that it helps out here so that for future adoptions of the single currency , the criteria that are already laid down in the Treaty will be made specific .
Since becoming a Member of the European Parliament , I have been present every time a new country has adopted the single currency .
Each time , we have been presented with new arguments , including the one that ' after all , the previous states were able to do it this way too ' , and this will become a neverending story .
I consider it important that we see joining the euro area less as a matter of national honour and more as a goal of making the criteria more objective , which is good for the state that is joining .
The upward revaluation of the koruna by more than 17 % is certainly economically justified .
Whether it was right to combine the timing of the revaluation with entry to the euro area is another matter .
Therefore , we should do everything possible to ensure that the euro and the overall economy achieve something good , rather than restricting ourselves to the point of view of a political situation of limited duration , whether European or national .
Let me mention briefly what happened on Thursday .
I think it is wrong for the European Parliament to ignore this repeatedly , and we will have a major debate about this tomorrow .
We will vote today on whether Slovakia should join the euro area and ECOFIN will do so in July .
We saw on Thursday how one member of the euro area said that it did not want the European Union to be the way it is .
High representatives of your home country then chimed in along the same lines , Commissioner .
The euro was never an end in itself .
The euro was always just a marker along the way to further development of the European Union .
Now - although the Council is not here , unfortunately - everyone is asking the same question : where to with Europe now ?
What are the next specific steps ?
Some are talking about the core of Europe , others of alternatives , still others are saying we should stop expanding , but some are behaving as if nothing will change .
Therefore , we will try again with the euro , and even try again after that .
However , when we make these decisions , we should bear in mind the political realities in the European Union , so when we vote today , I will have very mixed feelings about whether simply ignoring the vote - the reality in Europe - is really the right thing to do .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Casa for producing an excellent report .
I wish to say that the PSE Group will be supporting this report .
I would also like to emphasise that we are dealing for the first time with the entry of a Central European country , a post-Communist country from the old Soviet bloc , into the euro area .
I see this as not only a symbolic event , but also an important step along the road towards European integration .
This is a success for the monetary union , as it is being entered by a dynamic and competitive economy unburdened by public debt , and this will surely serve to strengthen the euro area .
Secondly , it is also a success for Slovakia , which successfully met all the membership criteria and will be able to benefit from the advantages of a common currency .
This success is particularly important and necessary today , when the results of the failed referendum in Ireland have shaken faith in the future of European integration .
Slovakia 's accession to the euro area shows that the process of deepening European integration is moving ahead , and I believe that even the greatest Euro-sceptics will not be in a position to hold it back .
Slovakia 's acceptance into the club of States making use of the common currency is confirmation that , when introduced , consistently economic and structural reforms pay off and bring positive results .
Today Slovakia is one of the most rapidly developing States in the European Union .
Commissioner Špidla spoke about this .
One source of these successes is in fact reforms , and here thanks and recognition are due , both to Mikuláš Dzurinda 's government , which brought in these difficult reforms , and to Robert Fico 's current government , which is continuing them .
Slovakia 's adoption of the euro is also a major challenge .
In particular , the Slovakian Government must make sure that the change in currency takes place in an organised manner , so that there are no price rises , and so that the Slovak public 's support for the new currency is maintained in future .
In congratulating my Slovak fellow Members on this success , I would also like - as a Polish MEP - to express the hope that my country will soon be joining them .
Mr President , Slovakia has indeed achieved amazing things within a few short years .
Who could have imagined that Slovakia would be one of the first of the new Member States to be able to join the euro area ?
However , the hard work is not over ; in fact , it has only just begun .
In their assessment and analysis , the Commission and the European Central Bank made it clear that the question of whether inflation can be kept at the desired level over the long term remains open .
Indeed , Slovakia is aware of this problem .
Otherwise this unparalleled step of revaluing the country 's currency , the koruna , by more than 17 % to match the euro makes no sense .
I can only appeal to Slovakia not to give us cause to experience a second Slovenia where , almost as soon as the country joined the euro area , inflation became rampant .
The step you have taken of revaluing the koruna shows that you are taking dealing with inflation seriously .
It is true that imported inflation , especially in the case of energy products , can be kept somewhat in check by this means .
However , that does not mean that measures in other areas cease to be very important ; they always will be .
As Commissioner Špidla mentioned , restrictive fiscal policies , wage increases that continue to focus on increasing productivity and not on the wishes of employees , and mobilisation of the employment market are all part of it .
We know that circumstances vary greatly between Slovakia 's diverse regions .
There is above average unemployment in some regions while in others , there are too few skilled workers .
Mr Radwan is absolutely right . Joining the euro area is not just an economic step , but also a political one .
Back then , it was designed as entry to a phase that would be completed by a much more extensive integration .
I hope that Slovakia , through moderate , correct , structure-oriented policies , will make its contribution to being able to chalk this entry up as a success at the end of the day .

Mr President , in taking the floor in this debate on behalf of the UEN Group , I wish to draw attention to the following issues .
Once again the European Commission is reminding us of the need to meet all of the Maastricht criteria prior to entry into the euro area , with reference to the new Member States .
Meanwhile , it is choosing to remain silent regarding the fact that , at the time the euro was introduced , many of the old Member States did not meet these criteria .
Secondly , despite changes in the Stability and Growth Pact that benefit such countries as Germany and France , the characteristic lenient position taken by the Commission with regard to the largest States in the euro area concerning observance of the Maastricht criteria has not changed .
The Commission has in the past tolerated both significant budget deficits and , especially , a level of public debt exceeding 60 % of GDP , and it appears to be tolerating these still .
In 2006 public debt in the Fifteen was , on average , 63 % of GDP , and as many as half of the countries in the euro area had a public debt that exceeded 60 % .
In this situation , Slovakia 's achievements in the form of a deficit of 2.2 % , or a public debt of just 29 % , with inflation at 2.2 % , are particularly worthy of mention .
Slovakia 's entry into the euro area will be an important experience for the new Member States .
They all have a relatively low level of GDP per head , a large income differential over the populace , a low level of affluence or a relatively low overall level of prices .
The consequences of introducing the euro in Slovakia , especially ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , Slovakia wishes to participate in the euro , and I do not blame it for that , yet I wish to take this opportunity to call for level-headedness .
After all , it could be said that the euro is about to take its first test .
For various reasons , we are seeing price increases , not only in Europe but worldwide .
Inflation is rising , and inflationary expectations have been generated .
The euro as a currency has not faced this test before .
The European Central Bank operates on the basis of a maximum inflation rate of 2 % .
It has no means of enforcing this ceiling other than to raise interest rates in order to reduce the level of activity in an attempt to bring down inflation .
If it does this , there is reason to fear recession .
The Stability and Growth Pact focuses exclusively on ensuring that public deficit does not exceed 3 % of GDP .
This restraining of economic stimulation gives us grounds to fear further recession in Europe .
If I were Slovakia , I would at all events defer abolishing my own currency in favour of the euro until the latter has passed its first test in economic crises .
( SK ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , we can learn a lot from history .
In the 1990s most of the then eurozone members were not capable of meeting the convergence criteria .
Most of these countries had problems with excessive deficits , public finances and inflation .
During the reference year , 1997 , Germany had problems complying with the criterion relating to the level of public borrowing , and as a result even those countries that had significantly exceeded the criteria values , such as Belgium or Italy , were tolerated .
Some countries in the nascent eurozone had even resorted to so-called ' creative accounting ' , i.e. procedures that made their economic results look better than they were .
Afterwards , although there were some hiccups , most of the eurozone members solved and continue solving these problems under the umbrella of the euro , a strong single currency .
I must point out that these countries have not met all the deficit criteria .
Therefore , those who point the finger at the applicants for accession to the eurozone should take care not to cast the first stone .
The Slovak Republic not only met the convergence criteria ; it met them well in advance .
The development of the Slovakian parameters had been monitored for a long time and was fully transparent .
Fears of future inflation , expressed by the European Central Bank , can be generally applied to all eurozone members because the European economy is not developing in a vacuum .
The current global price explosion is proof of this .
Consequently , I welcome the positive position of the European Commission and of the European Parliament as highlighted in the report by the rapporteur , Mr Casa , on the adoption by Slovakia of the single currency on 1 January 2009 .
This position is not only a technical but also a significant political gesture that signals to other applicants for accession to the eurozone that their efforts can lead to a tangible result .
( SK ) I would like to begin by expressing my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr David Casa , for his excellent and balanced report , and for his pragmatic approach when evaluating the individual amendments .
Slovakia 's accession to the eurozone has not come about by chance .
It is the natural culmination of enormous efforts by the Slovak Governments that created , in particular between 1998 and 2006 , a solid economic base through radical economic reforms in the areas of finance , tax and social affairs .
These reforms , together with direct foreign investment , have enabled Slovakia to enjoy constant and high economic growth .
Continuous efforts to reach the goal , as well as the responsible conduct of the Slovak Governments and the National Bank , made it possible to meet all the Maastricht criteria necessary for accession to the eurozone , without extra influences such as hidden inflation or the artificial strengthening of the Slovak currency , the koruna .
Some members of the ECON Committee have voiced their concerns about the long-term sustainability of these criteria , in particular a low inflation rate .
I am convinced , however , that Slovakia has all it needs to meet these criteria on a long-term basis , provided that at least a standard fiscal policy is in place and further structural reforms are carried out .
The developments in the area of energy and food prices are , and will continue to be , a global problem .
Slovakia will definitely not be a country that goes beyond the agreed framework .
To conclude , I would especially like to congratulate the people of Slovakia , who accepted these fundamental and radical reforms and therefore deserve the utmost praise for achieving this positive result .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that thanks to our rapporteur , Mr Casa , we have a balanced report for welcoming the political decision we are going to take : Slovakia 's entry into the euro area .
This is the first of the ' Visegrad ' countries to join the area and I believe that , from a political point of view , it has major significance that needs to be underlined .
For the Slovaks , it is the end of one adventure and the start of another .
It is the end of preparation and of reaching a position that fulfils the Maastricht criteria .
Experience has shown us that once a country joins the euro , the hardest is often yet to come .
In Slovakia 's case , we can see that from the point of view of controlling inflation and pursuing balance , and from the point of view of social cohesion and implementing structural reforms , there is still much to be done .
To achieve this , I believe the mechanisms we are discussing so that , in future , the Economic and Monetary Union is better able to support and work together on the way Member States use their currency , will be helpful .
We will not be changing the much-discussed Maastricht criteria .
Nobody has asked for them to be changed , and yet they have to be interpreted , to be examined in a changed context .
Economic and Monetary Union is now 10 years old , and we know what is still wrong with it in terms of the balance between economic policy , monetary policy and even its external representativeness .
It is this Economic and Monetary Union that Slovakia is joining ; it is not the same situation as 10 years ago and we all need to take this into account .
( SV ) Who would have thought , when Vladimir Mečiar led Slovakia , that his country would not just become a Member State of the EU but would also introduce the euro some 10 years on .
It is truly a Slovakian miracle .
The rapporteur points out the advantages which the euro brings but also the risks and problems which may arise .
It is good that Slovakia has taken on board the ECB 's view of the risk of increased inflation with the adoption of the euro and I think it was necessary therefore , after consultation , to revalue the koruna .
It shows both instinct and confidence for good future economic policy as a member of the euro group .
Mr President , I hope that in the near future my own country will also realise the importance , both economically and politically , of participating fully in EU cooperation .
Although referendums are not very popular these days , I hope that over the period 2010-2011 we shall be able to hold a referendum which will vote to introduce the euro in Sweden .
The financial crisis shows what a strong European currency and an effective central bank mean to the protection of the EU 's growth and economy .
With the continued application of strict criteria for entry and with constructive assistance available to all those who become members of the euro group , the EU 's economy will become even stronger .
( HU ) Thank you for the opportunity to speak .
A great moment has arrived , since Parliament , and later on the Council in the formal legal sense , are about to decide whether the first of the former Council for Mutual Economic Assistance ( CMEA ) and Warsaw Pact countries will be admitted to the single currency area .
I congratulate Mr Casa , the rapporteur , for doing a splendid , outstanding job .
I am delighted that Slovakia has fulfilled all the criteria set out in quantitative terms in the EC Treaty as conditions for admission to the euro zone .
This achievement is the result of ten years ' work .
I believe it is important only to voice an opinion on whether the applicant country has fulfilled the criteria , because otherwise we discriminate among Member States on the basis of whether they joined the euro zone earlier or will do so in future .
Loosely defined sustainability criteria - notably with regard to inflation or debt - or real convergence cannot be the subject of separate quantitative analysis in the report , since all Member States in the euro zone , must be trusted equally from the moment they join to implement sustainability .
This is especially the case if the Member State in question has a low and falling level of debt compared to its fellow euro club members .
This is a vital question for the future enlargement process .
The Slovak Government is taking on a huge responsibility .
As soon as its exchange rate is frozen , in other words from July onwards , it must demonstrate that it is not only concerned with its own membership of the euro zone but also carries responsibility for the other countries in the region .
In view of this , Slovakia must use all means at its disposal to keep inflation under control , in other words within the reference limit .
In doing so it will demonstrate that the understandable and justifiable fears expressed by several Members of this House and the European Central Bank ( ECB ) - namely that after the massive shift in the central exchange rate occurs , Bratislava may unable or unwilling to keep the brakes on the inflationary pressure resulting from import prices and from closing the price gap - are not compounded by an irresponsible attitude .
Furthermore , this is not the time or the place to address other unresolved issues relating to enlargement of the euro zone .
Issues such as ensuring that applicant countries submit their request in time , defining what we mean by discipline concerning the timeframe between the Commission forming an opinion and a decision being reached , or defining the notion of real convergence , or how long we can realistically expect exchange rate stability to be maintained in the event of appreciation , must be addressed separately .
These issues should not be addressed here , in a selective and discriminatory way , and this is why I am abstaining today from voting on these issues . Thank you , Mr President , for the opportunity to speak .
( SK ) In recent years the Slovak Republic underwent many difficult reforms and the present government has successfully compensated the poorer sections of society affected by them .
Since the government approached , responsibly and conscientiously , not only the compensation with regard to the reforms but also the task of meeting the obligatory criteria and ensuring a smooth overall process culminating in the adoption of the euro on 1 January 2009 , Slovakia today has one of the most successful economies ( not only within the Union ) and we have also succeeded in increasing the employment rate .
All of these facts suggest that the new criterion of permanently sustainable inflation will not be an insurmountable problem for Slovakia in the future either .
It is the sincere wish of the Government of the Slovak Republic that the adoption of the euro on 1 January 2009 should not have a serious impact on the poorer sections of society .
Consequently , the government is already taking steps to protect these people and to create for them a comfortable framework for the period of preparation for the new currency and later its use .
For example , the Slovak Government will soon debate a moratorium on the prices of some basic foodstuffs .
Another similar step is the attempt by the Slovak Government to reach an society-wide consensus on the issue of the transition to the euro .
The government has involved the regional and local governments , professional circles and civil society , as well as churches , in this programme .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to finish by saying that cooperation and mutual respect , rather than unsubstantiated and often populist criticism , are the only successful way forward for the Union , in all respects .
Mr President , it is rather a peculiar day for us .
We used to live in the same country , Czechoslovakia , and now , today , we Czechs can wish all the best to the Slovaks in joining the euro .
Slovakia was given the green light to join the euro zone a few weeks ago .
The Slovakian Government as well as the Slovak Central Bank are well aware that meeting crucial criteria , not in the short term but in the medium and long terms , will be a demanding task .
The Slovak economy is in the process of catching up with the rest of the European Monetary Union .
That may lead to pressure on prices and inflation and I am sure that the Slovaks will cope with it .
But that is not what I want to talk about now .
Today I would like to put the emphasis on something different , on something which I would personally call the Slovak story , the way to the euro .
The reality that Slovakia will join the euro zone is based on sound foundations and the remarkable results of the Slovak economy .
It is fair to stress the positive role of the former Centre-Right coalition Slovak Government , led by its skilful Prime Minister Mikuláš Dzurinda .
Having carried out all important structural reforms , the Slovak economy has met all important criteria : reduction of public debt and keeping inflation under control ; the author of these reforms was the government and cabinet of Mr Dzurinda .
I wish all the best to the Slovaks in the euro zone .
( SK ) In the course of the last six years , the Slovak economy has been growing at an average rate of more than 6.5 % per year .
Last year growth even exceeded 10 % .
According to all the indicators , Slovakia meets the criteria with room to spare .
The Slovak authorities are aware of the situation with regard to the real and nominal convergence of the Slovak economy and its potential impact on future economic and inflationary development .
In their opinion , Slovakia 's consolidation is in line with the Stability and Growth Pact .
In accordance with the approved three-year budget , the primary fiscal goal is to reach the deficit of 0.8 % by 2010 , so this means meeting the fiscal goal .
In accordance with the agreed data , the goal is to reach a balanced budget by 2011 .
That means budget a surplus of 1.3 % leaving aside the second pillar .
The Slovak Government has adopted measures to keep inflation under control .
In June it approved a modernisation programme , featuring structural reforms of the labour market , consolidation of public finances and support for education , science and research .
Let me emphasise that the representatives of the business community , entrepreneurs , employers , trade unions , pensioners , Slovak towns and villages , and banks all support the adoption of the euro in Slovakia .
The government 's social partners signed a declaration in which they undertake to keep wage increases in line with productivity growth .
This will significantly contribute to the sustainability of inflation in Slovakia .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for their correct approach , based on numbers , facts and analyses .
The Slovak officials and the Slovak people wish to contribute to the development of the European economy , and thus to the stability and reliability of the euro .
( SK ) Since the euro is an important symbol of removing barriers and bringing Europeans together , the adoption of the euro by Slovakia is yet another historical step in the process of European integration .
The preparations for the adoption of the euro by Slovakia had begun even before the Slovak Republic joined the European Union .
The previous Slovak Government , led by Mikuláš Dzurinda , approved the strategy for the adoption of the euro as far back as 2003 .
It implemented important reforms that made Slovakia a successful country , economically and politically .
As inflation has increased in Slovenia since the country adopted the euro , the issue of the sustainability of inflation and the public deficit causes anxiety in Slovakia .
However , I do not agree with the views of some of my colleagues that additional criteria for monitoring the economic stability of Slovakia are needed .
Slovakia meets all of the Maastricht criteria , which are the conditions for the adoption of the euro .
It is too late for a debate on setting the Maastricht criteria for fast-growing economies .
Instead I would like to mention the reason for the change in the central parity , which the German Members presented as a negative phenomenon .
The central parity shift reflected , on two occasions , the economic development of the country , which was backed up mostly by productivity growth .
I call on the Government of the Slovak Republic to step up the campaign targeted at the citizens , in particular the provision of information to vulnerable groups .
I think that dual price display should be obligatory not only for six months before entering the eurozone but also for at least one year after adopting the euro .
This will help consumers to get used to euro prices .
I am convinced that a good competitive business environment will result in more choices for consumers , which is the best remedy for rising prices .
I believe that Slovakia will also learn from the experience of those countries that have already adopted the euro .
To conclude , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr David Casa , for his support for Slovakia 's accession to the eurozone .
I believe that his name will go down in the history of the Slovak Republic .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 10 years after its birth , the euro is an undeniable success and is today one of the pillars of trust for citizens in the European project .
I therefore welcome the enlargement of the euro area .
Following on from identical decisions regarding other states , it will now extend to Slovakia .
However , in mentioning the 10th anniversary of the euro , we must include the lessons learned along the way , lessons on the sustainability of the process and on the impacts on real convergence that are linked to the single currency .
Perhaps there is some scope for improving application of the accession criteria and perhaps thought should be given to the sustainability and robustness of the process for old and new members .
In the case of Slovakia , the 17 % revaluation of its currency , albeit planned and in line with the Treaty criteria , gives food for thought .
As I said , these questions deserve a serious debate in which the European Parliament must have an active voice , and the Socialist Group 's wish is for the euro to contribute to more than just financial stability .
It must also be an instrument serving to boost the Union 's real convergence , employment and progress .
We shall suggest continuing this discussion in more depth during the EMU @ 10 debate , that is to say the celebration of ten years of the euro .
For the time being , I should just like to congratulate the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs and recognise and praise the extraordinary efforts undertaken by Slovakia , its Government , and the social partners , and the success they have already achieved .
I hope they will be successful in their forthcoming participation in the single currency project and my very best wishes to them in exactly this regard .
( DE ) Mr President , it is a good thing that Slovakia has the opportunity to join the euro area .
You only have to imagine what it would have been like in Europe over the last year without the euro .
The currencies of the individual states would have been a target , just as in the days of Soros .
However , as Italy has shown , sometimes being bound so securely to the euro is not quite such a good thing .
If it were possible to advise Slovakia - which , of course , would have to make its own decision - then I would be giving some thought to an opt-out clause , especially because of what is now happening at European level .
We are running the risk that the EU Summit will not read the signs of the times , that it will carry on as if it is ' business as usual ' .
The distance between the citizens and the European elite is growing in such a way that the entire European project is put at risk , whereas instead everyone should be working towards true democracy .
( SK ) I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr David Casa , for his work on the report .
In the last decade , in particular during the years of Mr Mikuláš Dzurinda 's Government , post-communist Slovakia implemented demanding socio-economic reforms that made it possible for the economy to meet the Maastricht criteria .
Slovakia 's adoption of the euro will bring about changes .
It is necessary to prepare the citizens for the changes and to persuade them that accession to the eurozone will be beneficial to them .
It is necessary to create a sense of trust in the new currency and provide sufficient information .
Several Slovak businesses have voluntarily pledged to observe the so-called Business Code of Ethics for the euro changeover .
They have agreed to offer their customers , partners and citizens enough information and pledged not to misuse the currency conversion in any way for the purpose of personal financial gain .
I think that these steps will help us to trust in the common European project .
I also believe that the European Parliament will vote for Slovakia 's adoption of the European currency today .
( SK ) The new currency is a turning point for the society and its citizens .
Like any change , there are some concerns about its outcome .
Knowing the situation in Slovakia , I am sure everything will turn out just fine and all worries will disappear a few months into 2009 .
My confidence is based on two main elements .
Firstly , it is generally known that Slovakia has fully met the Maastricht macro-economic criteria , which is proof of Slovakia 's formal readiness to adopt the euro .
Slovakia will also ensure sustainability of the criteria .
What is more , the government , the parliament , the social partners and the entire society are making serious plans for solutions to practical problems that might accompany the currency changeover .
Dual pricing will be introduced everywhere , and the regular monitoring mechanism is ready so that the changeover to the euro cannot be misused .
A number of other measures are also in place to give the citizens information and help with day-to-day difficulties in using the euro .
I believe that from next year onwards Slovakia will be a model stable eurozone member ; a problem-free showcase for the European Union .
( LT ) I would like to congratulate the Commission on giving Slovakia the green light to join the euro area from 1 January next year .
Slovakia 's adoption of the euro is a great example to other states and an incentive to them to increase their efforts and adopt additional measures for achieving the convergence criteria .
Slovakia is to join the euro area at a time when the EU and the world as a whole are experiencing a very complicated economic situation , with rising fuel prices and growing inflation .
Therefore , every country that is seeking membership of the euro area or is already an established member should learn from Slovakia 's example .
I would also like to point out the fact that , with Slovakia about to become the 16th member of the euro area , it is essential to ensure that an efficient decision-making procedure is put in place for the European Central Bank 's Governing Council .
Alas , the final decision on the rotation system has not yet been made .
I would like to point out the importance of not postponing the introduction of the rotation system until the number of members of the Management Board reaches 18 and making sure that it is implemented as soon as possible in view of both the preparations that Slovakia must carry out in order to join the euro area and the further expansion of the latter .
( MT ) I would like to congratulate my colleague Mr Casa , who I know put a lot of work into preparing this report , and I wish him success .
I would also like to congratulate Slovakia , which is about to adopt the euro .
I come from a country that introduced the euro this year and I can assure everyone that , despite the difficulties and sacrifices that a country has to make in order to enter the euro area , it is surely a source of satisfaction and pride for such countries .
I would like to say that it is becoming clear in this discussion that it is possible to have a ' two-speed ' Europe .
I say this because last week there was a referendum in Ireland .
Everyone knows the result .
I think it is important to show that Europe can proceed at a different speed and it is also important that we start to consider this possibility for the future development of European integration .
( LT ) Lithuania is a country that made a commitment in its Accession Agreement to adopt the euro .
Every single time - that is , four times during our term - that we make a decision on whether to give the green light to one country or another to adopt the euro , we keep trying to upgrade the Maastricht criteria or explain them in a different way .
This tends to confirm the fact that we still have doubts regarding the implementation of these criteria .
At the very beginning we , as representatives of Lithuania and representatives of other countries , suggested that these issues be dealt with on behalf and at the level of Parliament and the Council .
However , all this time these suggestions have been turned down .
Instead of sitting down to clarify the nuances and technicalities hindering the successful expansion of the euro area , we would rather play about by making separate , more or less of random decisions for each country .
I would like to point out that it is very clear that we must implement strict fiscal policy and that there is no way we might change our ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) Mr President , the reason for the delays with the European unification project , accompanying the ratification of the new Treaty , is probably the fact that the prosperity brought to Europeans by the common internal market is already being taken for granted .
It is a pity that our praise for the success of the Customs Union that is now celebrating its 40th anniversary is too quiet .
The 10 years of successes and achievements of the common currency are also a reason to celebrate .
By forcing governments to maintain budgetary discipline , the eurozone has created an admirably stable macro-economy , immune to all shocks in spite of globalisation .
As a Czech Member of this Parliament , I want to congratulate Slovakia on its accession to the eurozone .
The lion 's share of this success belongs to Mr Dzurinda and the reforms he implemented five years ago .
The left can now celebrate their success because when it entered into government it adopted membership of the eurozone as a national interest .
Hopefully it will teach the Czech Eurosceptics a lesson and one day it will be the Slovaks who will be congratulating us .
Sadly , this will take at least another five more years and possibly even longer .
( DE ) Mr President , Slovakia has experienced an economic upturn and , after this very controversial debate about its fulfilment of the criteria , we will vote on whether it should join the euro area .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Casa , because in his report , he took into account the objections that were raised .
The reform process and reflections on it do not come to an end when a country joins the euro area ; rather , that is when the real challenge begins .
Inflation is and will continue to be a problem in Slovakia .
Not for nothing have there already been two revaluations - most recently of 17.65 % - and I say in advance that before the exchange rate is finally set , there will be a further revaluation of the Slovak koruna .
Therefore , we must all play our part to ensure that real convergence occurs .
I hope that the Council and the Ministers of Finance take Parliament 's concerns seriously and that the Commission will conduct an open discussion on the process in future .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Slovakia now has the opportunity to join the eurozone .
This is possible because of the Slovak Republic 's socio-economic results .
Credit for this achievement is also due to all of Slovakia 's successive governments and their firm focus on this issue .
I think that the Slovak leadership has in general shown their will and ability to respond to the necessary changes .
This opportunity is also due to the consistency of the European Union 's policies and to the launch of the European project because Slovakia has accepted and met all the necessary criteria .
This fact has opened the door for the adoption of the euro and no further doubts were expressed .
In my opinion , this is a very important aspect .
Enlarging the eurozone to include another country , Slovakia , will definitely lead to deeper European integration .
It will not be just the Slovak Republic but also the European Union as a whole that will benefit from this deeper integration when this very successful and fast-developing economy joins .
Fears of inflation were mentioned in the debate .
Of course , in some ways these fears are justified .
On the other hand , there are equally potent arguments proving that the Slovak Government is consistent in its response and , at any rate , it is not in the interest of any government to set off inflation .
Of course the risk of inflation exists , and this matter has been brought to the Slovak Government 's attention in all documents and debates .
Regarding the issue of revaluation of the Slovak currency , I must say that it always took place within the expected limits , within the framework of flexibility that each government , each country is allowed in this process in order be able to respond , in the best possible manner , to the extraordinary moment when the euro is adopted .
This is not an everyday situation , an everyday affair .
It is a truly extraordinary situation and the Member States must be allowed some room for manoeuvre .
Although the final setting of the value will be a very serious goal and task , and although it will be an extraordinary operation , it will not be taking place for the first time .
The eurozone has been enlarged before and this complicated expert operation has been carried out many times with adequate success .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to congratulate Slovakia on taking this big step and achieving this huge success .
I also want to emphasise that this is clearly the result of the work of successive Slovak Governments and the understanding and will of the Slovak people .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members for the discussion .
I agree that in this Parliament there is consensus about ( the fact ) that we all agree that Slovakia is ready to enter the euro area .
In fact , there are some amendments that have secured the agreement of several political groups .
We have before us as speakers - before me , to be exact - a historic moment .
We also have , as several Members have said , a club that not only accepts the largest and most developed countries , but also welcomes anyone who is prepared and ready to accept the rules of the European Union .
Therefore , today we have an area that accepts anyone who meets all the criteria laid down in the Treaty .
There is no doubt , as my fellow Members have rightly pointed out , that it was not easy for Slovakia , and it will not be easy for the country in the coming months .
I will end my speech by once again thanking all those who have helped me to arrive at this point and I sincerely hope that the Slovak people will be able to build on the success they have achieved up to now .
I hope that , in the coming months and years , the same success that their country is making in a number of sectors will also be achieved by these people who have worked so hard to reach this very important level .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Mr President , I rise on Rule 103 ( 2 ) .
In response to the historic and - some would say - joyous expression of democratic will in Ireland last week , you said yesterday from the Chair that ' it remains our goal to see the Lisbon Treaty enter into force before the elections of next year .
Provided that you agree to this , I shall resolutely defend these principles in the Council at the end of the week ' .
( Applause from members of other groups )
You have asked us for a mandate .
I would suggest to the House that simply having the mandate of the Conference of Presidents is not enough for this and that we ought - under Rule 103 , which clearly says that ' Parliament shall decide whether or not to wind up the debate with a resolution ' - to finish our debate tomorrow with President Barroso with a vote to see whether we should give you that mandate or not and to see whether Members of this so-called democratic Chamber are prepared to respect the Irish result and to find out whether ' no ' really means ' no ' .
( Applause from members of the IND / DEM Group )
Mr Farage , I gave you the chance to speak because you asked for it , but I have to tell you that your request has come too late .
It is the Conference of Presidents that decides whether there is a resolution .
The matter can be raised again in plenary , although that should have been done earlier .
You are now too late , so there will definitely not be a resolution .
That is the situation according to the Rules of Procedure , and we keep to the rules .
Your loudness does not make up for your arguments .
1 .
European Network and Information Security Agency (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are about to vote on extending the duration of ENISA 's mandate .
Just to remind you , ENISA is the European Network and Information Security Agency , which we , together with the Council , brought into being five years ago .
ENISA 's mandate expires half-way through next year by rotation .
My report proposes extending the mandate by three years , to 2012 , which also matches the Council 's decision .
ENISA 's aim is to contribute to Internet security .
However , with the increase in Internet crime , this is not possible with the available staff and the limited funding it gets so that , in the next three years by which we have extended the mandate , we need to think about what tasks ENISA should take on in the future and what role it can play , and then we will need to provide appropriate staff and funding .
I would ask you all , most urgently , to again approve this three-year extension and then to make an effort to get involved in the debate on the future of this Agency .
2 .
Lighting and light-signalling devices on two or three-wheel motor vehicles ( codified version ) (
3 .
Lighting and light-signalling devices on wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( codified version ) (
4 .
Roll-over protection structures of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( static testing ) ( codified version ) (
5 .
Mergers of public limited liability companies ( codified version ) (
6 .
Legal protection of computer programs ( codified version ) (
7 .
Reciprocal recognition of navigability licences for inland waterway vessels ( codified version ) (
8 .
Safeguards by Member States within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article 48 of the Treaty ( codified version ) (
9 .
Veterinary checks in intra-Community trade ( codified version ) (
10 .
Marketing of material for the vegetative propagation of the vine ( codified version ) (
11 .
Community procedure to improve the transparency of gas and electricity prices charged to industrial end-users ( recast version ) (
12 .
Nominal catch statistics in certain areas other than those of the North Atlantic ( recast version ) (
13 .
Catch and activity statistics in the Northwest Atlantic ( recast version ) (
14 .
Nominal catch statistics in the north-east Atlantic ( recast version ) (
15 .
Textile names ( recast version ) (
16 .
Accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Convention of 23 July 1990 on the elimination of double taxation in connection with the adjustment of profits of associated enterprises (
17 .
Exchanges between the Member States of information extracted from the criminal record (
18 .
Protection of the euro against counterfeiting (
19 .
Amendment of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice to specify the language rules which are to apply to the review procedure (
20 .
Revision of the framework directive on waste (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I rise on Rule 9 , specifically Annex I , Article 1 .
I did try to catch the eye last night in the debate , I am afraid to no avail .
There were only three or four people in the Chamber .
The rapporteur , Mrs Jackson , has been getting money from a recycling company or a waste-disposal company , which was undeclared , when she was actually rapporteur of this committee .
I find this a little fishy , even by the standards of this House , so I do not think she was the right and proper person to be rapporteur for this report .
Mr Bloom , I cannot say anything about the circumstances to which you are referring .
However , when you say something like that here , it is a very serious matter and you should be aware of the import of your remarks .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I made a full statement about this last night .
Mr Bloom may not have been able to hear it because his colleague , Mr Batten , was trying to get the attention of the House on the question of the referendum and spoke throughout the early part of my speech .
I made a full declaration at that point .
There is a full declaration in the Register of Members ' Interests .
I have referred to this in the debates in the Environment Committee .
I am a member of the Environmental Advisory Board of a company called Shanks plc in the UK and have been for the past three years .
The Environmental Advisory Board includes amongst its members a member of the Green Alliance and the chairman of one of the EU Scientific Advisory Committees .
The Environmental Advisory Board is solely concerned with the environmental audit performance of the company 's sites within the terms of EU legislation .
I am completely open about that and always have been .
I feel that my experience on the Board has helped me put together a reasonable report which does not favour any particular sort of waste treatment .
I hope that my colleagues will support me when I say that I have always been open about this and that I have tried to put together a balanced report , taking account of all points of view in the Parliament .
( Loud applause )
Mrs Jackson , I have known you personally for many years and I have no doubts at all about your personal integrity .
Furthermore , the wording of your declaration can be viewed and has been properly noted in the Register of Members ' Financial Interests .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to make any comment on what Mrs Jackson has just said .
I think , however , and this is something that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has always called for , that we should have better regulation on the issue of conflicts of interest , given that this Parliament , as a co-legislator , will in the future need to be and increasingly today needs to be transparent and correct : not only transparent , that is to say , but also correct , with regard to its Members ' conflicts of interest .
- After the vote :
Mr President , I do not care for the way some of these votes are going .
Can I suggest , in the light of our reaction to the French , Dutch and Irish referendums , that we simply disregard the votes and carry on as we wanted ?
Mr Hannan , when you speak , it must be in accordance with our Rules of Procedure .
I declare the standpoint thus amended to be accepted .
Mr President , I am sorry to interrupt the voting at the end but I think there was one error .
We have been checking during the course of the votes and I think all the groups agree that you may mistakenly have announced that Amendment 27 was carried .
Amendment 27 could not have been carried .
I would be grateful if you could go back to that and ensure that it was rejected .
The point is that you did not then go on to the next amendment .
Amendment 27 was accepted ; Amendment 92 was therefore invalidated .
We will check it again , but that is what we determined here .
We can vote again on Amendment 27 ; that is possible .
( DE ) Mr President , I just wanted to tell you that we can check whether you are allowed to repeat a vote that has already taken place , after you have announced the result .
It seems to us that , according to the rules of Parliament , that is not possible .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , anyone can make a mistake and if I proceeded too quickly or was incorrect in what I stated , then I take responsibility for that .
Naturally , I regret it , but let us not make a big deal out of it .
We will look into it .
( DE ) Mr President , as we understood it , it was an electronic check of a vote that had already taken place .
To that extent , the intention was clear .
( FR ) Mr President , I think that you are going rather too quickly .
In the same way as you did on other days , and again during the amendment to the Jackson report , you said : ' those in favour ' , ' abstentions ' , and ' carried ' .
In other words you exclude the possibility of voting ' against ' .
Mr President , I know how much you like Mrs Jackson and that what happens here does not have much to do with democracy , but all the same , please observe the proper conventions !
( Applause )
Mr Coûteaux , anybody can make a mistake , even within your group .
If you accept that that is true even for you , then we are on the same level .
I will try not to do it so quickly in future , so that you can see when you have not won .
Is that okay ?
( FR ) Mr President , I beg your pardon , but I am undoubtedly the victim of a secret lobby .
My machine allows me to vote ' for ' , but not ' against ' .
This could be awkward .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Lehideux .
I am glad that you do not hold me responsible .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just wanted to say that the chance you have given us to vote again on Amendment 27 has made it possible to put right an injustice , because in this way we were able to vote for Amendment 92 which , if Amendment 27 had really been adopted , would have lapsed .
It therefore seems to me that this decision was extremely wise and democratic .
21 .
Environmental quality standards in the field of water policy (
22 .
Minimum level of training of seafarers ( recast version ) (
23 .
Establishment of residue limits of pharmacologically active substances in foodstuffs of animal origin (
Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , this legislation is very necessary as the current legislation on residue control has led to a serious decrease in the availability of authorised veterinary medicines , creating adverse effects for public and animal health and welfare .
I would like to urge the presidency , particularly the incoming French Minister , to make this dossier a priority to help to resolve the crisis in availability , especially for what we call minor uses and so-called minor species , which include sheep , horses , bees , fish and many other animals that are not so minor in many of our countries .
However , there is an urgent need to review the Veterinary Medicines Directive according to the outcome of the task force on the availability of veterinary medicines .
This legislation is just a Band-Aid in terms of the necessity out there .
While I welcome it , I urge the incoming French Presidency to give it the priority it needs .
24 .
European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion (
Before the vote :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have reached an agreement with the Council and the Commission concerning Amendments 37 and 52 .
The compromise refers respectively to the financing of small non-governmental organisations and the maximum level of financing of NGOs .
The Commission and the Council have agreed to include a statement with the first-reading agreement and I would like to ask the Commissioner , whom I do not see here , but he made the declaration last night during the discussion ; he presented the statement included with the agreement ...
I do not know if there is anyone here who wants to present the agreement on behalf of the Commission .
In any case , I would like to ask my colleagues , provided that they agree with this statement , to vote in favour of the report so that we can proceed with the first reading vote .
25 .
Adoption by Slovakia of the single currency on 1 January 2009 (
26 .
The impact of cohesion policy on the integration of vulnerable communities and groups (
27 .
Policy coherence for development and the effects of the EU 's exploitation of certain biological natural resources on development in West Africa (
- Before the vote :
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats had asked , in accordance with Rule 168 , for this report to be referred back to committee .
After the compromise reached with the political groups to adopt Amendment 1 , tabled by our group , the PPE-DE Group is withdrawing its request for referral back to committee .
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
- ( PL ) Mr President , the new directive on waste is intended to provide a basis for the creation of a society in Europe that is universally engaged in recycling .
Some very ambitious aims are to be set for the Member States .
Are the aims that we wish to set for ourselves not too ambitious , though , and can the Member States , especially the new ones , manage to meet the rigorous requirements ?
It is worth pointing out that the old Member States have had far more time to adapt their waste management systems to the stringent requirements , while the new ones are being forced to introduce legal mechanisms and build the necessary infrastructure a lot more quickly .
The proposal for a new directive on waste is causing much controversy in many European countries .
I do not think we should be surprised , then , that it was so difficult to reach a compromise with the Council .
During yesterday 's debate , many MEPs said they were not happy with the compromise on the directive .
I fear , though , that the introduction of still more stringent requirements could cause problems with the implementation of this law .
The new directive on waste will force countries that have neglected municipal waste management to take decisive action .
These countries will be forced to introduce legal and economic mechanisms in order for their effect to be one that stimulates rather than burdens the economy .
The new directive should be a stimulus to the development of new ways of creating jobs .
That is why I voted in favour of the report .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
The waste directive that we have now adopted contains compromises , and is therefore liable to come under attack from many quarters .
I understand the concerns of all those environmentally-aware citizens who petitioned me , too , with requests not to support the directive .
At the same , however , I should also point out that many of my private member 's amendments , formulated in a progressive spirit in cooperation with the environmental organisations , have been included in the text .
The greatest virtue of this directive is the adoption of the waste hierarchy .
Primacy is given to waste prevention , followed by the different forms of reuse / recycling , and lastly disposal , which must be avoided where possible and at the very least reduced .
I voted in favour of the directive basically because it adopted the hierarchy principle , and I hope that in future we can improve on it .
( SK ) The consumer society produces a huge amount of waste that makes people 's lives a misery , particularly in large European cities .
Although recycling and the use of secondary products have been increasing in recent years , there is still too much waste in EU landfills .
While the approved compromise package is not perfect , I consider the text of the directive to be a politically ambitious instrument in the area of waste management for future generations of Europeans , which is why I supported the report by the rapporteur , Mrs Caroline Jackson .
The Member States will have to improve their waste management in accordance with this directive .
I welcome the fact that the directive also covers issues concerning the disposal of hazardous waste and oils .
I believe that the Member States will meet all the ambitious goals in keeping with the adopted text , in particular the objective that by 2015 they will have set up separate waste collection schemes for paper , metal , plastic , glass , textiles , other biodegradable waste , oil and hazardous waste .
( CS ) Mr President , I supported the revision of the framework directive on waste today .
One of my reasons for doing so was that after the adoption of the directive the Czech Republic will be able to ban the import of waste although it will contradict the national plan .
Thanks to the intervention of Parliament , the revised text also contains new goals in the area of recycling .
The southern European countries consider them to be too ambitious while the Scandinavians , as well as the Czechs , think they do not go far enough .
I welcome the compromise that was reached .
Different countries have different starting points and this directive is a common beginning .
Today 's waste production is 3.5 tonnes per person and in the southern European countries up to 90 % of waste goes to landfills .
The five-stage waste hierarchy is being incorporated into European legislation for the first time : first comes prevention , then re-use , then recycling and only then incineration as a means of energy production .
Landfills are the last resort for residual waste .
I very much value the work done by Mrs Jackson .
Thanks to her , this beneficial compromise for Europe was reached .
( CS ) I , too , welcome the adoption of the directive .
Few are likely to be satisfied with the goals of recycling a minimum of 50 % of household waste and 70 % of industrial waste .
Some see it as not ambitious enough ; others think it is unrealistic .
The Czech Republic is likely to see it as a step backwards but the important thing is that the directive does not prevent countries from adopting stricter and more binding national legislation , which I think is very desirable in this case .
Looking at the matter from the perspective of the Czech Republic , I consider the provision allowing the reclassification of municipal waste incinerators as waste-using facilities to be highly unsatisfactory .
This might mean massive imports of waste from neighbouring countries since importing waste for the purpose of using it is allowed in the Union .
I find it difficult to imagine what kind of effective control mechanism would be able to determine whether the imported waste was really used or incinerated .
Consequently , the countries that do not wish to become the incinerators for the whole of Europe should do everything in their power to make sure that this provision is removed from the directive .
Mr President , I rise to explain the vote that I made on the Caroline Jackson report , but before doing so I want to pay tribute to my Conservative colleague , Caroline Jackson , and the work she has done on this excellent report .
The provision for waste disposal is absolutely vital in every European country , not least my own , and I think this is a happy compromise .
It is one of those rare instances where Europe can act together in this way .
There are not many of them and maybe the people of Ireland were saying something about that in the decision in the referendum which they recently made .
But this is a good report .
I will hope it will inspire the British Government to take a lead in these matters .
That will certainly be the case if in hopefully two years time in Britain we have a Conservative government : Mr Cameron , our leader , has made it absolutely clear that green issues will be at the forefront of our affairs and therefore this vote today will set a good example , as indeed would be a good example the way Conservative Members of the European Parliament have voted .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
It gave me great pleasure to vote on the directive on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy , and I would like to take this opportunity to thank my 610 fellow Members who supported the adoption of this directive by voting in favour of it .
Once again we have succeeded in producing a good and forward-looking directive , a proposal that reinstates the principle of shared responsibility and joint regulation by Member States of water courses that cross national borders ; it is also a proposal that shifts the emphasis from emissions to immission , in other words it shifts the priority from the interests of industry to those of the river biota .
It is a directive that introduces rigorous limits on the use of 33 substances , notably insecticides , chemical and industrial substances and heavy metals .
Now it is the turn of the Council .
Will the Council support the directive and thereby help to clean up our river - our rivers ?
It is now up to the governments whether or not we will be able to put an end to the over-pollution of the River Raba and other European rivers in a similar situation .
Thank you very much .
( SK ) A high level of protection of human health and consumer safety are the fundamental interests when it comes to establishing residue limits of pharmacologically active substances in foodstuffs of animal origin .
In production-bred animals , veterinary medicines can leave behind residues , which has already started to have a negative impact on both human and animal health .
I welcome the report by my colleague , Mrs Doyle , and I voted in favour of it today .
A more consistent approach to controlling the residues of all pharmacologically active substances , and analyses of the risk they represent , are crucial .
I believe that we need to change , amend and unify the legal framework for setting maximum residue limits .
I share the rapporteur 's view that by doing so we can ensure that veterinary medicines are used correctly and are more accessible , see to it that the trade in foodstuffs of animal origin functions properly and , above all , achieve optimum protection of public health .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this report because , having worked for 18 years combating poverty and social exclusion , I strongly support the designation of 2010 as a European Year on this issue .
It is totally unacceptable that 78 million people in Europe are currently living at risk of poverty .
It is shocking that in this day and age children and the elderly are unable to feed themselves or keep themselves warm across many Member States .
Recent figures show a widening gap between the richest and poorest families in some countries as a result of the unequal distribution of European economic progress .
I hope that in this year the Commission will focus on regions where poverty and social exclusion are at their most acute .
For example , a recent report by Channel 4 in the UK highlighted that the region I represent , the West Midlands , has the second-highest level of poverty and the second-lowest standard of living nationwide .
Therefore , whilst I welcome this initiative because it will raise awareness of poverty and social exclusion , I am disappointed that it does not offer any clear solutions on the directions that Member States need to take and I believe that unless this year is used as platform to move forward , it will be just another talking shop , a missed opportunity to actually make a difference on a very important issue .
- ( PL ) Mr President , we have adopted an exceptionally important report on the problems of combating poverty and social exclusion .
This document is an example of the social sensitivity of the European Union and the creation of a European social model that we are building in parallel with actions promoting greater economic growth and a functioning market economy .
It is important for us to devote so much space to countering exclusion and poverty among children , the elderly and the disabled , in other words those who are not in a position to avoid this situation .
We should bear in mind that poverty increases in areas where natural disasters have struck , or as a consequence of other situations that we are currently observing , namely a significant rise in food and energy prices .
In this situation additional actions are needed to limit the impact of these harmful factors on the revenue situation of the poorest social and occupational groups .
Mr President , I supported this report because of course all of us are in favour of motherhood and apple pie .
None of us here wants to see an increase in poverty ; none of us here wants to see an increase in social exclusion .
So , the words are good and in a sense I echo my colleague on the other side of the Chamber in that .
The question is what we do about it .
And that is a question for each national government in the Member States .
In my own country 's case , it is up to the British Government to do something about it , and it is up to each national government , because the situation , the economic conditions and the social conditions apply differently throughout the European Union .
In Britain today , maybe in other countries too , we face a threat of a real recession , real poverty and real social exclusion getting worse , and it is now up to our Government in Britain and to the governments of all the Member States of the European Union to recognise this factor and to act accordingly .
( SK ) I am taking this opportunity - which is so precious for myself and for my country , Slovakia - to say thank you to all the Members who voted for Slovakia 's accession to the eurozone .
I am glad that all the Slovak Members managed to persuade the European Parliament , with the help of the balanced report by our colleague , Mr David Casa , that Slovakia belongs in the successful ' e ' club .
It is up to Slovakia now , and particularly the Government of the Slovak Republic , to continue to take strict macro-economic steps and continue with restrictive fiscal policies , so as to be able to comply with the Maastricht criteria in the future as well .
Slovakia 's accession to the eurozone is also a signal for other Member States to continue with their reforms and meet the Maastricht criteria .
Today I want to make use of the floor to thank the Slovak citizens , who put their lives at stake when helping to bring down the Iron Curtain in 1989 , and those who understood the importance of the reforms , though it was not always easy .
It is because of them that the Slovak people can build a strong Slovakia in a strong Europe today .

( CS ) Mr President , I sincerely congratulate Slovakia on its accession to the eurozone .
I also want to express my gratitude for the work done by the rapporteur , Mr Casa , who in Parliament had to deal with arguments concerning the justification for the revaluation of the Slovak currency and so on .
The debate demonstrated that many other requirements , which can affect the long-term stability of the single currency , are justified .
While they do not represent an obstacle to Slovakia 's accession today , they are a challenge for the agreement on amending the rules .
I do not agree with those who rejected in the course of today 's debate the possibility of changing the Maastricht criteria in the future .
Once more I would like to express my gratitude to the Government led by Mr Dzurinda that launched the necessary reforms in Slovakia five years ago .
Slovakia would not be celebrating its economic and political success today if not for them .
The Slovaks are now showing the Czech Republic the right path .
Mr President , I would like to explain to the House why I abstained on this particular resolution .
I abstained not because I am in favour of the single currency so far as my country is concerned ; in fact , I am absolutely opposed to it .
It would be a disaster for the British political system and for the British economy if we entered into the single currency .
I abstained because I believe that this is a matter entirely for the Slovak Government .
If they decide it is in their country 's interests to enter the single currency , that is their national entitlement and they have made their decision accordingly .
It is issues like this which demonstrate how Europe should proceed .
It should proceed by countries making decisions which are in their interests , and to berate the people of Ireland as has been done in this Chamber over recent hours is wrong .
The people of Ireland have made a decision in their national interests .
It is for them to make that decision and their democratic vote should be respected .
Winston Churchill said , ' Trust the people ' .
That is what we should do .
( Applause )
Mr President , firstly can I completely concur with what Mr Sumberg has just said .
I just have to say thank you to the people of Ireland for giving democracy a chance again in the European Union .
I rise on this because I too abstained , since it is my party 's policy not to vote on these matters as we are not included in them .
But I was interested in the report itself .
Paragraph 6 recommends that ' the Slovak Government set up an observatory to monitor the price of a selected number of basic goods on a weekly basis so as to fight false perceptions about price increases ' .
Well , in the UK we measure inflation and our inflation rate has supposedly gone up to 3.3 % , as announced earlier this morning .
However , if you meet a humble punter living in Daventry or Long Buckby , they will tell you that the price of their petrol has increased by way more ; the price of their food has increased by way more ; the price of their Council tax has increased by way more .
And so I wonder about the quality of statistics .
There are other problems in paragraphs 8 and 9 , but these all go to explain why it is a very good idea that Britain is not in this club .
Nevertheless , I wish this country well .
- ( PL ) Mr President , I abstained from voting on Mr Harangozó 's report .
One of the aims of the European Union 's cohesion policy should be to bolster the instruments of solidarity and integration .
Vulnerable groups and communities should receive our support in the fight against exclusion and inequality .
This should not , however , be seen as a counter-argument to the development of urban areas , as one does not preclude the other .
A territorial approach is important but does not , after all , invalidate the significance of effectiveness in cohesion policy .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the Harangozó report accepted today raises the exceptionally important problem of the impact of cohesion policy on the integration of the most threatened societies and groups .
This report unambiguously stresses the need for a continuation of cohesion policy in areas that are less developed , neglected , where there are difficult farming conditions and where there is weak or outdated infrastructure .
Particular support should be provided for regions and for areas where there is historical developmental retardation , where the local people are less well prepared to meet the difficult challenges of a market economy .
Intra-regional differences in the level of development are very great .
It is therefore necessary to create a factual image of the state of development of our regions and to use this as a basis for getting to grips with difficult areas within individual regions .
We can say right now that this concerns mountainous areas and a significant proportion of rural areas .
We have to put together a sustainable development process so that enclaves of weaker development or backward enclaves are not left behind or created .
Mr President , I also abstained on this report .
I would like to make two or three points as to why I did so .
Firstly , I have struggled to believe that the founding fathers of this place , when they were laying the basis for their European Union for freedom and for freedom of movement etc. thought that the detailed policy that is set out in this report would be one of the things that would come forward in years to come .
Secondly , I am not convinced that this should be done at European level - perhaps it could be at national level , but most certainly it should be at the most local of levels .
Finally , I would like to wind up by saying that in my constituency the City of Leicester is an example of how local action in this field can work .
Leicester is one of the most diverse cities in the United Kingdom for all sorts of different reasons - it has both rich and poor , of many different nationalities - and yet , because of individual and local action , Leicester has one of the most coherent strategies for the cohesion and integration , as we say here , of vulnerable communities and groups .
It is an example to us all that local action is best , and I worry when we talk about it at an EU level .
Mr President , my comments echo those of the speaker before me .
My comments are also relevant to the Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou report on poverty and social exclusion .
If we take these two reports together they clearly represent a flaw in the thinking of European politicians , namely that whatever the problem appears to be , Europe is the solution .
I urge all of us really concerned with the problems of vulnerable communities to look instead at local-community-led solutions and not the proposals of some distant Eurocrat or some distant Member of the European Parliament .
Please look at the excellent work , for example , of the Centre for Social Justice based in London in my own constituency and led by Iain Duncan-Smith and his wonderful team , who are building an alliance of local community organisations tackling poverty and social exclusion : organisations such as the Croydon Caribbean Credit Union or the London Boxing Academy , attracting some of the most vulnerable people in society .

While the issues in the report are all serious problems , we should remember that the solutions are often to be found closer to home , and for this reason I abstained on the Harangozó report .
( CS ) Mr President , the sustainable development policy has no chance of succeeding unless it assumes a global dimension .
The UN Millennium Declaration may call on all states to ensure policy coherence for development but developed countries do not take many practical steps in this regard .
Therein lies the contradiction of the undertaking by the European Union , urging us to assess the impact of our European policies concerning the Development Goals .
This makes the fact that we add restrictions to our fisheries policy for the benefit of developing countries even more valuable .
I would also like to mention timber logging in West Africa , where only 5 % of forests are managed sustainably .
Of course it is important for the Commission to financially support the launch of national strategic plans in Africa but we will also be able to prevent the plundering of tropical forests if we prohibit the timber from being imported into Europe unless it has a clear eco-label .
I believe that the Commission will soon table such proposals and that we in this House and the Council will adopt them , without looking for any excuses .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - I supported the reports of Lidia Joanna Geringer de Oedenberg and I welcome the idea that at times when the European Union is facing major political decisions , we should not occupy ourselves with technical issues in excessive depth .
Although I would be intrigued to hear the Members of this House fiercely debating the political significance of lighting and light-signalling devices on wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors , I fully support using the accelerated working method for official codification of legislative texts in such matters .
When the EU is once again in deadlock , we need to concentrate all our attention on finding a way to save the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - ( SV ) I vote against this report , because detailed regulation of this kind should not be dealt with at political level .
It is unnecessary to codify legislation which should be withdrawn in favour of regulation through technical standards drawn up by technical committees .
in writing . - ( SV ) I voted against the report , because detailed technical regulation of this kind should not be handled at this level .
It should be dealt with by technical committees through technical standards ( there should be no codification of legislation , which should be withdrawn in favour of technical standards ) .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg on the legal protection of computer programs , as I feel that , since they play such a massive role in the functioning of modern society , they should be guaranteed appropriate legal protection that is recognised as complying with copyright regulations , like literary and artistic works in the sense of the Berne Convention .
Only computer programs expressed in the proper form should be subject to protection .
The actual concepts and principles on which individual elements of an IT program are based cannot be subject to such protection .
Naturally , mathematical procedures , programming languages and algorithms cannot be subject to such protection .
This protection should be afforded to both natural and legal persons , in accordance with national copyright legislation .
The point should be made that if a program has been written by employees as part of their work duties , the employer or customer has a right to enjoy property rights arising from this program ( unless otherwise stipulated in a contract ) .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the resolution regarding Romania 's accession to the Convention of 23 July 1990 on the elimination of double taxation in connection with the adjustment of profits of associated enterprises , because I consider it necessary to reduce the fiscal burden for tax payers .
It is very important for Romania and Bulgaria to join the Arbitration Convention as soon as possible and , consequently , to join the other Member States for which the Convention is already in force .
Their non-participation in this system presently generates significant costs for the economy and represents an obstacle in the operation of the European common market .
According to the EU Treaty of Accession of Romania and Bulgaria , the Council has to set the date for the coming into force of this Convention , based on the recommendation received from the Commission and after having consulted the Parliament .
I would like to express my concern regarding the retroactive implementation of the Arbitration Convention as of 1 January 2007 and , for this reason , I support the proposal for the effective date to be the day following the date of publishing the Decision in the EU Official Journal .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Moderate Delegation in the European Parliament has today voted in favour of the report by Agustín Díaz de Mera García Consuegra ( PPE-DE , ES ) on the exchange of information from criminal records between Member States and on the content of the information exchanged .
When crime moves across borders , measures to combat it must be adapted accordingly .
We therefore support the framework decision and increased cooperation to simplify and render more effective the exchange of information on convictions between Member States .
However we take strong exception to the article relating to the processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin , political opinions , religious or philosophical beliefs and the like .
This proposal regarding the organisation and exchange of criminal record information between Member States is intended to improve communication between judicial authorities .
It is important to ensure that extracts from criminal records are easy to understand and that the information contained in them is put to proper use .
I therefore support the excellent report by my colleague Mr Díaz de Mera , as well as the proposed amendments , namely regarding data protection .
It is essential that a general set of data protection principles is applied , which should be borne in mind when collecting , processing and transmitting data .
Additionally , the data protection authorities should be systematically informed of the exchange of personal data under this Framework Decision .
It is also important that this system should operate effectively , thus becoming a useful tool in preventing and fighting against crime , particularly that of a sexual nature .
To ensure greater protection of children , for instance , it is fundamental that schools have access to information on their staff or potential staff , in case they have a criminal record relating to offences against children .
It is outrageous that a dangerous criminal should be able to hide behind a lack of information about his criminal record so as to evade justice or commit crimes in other Member States .
The Fourniret affair is a distressing and painful example of this .
In these conditions , allowing the preparation of complete and readily available criminal records , which include convictions handed down in different states , seems a welcome improvement .
However , this laudable initiative does not just target paedophiles , murderers and armed robbers .
Simply by including the words ' disqualifications arising from a criminal conviction ' , it also covers international persecution for holding certain views .
We know only too well who the target is , in this madness that is Europe , open to the winds of uncontrolled immigration , perpetually repenting for what it was , what it is and what it could be : patriots attached to their identity , proud of their people , their nation and their history , and who dare to proclaim out loud their intention to defend them .
Therefore , we are abstaining because we fear that , apart from the legitimate repression of crime , this text will allow the extension to the entire Union of laws that destroy freedom and do so much damage to the democratic life of our countries .
The transmission of information extracted from the criminal records of citizens of one Member State to another must be conducted on the basis of ( bilateral ) cooperation established between the parties involved .
This initiative sets out to improve communication between judicial authorities and to ensure that Member States ' requests regarding the criminal records of citizens of other Member States ' are replied to properly and in a comprehensive , exhaustive fashion ' .
However , we disagree with the harmonisation of laws and the adoption of common procedures , namely as concerns the obligation to transmit ' full information concerning the convictions handed down on its nationals ' , or the obligation to ' store and update all information received ' , as well as the harmonisation of procedures - all the more so as , in the absence of clear guarantees on the protection of these data , in our view this proposal becomes even more questionable .
We recognise the need for mechanisms enabling the reciprocal transmission of information on criminal records between different Member States , yet this needs to be done on a case-by-case basis and within a framework of cooperation between the said States .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Díaz de Mera García Consuegra report on the exchange of criminal record information between Member States .
With increased mobility in the EU , it is important that Member States are able to keep each other informed of the criminal histories of EU citizens resident within their territories .
Safeguards must , however , be applied and I welcome the proposed general prohibition of the processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin , political opinions , religious or philosophical beliefs , party or trade union membership and data concerning health or sex life .
in writing . - ( DE ) In a European Union with open borders , good cooperation between the authorities is necessary in order to be able to keep up reasonably well with the fight against crime .
The goal of a European Internet portal that citizens and businesses can go to to obtain information about their rights as a consequence of criminal proceedings seems worthwhile .
The setting up of an electronic register that simplifies the exchange of criminal records across borders can be welcomed only when data protection requirements are sufficiently incorporated .
In practice , much will depend on the management of acts that are liable to prosecution in one Member State but not in another .
In my opinion , these questions were not dealt with properly in the early stages , so I have abstained from voting .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mr Díaz de Mera .
It is vital to improve communication between the judicial authorities and to ensure that requests for information from Member States concerning criminal records are replied to properly and in a comprehensive , exhaustive fashion .
Open borders , in fact , permit not only the free movement of honest citizens but also of criminals who often escape the net of justice by taking refuge in other states in which they commit further crimes .
Owing to inadequate exchange of information , however , neither their potential to re-offend nor the real danger they represent are taken into proper consideration .
In particular , as reported in the newspapers every day , sex criminals and other extremely dangerous individuals benefit from the lack of an effective information exchange system and take advantage of the limits imposed on the EU 's current powers .
in writing . - ( SV ) The European Parliament 's amendments improve the legislation , but at the same time I do not want to vote for its implementation .
I therefore abstain in the vote .
This Regulation aims to ensure a high level of protection against counterfeiting and falsification of the euro , laying down measures necessary for its protection through checking notes and coins for authenticity and fitness for circulation .
According to the most recent statistics , roughly 561 000 counterfeit notes and 211 100 counterfeit coins were withdrawn from circulation in 2007 .
Now that the European Central Bank and the Commission have laid down the definitive procedures for the detection of false notes and coins , it has become essential for the 2001 Regulation to be amended , as the establishments involved in the distribution of cash to the public have the tools they needed to carry out these checks .
I also welcome the explicit obligation for credit and other relevant institutions to check the authenticity of the notes and coins they have received before putting them back into circulation .
At the same time , they will have to adapt their internal procedures and upgrade their equipment as needs be .
It is also important for the authenticity of the euro to be guaranteed in the Member States which do not belong to the euro area , but where the euro circulates as a transaction currency , although control methods cannot be applied in the same fashion , which therefore means that specific verification procedures need to be established .
in writing . - ( DE ) There is a constant stream of fake banknotes of excellent quality from Eastern Europe .
After all , the European Union is , by its very nature , very attractive to counterfeiters , because the people are not particularly familiar with the new currency and even cash machines are not immune to fraud .
Improving the protection of the euro against fraud is a welcome development , which is why I , too , voted in favour of the Diaz de Mera report .
Constantly working on making the euro safer is one thing , but it achieves nothing if people still know very little about security features .
The European Central Bank and the Member States therefore need to increase their efforts in the area of education .
In addition , we must also see to it that it is possible to catch professional counterfeiters quickly anywhere in the EU .
Continual retrenchment in police services at the same time as borders are being eliminated is counterproductive , and not only in this area .
This draft Council decision , stemming from a request from the Court of Justice , is intended to add a provision to the Court 's Rules of Procedure concerning the use of languages in the review procedure in accordance with Article 64 of the Court 's Statute .
The procedure allowing the Court of Justice to review decisions of the Court of First Instance , as provided for in Article 225 ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) of the EC Treaty and Article 140a ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) of the Euratom Treaty , may be used when the latter Court has ruled on appeals against decisions of judicial panels .

Under the Statute a review may be carried out in cases where questions referred for a preliminary ruling fall within the jurisdiction of the Court of First Instance .
Although this possibility has not yet arisen , the Court of Justice has nevertheless taken the view that its Rules of Procedure need to be amended to enable it to apply its language arrangements to the new review procedure .
This provides for proceedings to be conducted in the language of the particular decision ( i.e. of the Court of First Instance ) being reviewed , which we believe to be right .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to give our full support to the compromise which has been worked out between the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
The compromise means that binding recycling targets will be introduced , which is extremely positive .
However , we would have preferred to see a more exact definition of by-products and even higher recycling targets .
in writing . - The objective of any waste policy is to minimise the negative effects of waste on human health and the environment .
Decoupling waste from our growing economies is vital .
We produce 1.3 billion tonnes of waste annually , some 40 million tonnes of which is hazardous .
This EU legislation aims to move us closer to becoming a recycling society .
Parliament has insisted on targets for re-use and recycling of waste .
These targets are ambitious .
By 2020 Member States need to increase recycling and reuse of household waste by 50 % .
We need to reduce amounts of waste in landfill and incineration .
The hierarchy system as a priority order forces legislators in waste prevention and management policy to apply prevention as key , followed by re-use , then recycling , with recovery and disposal at the lower end .
Only incineration with high standards of energy efficiency will be defined as recovery .
We need to engage with citizens , producers and consumers regarding reduction , reuse and recycling of waste .
Community and local authority recycling facilities need to be practically located and accessible for maximum impact .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I agree with the rapporteur that in some states , and especially where the move away from tipping has only just begun , obtaining energy from waste may be dominant and may discourage investment in other processes , such as recycling or reuse .
Poland currently recycles the smallest amount of waste of any EU country - just 4 % .
In Małopolska , 7 % of refuse is recycled .
Meanwhile , there are plans to build incinerators to handle 250 000 tonnes of waste a year - more than is produced by a city .
For an incinerator to be efficient , it must be suitably filled .
The project financed by the European Commission will thereby destroy any enthusiasm for segregation , as everything will be combustible .
It is estimated that tens of thousands of tonnes of illegally imported municipal waste , foil , scrap , used tyres and batteries regularly find their way to Poland .
On a selected southern sector of our western border , as many as 16 shipments bringing a total of 40 tonnes of waste have been stopped since January this year .
Some local authorities near the border have had to increase their budget by 30 % to clean up illegal dumps .
I would appeal for specific steps to be taken as soon as possible with a view to stopping these practices .
Endless regulations on waste sorting or recovery methods are of no value as long as it is cheaper for firms to dump refuse in the fields of a neighbouring state .
The compromise proposal of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on waste management is a significant volte-face for the sake of the huge , hidden financial interests involved in refuse and waste .
The proposed directive does not contribute to an overall reduction in the volume of waste .
Its targets and means are deliberately vague .
It exempts industrial waste and confines itself to certain types of urban waste , in the interests of cost-effectiveness and competition rather than the environment and public health .
One example of the general climb-down is the undermining of the hierarchical structure whereby recycling must precede energy recovery .
Another example is viewing energy combustion of composite waste as energy recovery in cases other than those already specified , such as the production of biogas .
Toxic and other hazardous substances discharged into the air , penetrating the soil and the water table , and affecting nutrients , have a direct effect on the health of employees in the waste management sector , and the population as a whole .
What is needed is a reduction in the volume of refuse , as well as its planned management and properly organised transport .
Responsibility should be taken at government , regional and local level to sort and separate toxic and other hazardous substances ( dioxins etc . ) and there should be as much recycling as possible .
Composite waste must not be burnt .
There ought to be an environmental upgrade of landfill sites and safe final disposal of the residues from them .
I voted in favour of Mrs Jackson 's recommendation for second reading on the revision of the framework directive on waste , as I believe that this proposal will help reduce the environmental and socio-economic impacts of waste management , bearing in mind that the reduction , prevention , re-use and recycling of waste need to be priorities throughout the European Union .
I voted for Amendment 82 because I support more ambitious targets for waste recycling for all Member States , in order to ensure an effective European waste prevention policy .
In this second reading , the European Parliament is insisting that the Council accept amendments that were already adopted at first reading .
Key amendments were the introduction of targets for recycling and waste prevention and the setting up of a five-stage waste hierarchy as a general rule .
The Council removed all references to targets but the rapporteur has restored Parliament 's amendments in a modified form .
In the rapporteur 's view , it would be wrong to miss this opportunity to ensure that this directive does more than supply a set of definitions .
There should be a real link between the directive and the aspirations about recycling and prevention set out in the Thematic Strategy on Waste Prevention and Recycling .
One important aim of the directive is to draw a clear distinction between what is considered ' recovery ' and what is ' disposal ' of waste , since Court of Justice judgments put the question in doubt .
In any event , we believe that waste reduction , recycling and recovery must be the priorities .
However , deeming coincineration a method of recovery and therefore a lucrative industry is very dubious indeed .
The question is , if this is the case , who is going to reduce production and increase recycling and recovery ?
According to OECD figures , between now and 2020 we will produce 45 % more waste than in 1995 .
Therefore , the European Union urgently needs to define a new waste management strategy allowing all types of waste to be seen not only as a source of pollution to be reduced , but also as a potential resource to be exploited .
The compromise adopted at today 's plenary will help to shift the focus towards prevention and recycling - with the aim of stabilising the volume of waste produced between now and 2012 and meeting the recycling targets of 50 % of household waste and 70 % of construction and demolition waste by 2020 - with separate waste collection schemes being mandatory by 2015 , at least for paper , metal , plastic and glass , and tighter regulations for hazardous waste , mainly through separate collection and traceability .
Separate waste oil collection will also have to be arranged , as well as distinguishing between incineration operations aimed at the ultimate elimination of waste and those that recycle through energy recovery .
Therefore , by applying an energy efficiency formula , only the most energy-efficient municipal waste incinerators will be classified as recycling plants .
in writing . - The second reading on the Waste Framework Directive represents a wasted opportunity .
The EU should be setting firm targets for waste reduction , not producing non-binding aspirations for some far-distant future date .
My own group 's amendments would have strengthened the proposed legislation and it is a matter of some regret that they were unsuccessful .
in writing . - ( CS ) Forward-looking politicians in almost all countries of the world have for years been monitoring the avalanche-style increase in waste generation .
One good solution to this disastrous trend is legislation imposing a high percentage of recycling of individual materials .
Unfortunately , even when the waste is separated , there is still a constant increase in the amount of materials that are collectively called ' mixed waste ' .
I welcome Mrs Jackson 's effort to find a correct and valid solution in her report .
Although some of the suggestions put forward in the amendments are interesting and we will support them , I cannot accept that waste incineration should be seen as an energy use equal to sustainable energy sources .
Consequently , although the report contains some positive aspects , I cannot vote for it ; nor can the majority of the GUE / NGL Group .
We cannot support the re-classification of incinerators of municipal waste to put them on a par with ecologically pure energy sources .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , I had a number of reasons for supporting the compromise that my colleague Mr Jackson negotiated , and I wish to thank her for the outstanding work she has done .
We had good reason to be satisfied with this outcome because more and more waste is ending up at landfill sites .
That is a pity in these times , when Europe is aware of the importance of policy on resources and raw materials .
On average only just under a third of household waste in Europe is recycled or composted .
About half is dumped and just under a fifth is burned .
In some Member States as much as 90 % of household waste ends up at landfill sites .
We need quantitative targets for the recycling of waste whilst at the same time focusing on the importance of waste prevention .
I would nevertheless like to point out that we need to make drastic improvements to the way we use energy .
It is high time we stopped applying the mistaken logic that says that the use of waste cannot be developed because it would result in more waste .
As that sort of logic only seems in practice to lead to an increase in the number of landfill sites , it has already shown its weakness .
I must therefore admit that I supported the Council line on the waste hierarchy and championed its guiding principle .
It would have made for a more flexible waste policy which took account of circumstances .
The guiding principle was also the approach I adopted in my amendment , and I thank Mrs Jackson for her support in different ways during the whole process .
I am therefore grateful to Mrs Jackson , who showed herself to be a little more rational than might be concluded from the final outcome .
She realised that energy from waste treatment plants is only a partial answer to the EU 's energy shortage , and felt compelled to say that in some of the Member States energy use is regarded as a threat to recycling .
in writing . - I welcome Caroline Jackson 's report on the revision of the Framework Directive on Waste .
To adequately contribute to our climate change objectives , the EU needs to renew its commitment to waste reduction and recycling .
We would make considerable progress on this by introducing binding recycling and re-use targets by 2020 of 50 % for household waste and 70 % for construction and demolition .
These views are reflected in my vote .
in writing . - ( RO ) The purpose of revising this directive is to create a homogenous and coherent legislative framework , connected with the objectives of the Strategy on the prevention and recycling of waste so that Europe becomes a recycling society with an increased level of efficiency in using waste resources .
The following shall be established :
• A 5-step waste management hierarchy : prevention , reuse , recycling , energy recovery and waste disposal ( including storage ) ;
• Measures / plans for the prevention of waste generation ;
• Mandatory recycling targets for municipal waste , as well as construction and demolition waste ;
• Increased responsibility of the manufacturer to supply information to the public regarding the possibilities to reuse and recycle products .
The actions to be taken in the Member States in order to achieve all the above-mentioned objectives should encourage the modernization and creation of new units for waste recycling , conditioning for reuse , namely " the green industry ” .
I voted for the revision of the Waste Framework Directive because all these measures shall contribute to the creation of new jobs , safer and more durable waste management , rational use of national resources and adjustment to climate change ( development of non-ETS sectors ) .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am supporting Mrs Jackson 's report because the new directive on waste is intended to provide a basis for the creation of a ' recycling society ' .
Europe has been faced with some very ambitious targets .
Are they too ambitious , though , and can the Member States , especially the new ones , manage to meet the rigorous requirements ?
I would like to make you aware that the new Member States already have problems complying with Community standards for municipal waste management .
It is worth pointing out that the ' old ' Member States have had far more time to adapt their waste management systems to the stringent requirements , while the new ones are being forced to introduce legal mechanisms and build the necessary infrastructure a lot more quickly .
The proposal for the new directive is causing much controversy in many countries , as its implementation will have major consequences for the economy .
I do not think we should be surprised , then , that it was so difficult to reach a compromise with the Council .
During yesterday 's debate , many MEPs said they were not happy with the compromise on the directive .
I fear , though , that the introduction of still more stringent requirements could cause problems with the implementation of this law .
The new Directive on waste will force countries that have neglected municipal waste management to take decisive action .
These countries will be forced to introduce legal and economic mechanisms in order for their effect to be one that stimulates rather than burdens the economy .
The new directive should be a stimulus to the development of new ways of creating jobs .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance supported some 30 compromise amendments , but also tabled further-reaching amendments seeking to tighten up the text with regard to hazardous waste , the treatment of bio-waste , ' end-of-waste status ' and the concept of by-products and waste that has ceased to be waste .
Above all , we wanted binding targets , to reduce the total amount of waste generated and to focus on recycling and re-use .
We oppose the contention that domestic-waste incinerators can be regarded as recovery on the basis of an energy-efficiency formula .
The text ultimately adopted lays down no legally binding target for waste reduction .
The proposal to fund a study on means of preventing waste is totally inadequate in this regard .
Recycling and re-use targets may have been laid down at 50 % and 70 % and Member States may well be required to take legislative action , but the targets are not legally binding in themselves .
This is irrefutably a missed opportunity .
In my electoral district , the danger with this revised framework directive is that some could seize upon the ' weaker ' European standards in order to defer somewhat the efforts we are already making .
Flanders is something of a world champion in this field ; we are right at the top .
Yet this revised framework directive is no real incentive to us to do even better .
It is a shame .
in writing . - ( NL ) Mr President , Belgium has been a forerunner on waste policy for years and so , personally , I would have preferred a rather more ambitious text .
Nevertheless , I believe that the agreement that Mrs Jackson managed to conclude with the Slovenian Presidency reveals excellent negotiating skills and a feeling for compromise on her part .
For the first time , a European waste hierarchy is being introduced .
Besides , substantial progress is being made on prevention , recycling and selective collection of domestic waste .
Gambling on a third reading and jeopardising the existing agreement again is too risky , in my view .
Since the most important thing is that the Directive is actually brought in , I voted in favour of the agreement .
Big business and industries unrestrainedly polluting rivers , lakes and water tables with untreated toxic waste are unaccountable .
They cannot be curbed by legislation that essentially allows companies to pollute and pay negligible fines - if and when a legal infringement is discovered - while making huge profits at the expense of public health and the environment .
The EU and governments are aware of this but maintain a wall of silence about it .
With the prospect of increased profits , they endanger the lives of workers by pretending to be ' competitive ' , while requiring them to fund anti-pollution measures through taxation .
The contamination of the water table in the Asopos River region with hexavalent chromium from unmonitored industrial activity highlights the substantial shortcomings in the legislation , which confines itself to setting the upper limit for chromium content and makes no provision for such a demonstrably dangerous carcinogen .
The EU 's proposed measures , even when they limit the content of hazardous substances , are invalidated by the absence of effective checks and pollution-deterrent measures that would affect industries ' profits .
Only the worker 's struggle against the profits of the plutocracy can safeguard the inalienable right to health and life .
I voted in favour of Mrs Laperrouze 's recommendation for second reading on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy , given that good surface water chemical status in the European Union is an essential condition for protecting human health and the environment .
This Directive is positive , as it sets limits for the concentration in water of particular pollutants that are harmful to health , as well as clarifying further Member States ' obligations in terms of transboundary pollution .
The adopted amendments somewhat improve the Council 's proposal .
The justification for this Directive derives from a requirement contained in the Directive establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy , and contains aspects with which we disagree .
Such is the case with the polluter pays principle , which may just serve to protect those who have the money to pay for pollution .
All they will need to do is pay up and then create clean-up industries to be able to carry on with their lucrative business at the cost of pollution that they have , meanwhile , been authorised to create , possibly destroying rivers , forests , etc .
We believe it is essential to act in the area of pollution prevention .
Yet we know that Article 16 of the Framework Directive , lists various obligations relating to the Commission 's drawing-up of proposals , including specific measures to combat water pollution by individual pollutants or groups of pollutants that pose a significant risk to or via the aquatic environment , establishing a list of priority substances , including priority hazardous substances and also setting quality standards applicable to the concentrations of priority substances in surface water , sediment and biota .
We also know that the Council has failed to meet the expectations of the European Parliament as regards the reclassification of certain priority substances as priority hazardous substances and as regards other important areas .
Hence our abstention .
I voted in favour of this text , which sets out the environmental quality standards for priority substances and certain other pollutants in order to ensure a high level of protection for the aquatic environment .
In total , 33 pollutants ( mainly pesticides and heavy metals ) found in rivers , lakes and coastal waters will be subject to environmental quality standards .
Not only do these substances threaten the survival of ecosystems , but they also - through the food chain - endanger human health .
The compromise that has just been voted on will enable Member States to ' make progress ' so that they comply with these standards by 2018 .
The decision to classify new substances as ' priority ' or ' hazardous ' should be taken by the Commission as quickly as possible .
Close to sources of pollution , it will take longer to meet the environmental quality standards .
In these ' mixing zones ' , concentrations of pollutants could exceed the limits set .
We must surround ourselves with the necessary safeguards so that Member States can have the best water treatment techniques available when identifying ' mixing zones ' .
in writing . - ( DE ) When it comes to water , our liquid gold , it is essential for the future that we preserve its quality and never slacken our efforts to protect it .
If , in practice , it turns out that water quality in the new Member States is lower , and that there are problems with non-Member States , we here in Parliament will have to intensify our efforts to find solutions including , in particular , putting a stop to the illegal dumping of waste and dealing with waste water .
Since intensive fertilisation in agriculture can put a strain on water , this should provide an incentive to adjust measures to promote agriculture in such a way that greater support is given to traditional , environmentally friendly growing methods , such as those used by organic farmers .
I believe that this report will lead to better monitoring of water quality , and that is why I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( RO ) The main elements of the proposal for directive are :
establishing water quality standards ( EQS ) for priority substances and priority hazardous substances ;
introduction of the " mixing zone ” concept - in whose area EQSs may be exceeded ;
setting an inventory of discharges , emissions and losses of priority and priority hazardous substances , which facilitates the monitoring of the way in which the objectives of the Water Framework Directive are achieved at the relevant point sources of pollution , as well as the assessment of the impact of implementing the principle of " the polluter pays ” ;
introduction of the provisions regarding cross-border pollution .
They exclude the sole responsibility of the Member State for exceeding EQS in case it proves that the excess was due to cross-border pollution , but requires the taking of joint actions .
I voted for the environmental quality standards in the field of water policy because the introduction of the provisions regarding " cross-border pollution ” is welcomed , especially in the case of Romania , taking into consideration that we border non-EU countries , which are not forced to comply with the standards imposed at the Community level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Laperrouze .
We do need to strengthen the European strategy and action on water protection .
I believe that specific measures are needed to combat the water pollution produced by individual pollutants , or groups of pollutants , that pose a significant risk to the aquatic environment .
This proposal aims to ensure a high level of protection against the risks that such priority substances ( and a few other pollutants ) pose to the aquatic environment and it therefore lays down some environmental quality standards .
I applaud the various measures relating to standards and biological species .
I also congratulate the rapporteur on the approach she has taken in dealing with this issue , which is in many ways decidedly technical and complex .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou report and in particular welcome the additional role given to the European Maritime Safety Agency .
EMSA was established in the wake of a number of serious maritime incidents and has an important role to play in minimising such future occurrences .
It is right that EMSA 's interests should extend into the field of ensuring adequate training for seafarers .
In the light of the recent Erika and Prestige disasters , human error has emerged as a serious aspect of maritime safety .
Good training for crews is therefore essential .
In this regard I should like to raise two aspects that I consider fundamental .
The first concerns the very logic behind Europe 's approach : the refusal to promote in any way whatsoever the recruitment of seamen from Member States .
Indeed , far from showing a Community preference , as in all economic and social areas , the recruitment of non-EC seamen is encouraged .
This deliberately anti-national approach can only increase the current shortage of qualified seamen in the EU and the lack of interest which is emerging for this difficult and dangerous profession .
All of this in favour of under-qualified , cheap labour from Asia .
Secondly , we need to safeguard ourselves to the maximum , in terms of quality of training , its supervision and the issuing of certificates .
Instead of mutual recognition of qualifications based on minimum , non-EC technical standards , we should recognise the true value of our existing qualifications and save our marine professions in the name of maritime safety and the protection of our national jobs .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the minimum level of training of seafarers - C6-0348 / 2007 - .
The fine-tuning of the provisions of the directive on the minimum level of training of seafarers raised in Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou 's report seems right and appropriate , as it will enable more complete fulfilment of the provisions of this directive , which is aimed at improving the level of knowledge and skills of seafarers and also at providing greater guarantees of safety and prevention of maritime pollution .
As veterinary medicinal products used for the therapeutic treatment and the welfare of animals which are destined for human consumption may give rise to residues of such products in food-producing animals , a risk assessment of the safety limit of residues of all pharmacologically active substances contained in veterinary products needs to be carried out .
The Commission 's proposal to repeal Regulation ( EEC ) No 2377 / 90 seeks to resolve the difficulties encountered in the application of the existing legislation .
It proposes alternative ways to achieve a high level of consumer protection , coupled with the continued availability and development of veterinary medicinal products for the European market and good functioning of the intra- and extra-Community trade in food of animal origin .
The rapporteur also points out that as the ultimate goal is human health protection , a more consistent approach is required for the risk analysis and control of residues of pharmacologically active substances , which may appear in food produced in or imported into the European Union .
in writing . - The proposed simplifications of the regulations dealing with pharmacologically active substances in foodstuffs of animal origin are to be welcomed and , accordingly , I supported Mrs Doyle 's report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We expect the Member States of the EU to act continuously to combat poverty .
Both decision-makers and public and private agencies must take up their responsibilities and act to improve opportunities in employment , business enterprise and education and to prevent social exclusion and combat poverty .
On the other hand , we do not think that the EU should conduct information and PR campaigns directed at the public .
The EUR 17 million set aside for the European Year would do more good in the hands of the poorest members of society .
in writing . - ( RO ) I supported , by voting , the proposal for a decision regarding the designation of the year 2010 as the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
In addition to the priority actions mentioned in the proposal for a decision , we consider it absolutely necessary to introduce a minimum guaranteed salary in all the EU Member States for an efficient fight against poverty .
In the country where I come from , Romania , after 3 years of right-wing government , 40 % of the Romanian employees live below the poverty threshold because they cannot afford to pay the costs of the minimum consumer basket and of the current bills during winter .
Due to the 2005 introduction of the single tax rate by the right-wing government , an excessive polarization of society has occurred , as well as an increase in poverty .
In 2007 , only 5 % of the Romanian employees earned more than 2000 RON , approximately 500 Euros .
In the case of Romania , it is necessary to give up the single tax rate and adopt the progressive rate , at the same time with exemption from the tax on reinvested capital .
In this way , the society polarization would diminish and fair taxation would be achieved and people with low income would be taxed less than those with high and very high income .
Although we know that it is not enough to devote one year to fighting poverty to ensure that the appropriate measures are taken , we voted in favour of the report to try at least to raise the profile of this issue .
Nevertheless , we would like at the same time to warn of the gravity of what is happening and of the consequences of measures that continue to promote the liberalisation and privatisation of key public sectors and services , labour deregulation , precarious and poorly-paid work and rising prices of essential goods , which is helping economic and financial groups to boost their windfall profits at the cost of increased poverty .
For this reason , whilst giving our approval to the report , we insist on an end to the neoliberal policies of the Lisbon Strategy and the Stability Pact , and we demand alternative policies guaranteeing the social inclusion of children , women , workers and their families .
We need measures that value work , increase employment with rights , ensure quality public services for all , decent housing , public and universal social security , an agricultural policy that boosts production and the incomes of those working the land and guarantees a decent income for fishermen .
Each ' European Year ' is an excuse for the EU to spend vast sums on its own propaganda , on a theme considered to be of media interest .
Therefore , 2010 is to be the year for combating poverty .
Will it also be the year for combating globalisation , which causes unemployment ?
Will it also be the year for combating immigration , which forces wages down in Europe ?
Will it also be the year when we abandon the economic , trade , financial and fiscal policies that are dragging Europe 's middle classes into poverty ?
Will it even be ' European ' , caught as it is between combating global poverty and the inevitable priority given to non-EC migrants who are classed as amongst the most vulnerable people in the world ?
Increasing and persistent poverty in Europe is a scandal .
It deserves more than a ' European Year ' promoting eurocracy .
It deserves to be the focus of all the decisions that you make .
Unfortunately , experience has shown that , regardless of prepared statements , this is not the case .
in writing . - ( SV ) In March 2000 the European Council invited Member States and the Commission to take steps to make ' a decisive impact on the eradication of poverty ' by 2010 .
This would happen through the Open Method of Coordination , which is in itself positive since the method adopts a decentralised approach .
Action to combat poverty is an extremely urgent matter .
However , this work should be carried on in all essential respects by the Member States in cooperation with international organisations having broad democratic legitimacy , such as the United Nations .
We take a negative view of several points in the Commission 's proposal and , not least , in the European Parliament 's report which , among other things , highlights the value of structural support and the need for the EU to provide support to extremely remote regions .
We also take a critical view of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , an awareness-raising year which features prominently in the report in question .
There have already been international years and campaigns of this kind .
We must ask ourselves whether it is worth appropriating EUR 17 million for such an EU Year and what the concrete added value is .
We are convinced that these financial resources would do more good in the national budgets of Member States , where they would make a real contribution to the urgent fight against poverty and social exclusion .
On the basis of the above arguments , we have voted against the report .
in writing . - It is to be hoped that the designation of 2010 as " European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion " will lead to real progress across the EU in tackling inequalities .
The report correctly notes that the successful work in this area requires cooperation at European , national , regional and local level .
My own nation , Scotland , still has levels of poverty which are quite shameful particularly given the country 's immense wealth .
Fortunately we now have a government which is committed to tackling the social exclusion that they inherited from successive unionist administrations .
The Scottish government 's commitment is wholly in keeping with the principles outlined in the Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou report which I happily supported .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , I am in favour of the proposal for the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ( 2010 ) .
In her report , however , my colleague Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou has added what I think are a few essential elements to the Commission 's otherwise excellent draft text .
First of all , the report legitimately reminds us of the complexity of the structures which lead to poverty and social exclusion and broadens the definition of groups at risk .
Secondly , it rightly gives greater attention to the importance , not just of social security , but also improved employment levels , and it also emphasises the importance of focusing on the need to make work pay as a way to combat poverty and exclusion .
Thirdly , Mr Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou 's report understands the importance of lifelong learning and stresses the need to give everyone equal opportunities in order to hone their skills to reflect changes in the labour market .
There is an urgent need to address the issue of combating poverty and exclusion in a new way .
To my delight I noted that the appropriation granted for the European Year , EUR 17 million , is the largest amount ever granted for a European Year .
That too demonstrates its high political importance .
The European Commission is proposing to make 2010 the ' European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ' .
With the largest ever budget for a European year , the political connotations of the project are all too clear .
This year of ' combat ' will serve merely to boost the image of a European Union which is witnessing the complete failure of its Lisbon Strategy .
Although the fight against poverty and social exclusion is a priority and must be supported , despite all of these pious hopes , Europe will have done nothing to improve the lives of the 78 million Europeans living below the poverty threshold .
This is why I will be voting against this report , the sole acknowledged political aim of which is to pander to the propaganda of the euro-globalists .
Following the Irish ' no ' vote , it is time for the arrogance of the ultra-Europeans to be replaced by an objective review of current European integration .
This absurd system urgently needs to be reformed if we are to maintain a Europe of cooperation and not one of submission .
A Europe of nations must finally emerge that fosters Community protection and preference for Europeans .
Growing concerns over unemployment and the rising prices of essential goods and fuel throughout the continent are a serious reason for confronting the problem of poverty and social exclusion , which affects around 16 % of the population .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , who is the President of the Intergroup on Family and Protection of Childhood , of which I am Vice-President , on her work .
I share her concern for those who are most exposed to this scourge and who are experiencing the greatest difficulty in overcoming it .
I should like to second her recommendation that the difficult circumstances of outermost regions , island regions and areas in industrial decline must always be taken into account .
The European Commission 's proposal gives us hope of more collective , public and private , individual and Community awareness of this phenomenon and a commitment by the Union and the Member States to seek solutions whose cornerstone has to be the intrinsic and inalienable dignity of every human being .
The Lisbon Strategy sought to affirm European global competitiveness by ensuring social cohesion and investing in employment .
Despite its lack of success , I hope that 2010 will help awaken Europeans ' awareness of the need for greater social cohesion .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - 2010 will be the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
I hope that the subject of child poverty across the EU will be highlighted and concrete action taken by Member States to eradicate child poverty .
Do we all appreciate the importance of the problem of poverty and social exclusion ?
Are we aware that in 2006 16 % of the citizens of the EU-25 ( 78 million people ) were living below the poverty threshold ?
I am in favour of 2010 being proclaimed European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
It is our moral duty to increase social awareness of this matter .
The European Year should make people aware of the existence of poverty and social exclusion in Europe and convey the message that they have a destructive impact on social and economic development .
It should endorse the significance of collective responsibility , embracing not only decision-makers , but also participants in the public and private sectors .
Our task is to achieve stable economic growth by 2010 , with a greater number of better jobs and greater social cohesion .
I am voting in favour of Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou 's report .
The European Parliament decided to support the position of the Commission and the Council on Slovakia 's wish to adopt the single currency on 1 January 2009 , although it does have some concerns about discrepancies between the convergence reports of the Commission and the ECB as regards the sustainability of inflation .
It is also interesting that the report expresses concern about what it considers to be ' low support for the euro among Slovak citizens ' .
Furthermore , instead of trying to address the reasons for this low support , it calls on the authorities of Slovakia to step up the public information campaign aimed at explaining ' the benefits of the single currency ' , whilst nevertheless still exhorting them to take all necessary steps in order to minimise price increases during the changeover period .
Once again , it is a shame that we cannot know exactly what the majority of Slovak citizens think about all that is happening , particularly their joining the euro .
Hence our abstention .
The consequences in Portugal are well known and prompt us to oppose this in a clear-cut fashion .
in writing . - I will be supporting the report on the adoption of the single currency by Slovakia on 1 January next year .
Since its introduction the euro has been a global success story rapidly establishing itself as a global reserve currency that has challenged the dollar 's monopoly .
All the evidence is that it will continue to go from strength to strength .
As a firm supporter I only wish my own country England was on the verge of joining .
It was difficult for me to imagine that countries that were not even Members of the Union when the single currency was adopted would themselves introduce the euro before the UK .
We are in danger of being left behind as a semi-detached part of the Union .
in writing . - ( PL ) Slovakia is the first country of the former Communist bloc to wish to enter the euro area , as of 1 January 2009 .
The dynamic Slovak economy meets the convergence criteria stipulated in the Maastricht Treaty .
Accession to the monetary union will enable Slovakia to take advantage of the numerous benefits that the common currency confers , and this will surely be an additional stimulus for the economy .
It is true that doubts have been raised as to whether Slovakia will be in a position to sustain a low inflation rate or budget deficit .
As the rapporteur correctly observed in his speech , though , rising inflation is a problem not only for Slovaks , but also for the entire European Union , including the euro area .
Like all the states that already belong to the monetary union , Slovakia must continue a macro-economic policy that ensures that the convergence criteria are maintained .
Certainly Slovakia 's experience in introducing the common currency will be excellent training for Poland .
We must observe our southern neighbour attentively .
As the rapporteur points out , adoption of the euro does not enjoy great support among the Slovak people .
I hope that Slovakia 's accession to the euro area will be preceded by an information campaign that will convince and above all properly prepare Slovaks for the change in currency .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Casa report relating to the adoption of the euro in Slovakia .
Slovakia , a country of just over five million people , has been independent for a mere 15 years .
In that short time , Slovakia has developed both politically and economically and now the country is in a position to join the eurozone .
The Slovak experience gives the lie to claims that Scotland is too small to become a successful and independent nation within the EU .
I voted in favour of the Casa report on the adoption by Slovakia of the single currency on 1 January 2009 , in which the European Parliament is won over by the positive recommendations of the Commission , the ECB and the Council .
Slovakia has in fact made huge efforts to meet the Maastricht and convergence criteria .
The growth of the Slovak economy since the fall of its Communist regime is remarkable and Slovakia 's entry into the single currency will be a just reward for the country , which has implemented a strict reform agenda .
In terms of inflation , the European Parliament has expressed its concern over the sustainability of inflation in Slovakia in the medium and long term , as identified in the last ECB Convergence Report .
However , it is our view that the Slovak Government could take the necessary measures to avoid inflation escalating after it joins the euro area .
Bear in mind that inflation forecasts for the euro area for 2009 are well above the ECB 's 2 % target .
It would therefore be unfair to penalise Slovakia for its struggle to meet criteria that even euro area members will not fulfil in 2009 .
in writing . - ( DE ) At the end of April , 53 % of Slovaks were still against the introduction of the euro .
Their fears , such as loss of sovereignty to the European Central Bank , and price rises , should be taken seriously .
A later entry to the euro area gives the countries affected the opportunity to carry out the necessary reforms at a more leisurely pace and allows people more time to adjust .
If countries such as the United Kingdom , Denmark and Sweden retain independence in terms of currency policy , then we should accord this right to other countries too .
In any case , the sovereign - the people - should decide .
This decision should then be respected and not tinkered with , as happened with the Constitution , which is being discussed yet again .
In my opinion , not enough consideration was given to the will of the people here , so I have abstained .
in writing . - ( DE ) I abstained from voting on the introduction of the single currency in Slovakia on 1 January 2009 , because I have doubts about whether Slovakia 's currency policy is free of manipulation .
Furthermore , given the current uncertainty about the future of the European Union after the outcome of the Irish referendum , I think it would be appropriate to first analyse the causes and not to continue with the currency policy integration process as if nothing had happened .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of Mr Casa 's report on the adoption by Slovakia of the single currency on 1 January 2009 .
The rapporteur has presented a very good and solid report .
We must agree that the creation of the euro area is a success along the path towards deepening European integration .
Therefore , further enlargements of this area are necessary and it is pleasing that another country will soon be joining this circle .
I would also like to mention that with every enlargement of the euro area we should make sure that there is social support for this European project , and we should also make sure that these enlargements point towards a reinforcement of common European economic policy .
Mr President , I agree with the rapporteur that significant disparities occur within individual regions and that analyses serving as a basis for the division of Union money should take this problem into account .
It is clearly visible in the new Member States .
In Poland , for example , the most important social division affecting Poles is the growing gulf in their affluence .
Currently as much as 12 % of the population is living in extreme poverty .
The greatest differences continue to be between the town and the country .
Although Małopolska is ranked fourth in the country in terms of GDP , unemployment is a problem there - and it mainly affects the rural populace .
In the neighbouring Świętokrzyskie province , country dwellers account for 55.5 % of the unemployed ( 88 % of them are unemployed and have no benefit rights ) .
The prolongation of such situations means that these people 's chance of overcoming the ' social exclusion ' that has been discussed so extensively during the current parliamentary session is dwindling .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Moderate Delegation in the European Parliament has today voted against the own-initiative report of Gábor Harangozós ( PSE , HU ) on the impact of cohesion policy on the integration of vulnerable communities and groups .
We do not think that cohesion will be strengthened by the definition of further vulnerable groups in society or by establishing further statistical categories .
On the contrary , we think that the formulation of distribution policy is a national responsibility .
Moreover , the European Parliament should not at this stage call for an extension of support after 2013 , since that would be to disregard the results of the policy .
I regret that proposals contained in my opinion that we put forward in plenary and that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted , particularly on the need to revise the CAP to reverse the objectives of its previous reforms .
They have been responsible for loss of income for small and medium-sized farmers , absenteeism and the abandonment of agricultural activity , favouring large landowners only .
I also regret that not enough importance has been given to the continuing provision of high-quality public services in rural areas ( including in mountain and extremely remote areas ) in order to combat isolation and to provide universal access to education , healthcare , transport and communications , culture and a decent life for farmers and their families .
Lastly , I am also disappointed that there is no inclusion in the final resolution of the need to boost support for farmers ' associations , cooperatives , wine cooperatives and other local institutions in the field of crafts and other activities that are complementary to farming so as to facilitate the marketing of products , the creation of local markets and closer links between producers and consumers .
How does the majority in Parliament intend to use cohesion policy to promote the integration of vulnerable communities and groups when :
it conceals the fact that there are countries in economic divergence with the EU in the name of ' nominal convergence ' under the Stability Pact and the euro ?
it refuses to emphasise the fact that regional policy is an indispensable instrument for promoting economic and social cohesion whose priority objectives are reducing regional disparities , promoting real convergence and stimulating growth and employment , which also serves as an instrument for redistribution and compensation as regards the costs of the internal market , Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) and liberalising international trade for regions lagging behind ?
it declines to underline the need to support less-favoured regions , areas with permanent structural disadvantages , outermost regions and areas affected by industrial restructuring , relocations or company closures , in order to strengthen economic and social cohesion and the social inclusion of vulnerable communities and groups ?
or when :
it refuses to emphasise the vital importance of public services to economic and social cohesion or to state that the proximity factor is essential in ensuring the accessibility and availability of these services to the whole population ?
in writing . - The Harangozó report makes some important points on social exclusion .
The report rightly highlights that social exclusion and impoverishment exist in both urban and rural areas .
It also notes the importance of regional and local authorities as well as the economic and social partners and relevant NGOs in developing strategies to combat social exclusion .
However , this house failed to adopt my own group 's amendment relating to the Social Agenda and , accordingly , to citizens ' rights to a minimum income and to access to education and training .
Accordingly , I abstained on the final vote .
Cohesion policy is an EU priority that occupies a prominent place in the budget - a third of the EU 's budget .
It is based on the principle of solidarity and is intended to reduce economic , social and territorial disparities between Member States and their 268 regions .
Yet despite everyone 's best efforts , these disparities persist .
There are increasing signs that the most underdeveloped regions are still finding it difficult to break out of the poverty cycle .
More specifically , the increase in vulnerable groups surprises us , given the investment in these regions .
We are also aware that the shift from poverty to social exclusion and segregation can be rapid .
It would increasingly seem that this issue is rooted in spatial and territorial development itself .
We therefore need relevant information to solve a problem that is hidden behind various layers of exclusion - for instance , long-term unemployment often results in prolonged inactivity that reduces the capacity of those affected to overcome their social exclusion and economic difficulties .
I believe it is essential to look as a matter of urgency at the way territorial development and the phenomenon of exclusion interact , so that we can meet the goal of sustainable development , using the existing financial instruments more efficiently to tackle the disparities that still persist .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of Mr Harangozó 's report on the impact of cohesion policy on the integration of vulnerable communities and groups .
I agree that there is a need to introduce an approach that takes account of the micro-regional level and concentrates on intra-regional disparities and the most sensitive areas .
In some cases intra-regional inequalities are of greater importance than disparities between regions .
The lack of such an approach may give rise to a deepening of regional divisions and to a further deterioration in the situation in excluded areas .
Let us not forget that the objective and founding principle of European regional policy is to reduce developmental differences between individual areas in the European Union , and the phenomenon of territorial exclusion has still not been properly taken into account in political instruments .
In the new Member States , social segregation and deficiencies in the sphere of ensuring equal opportunities arise most often in rural areas , whereas economic and social initiatives in regions are usually focused on dynamic targets - mainly urban centres .
There is no doubt that this is an EP own-initiative report that is highly relevant and topical , yet , despite raising pertinent questions on timber and fish exploitation and trade , it does not call into question the framework of trade relations between the EU and these countries , in particular when it mentions again the ' not yet fully agreed and signed Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) with the West African countries ' .
The resolution ' exhorts the Commission once again to act on the ultimate objective of the EPAs , which is advancing regional integration and strengthening the economic position of the ACP countries , and in this context stresses in particular the position of the West African countries ' , that is , in an attempt to sell these countries ' a pig in a poke ' .
Furthermore , among other important points , while drawing attention to the ' insufficient means to survey and control the activities of fishing vessels ' in these countries , it recommends ' monitoring and surveillance services , since these countries lack the necessary technical and human resources to carry out these tasks , by setting up monitoring centres , training inspectors or acquiring patrol vessels and airborne resources ' , measures which , if they go ahead , will have to respect fully the sovereignty and the exercise of that sovereignty by these countries in terms of their EEZs .
in writing . - I welcome the general thrust of the Schmidt report .
The EU 's policies have a profound impact on the economies , environment and societies of West Africa and it is imperative that we take responsibility for our actions in dealing with West African nations .
I deplore , however , Parliament 's decision to adopt amendment 1 and remove the reference to avoiding over-capacity in the fisheries sector .
It is abundantly clear that over-capacity in any fisheries should be avoided and it is shocking that Parliament has voted in such a way to appease politicians in certain Member States .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , Mr Schmidt 's report on policy coherence for development highlights perfectly one major flaw in the EU 's development cooperation policy in the wider context : it is not sufficiently coherent and it frequently does not cut across all the essential sectors .
The report focuses on the effects of the EU 's exploitation of biological natural resources on West Africa .
The most important natural resources for the region 's Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) are wood and fish , and more than 80 % of exports of these go to the European Union .
Although agreements have been made in both sectors that are built on the principles of sustainable development , they have not been comprehensive enough .
There are clear signs that many species of fish are being overfished , and a lack of regulation and control has resulted in forest being cut down illegally and unsustainably .
The resultant impoverishment in the region can also be linked directly to large-scale migration .
I voted in favour of Mr Schmidt 's report and I believe that the coherent EU policy it calls for could have a significant impact in West Africa , the EU being the region 's biggest purchaser of the region 's key products .
It is worth remembering , however , that trade policy alone is not the answer .
It has to be closely connected mainly with development cooperation , so that the region can enjoy the sort of political and socioeconomic conditions for the countries concerned to be able to exploit the full potential of their biological natural resources themselves .
Another essential factor here is that the coherence of policies that impact on development can only come about properly if they begin to be implemented at the highest political level .
in writing . - ( PL ) What is needed in EU policy on West Africa is coherence between development policy for these regions and fisheries policy in the area , and the level of utilisation of timber resources , which is linked to the afforestation of this area and its impact on climate change .
EU fisheries policy for the African states needs to be strengthened and further expanded .
Given that the seas of West Africa are among the most heavily exploited marine areas , and some species are being caught to excess , the European Union should help to develop and introduce special programmes to monitor and control these waters .
It is extremely important to exchange knowledge and experience in this area , particularly where scientific studies of water resources are concerned .
The priority for the EU and West African states should be to restrict illegal fishing and prohibit excessive depletion of fish stocks .
Let us not forget that many people support themselves specifically by fishing .
Smaller catches mean greater poverty and problems with food security in this region of the world .
Improper exploitation of forestry resources is giving rise to climate change .
We should take steps to equip these states to combat climate change .
We must be aware that the difficult financial situation of this region is causing these and not other actions .
We should therefore help them to create conditions for development that would bring about new production opportunities and would create new forms of activity that would improve the standard of living .
in writing . - ( PL ) I was interested to read Mr Schmidt 's report on policy coherence for development and the effects of the EU 's exploitation of certain biological natural resources on development in West Africa , and I am voting in favour of the report .
The ' European consensus on development ' of December 2005 jointly agreed by the EU institutions and Member States declares their common objective of ensuring policy coherence for development .
Timber and fish can be said to represent two key products for West Africa 's economic and social development .
As the main destination for these products , the EU can play a significant role in the region 's further development in these areas .
I express my satisfaction that seven countries of West Africa have signed fisheries agreements with the European Union under the new formula of partnership agreements in which , in addition to the initial objective of protecting the interests of the Community fleet , clauses are included by means of which the third country must establish plans that will guarantee the sustainable exploitation of its fishery resources .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Internal market in electricity - Conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity - Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators - Towards a European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Mrs Morgan , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2003 / 54 / EC concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity - C6-0316 / 2007 - ;
the report by Mr Vidal-Quadras , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1228 / 2003 on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity - C6-0320 / 2007 - ;
the report by Mr Chichester , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing an Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators - C6-0318 / 2007 - ; and
the report by Mrs De Vits , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on Towards a European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) During the Slovenian Presidency of the Council , energy issues have been high on the agenda .
Reliability of supply , the functioning of energy markets and sustainable management of the environment are indeed issues that are of strategic importance for the European Union and its citizens .
It is also becoming increasingly clear that energy is a field that must offer new knowledge and new services , if we wish the European economy to remain competitive in the world .
More than a year ago the representatives of governments and Member States committed themselves to sustainable goals and to strengthening effective energy markets .
The European Parliament also supported the targets set then and formulated proposals which the Council studied with great interest .
The third package on the natural gas and electricity markets was a very important legislative dossier for the Slovenian Presidency .
Its main purpose , the main purpose of this package , is to continue the process of liberalising energy markets and increasing their efficiency and transparency .
In line with the Commission 's proposal , in studying this dossier the Council treated all five legislative proposals as one complete package , and therefore where it was logical retained the same solutions for documents relating to the electricity and natural gas markets .
At the meeting of the Energy Council on 6 June , the Slovenian Presidency secured broad support for key elements of the package of five legislative proposals .
The most important element of this broad consensus is of course the third option of the organisation of energy undertakings .
Here , at the same time , the two original proposals from the Commission were adopted .
These proposals define either full ownership separation , or an independent system operator , while Member States also agreed with the third option , which enables an independent operator of the transmission network to be established .
Permit me briefly to summarise the more important and perhaps also the more sensitive points of this agreement , which you will also be addressing in this esteemed House .
The option of an independent operator of the transmission network may be used by countries in which , on the entry into force of the new directive , the transmission network will fall to a vertically integrated undertaking .
It can be applied both to the natural gas sector and to electricity . This option allows undertakings to retain ownership of the transmission network on the condition that it is managed by an independent operator .
Regarding the organisation of the transmission system and the system operator , in the context of a vertically integrated undertaking a range of requirements have been established that define the independence of the system operator , balanced and impartial operation , the safety of carrying out necessary investment and also protection of the interests of the vertically integrated undertaking itself .
This will ensure the following :
1. independence of the operator , managers and supervisory authorities ,
2. avoidance of any conflict of interests ,
3. fair and non-discriminatory access to the network ,
4. fair encouragement of investments including for international connections ,
5. independent access to means and resources for the work of transmission network operators , and ultimately , this will ensure additional jurisdiction for national regulators regarding independent operators of transmission networks .
Another element of the agreement reached in the Council concerns investments by third countries in the European Union .
The Council believes that the text should ensure such an approach to third countries controlling networks that will not be protectionist .
At the same time , a guarantee must be given that companies from third countries will observe the same rules that apply to European Union undertakings .
Here we need to take into account the interests of third countries and their undertakings seeking good partner relations with energy undertakings in Member States .
Moreover , we will also need to analyse a range of energy investments already initiated on both sides .
Another very important area is investments and network development planning , especially the formulation of the European Union 's ten-year plan for network development .
A consistent and effective approach is ensured at all levels , especially as regards transmission network operators , in an open and transparent consultation process , as well as all the main players and the agency .
In this latter connection , the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators , the Presidency takes the view that we have succeeded in creating a truly independent agency with an effective management .
Its tasks are focused on the areas of international and regional cooperation , and it will address in particular the issue of transboundary connections .
Other important elements of the agreement relate to public ownership , the treatment of transboundary cases , enhanced regional cooperation , operation of the market , consumer protection and guidelines that should be adopted by committees of the Commission in comitology procedures .
In these few points I hoped to present you with a brief overview of the main elements of the consensus reached in the Council .
I am convinced that the compromise text is also a fine basis for the next Presidency trio and cooperation with this esteemed House .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like first of all to congratulate all the rapporteurs , Ms Morgan , Mr Chichester , Mr Vidal-Quadras and Ms De Vits , on their excellent reports , as well as the shadow rapporteurs and all the members of the committees involved .


The deadlines have been very short and the package is challenging and complicated .
I have greatly appreciated all the work done over these few months and the very high level of involvement of the Members of the European Parliament .
Let me again highlight the key challenges that we are facing .
I know that they are of particular concern to this House .
With this far-reaching package , the Commission has one objective in mind : the interests of the citizens of the European Union .
Of course , market opening cannot as such stop oil prices from increasing .
However , exactly at a time of high prices , we need to ensure truly effective competition on our energy markets to guarantee that the effects of these prices on our citizens are as limited as possible .
Already now , some of Europe 's citizens have benefited from more choice and from more competition to keep prices as low as possible , as well as increasing standards of service and security .
For far too many of Europe 's citizens , however , the process of developing real competitive markets is far from complete , and they are not in a position to make a real choice of supplier .
This is not just about better prices and more choice .
Ensuring security of supply will need massive investments in new networks over the next couple of decades .
If we allow the status quo to continue , these investments will just not be made to the extent needed .
Furthermore , a functioning internal market is one of the key elements of the EU 's efforts to tackle climate change .
Without competitive electricity and gas markets , an emissions trading scheme will never work properly and our aims regarding renewable energy will quite simply fail .
We all agree on the need for legislative reforms to remedy the numerous shortcomings of the current legislative and regulatory framework .
Indeed , in the Vidal-Quadras report of 10 July 2007 , the European Parliament showed its determination in achieving such an ambitious policy in the field of energy .
Let me now turn to some of the issues of the reports in more detail .
Of course , the reports are very substantial and I will , therefore , focus on only some elements .
Many amendments that are being proposed can be supported by the Commission .
The majority of amendments on strengthening consumer rights in Ms Morgan 's report are welcomed , and go hand in hand with the intention in the report from Ms De Vits .
The emphasis on stronger regional cooperation of network operators is also welcomed .
A number of amendments also usefully clarify or complement the Commission 's proposal , in particular as regards the role of the network operator , the powers of national regulators and an effectively well-functioning and secure internal energy market .
On a number of issues , the Commission also supports the overall objective of the committee , although it may have some reservations about the precise wording of the proposals .
I again would like to emphasis that the protection of vulnerable customers and the fight against energy poverty are essential to the implementation of market opening and should definitely be strengthened .
The Commission will look carefully at the wording in order to respect the principle of subsidiarity .
Price regulation should also not prevent proper investment signals and market entry .
Further , as regards the report by Ms De Vits on the Consumer Charter , I find the report and most of the proposed amendments very relevant .
Many of the ideas have also been taken up in Ms Morgan 's report , and the Commission can agree with many of these , not least on the need for better information to be rapidly delivered to consumers .
As you know , the Commission will shortly propose to Member States an energy consumer checklist designed to help collect and deliver relevant information to consumers about their energy markets .
Indeed , I agree that possible new consumer rights need to be introduced into the ongoing legislative process and that the purpose of the charter is to better communicate on energy consumer rights and thus render them more well-known with consumers .
It will be difficult to attempt to harmonise all public service obligations at EU level .
However , the Commission will monitor the correct implementation of the directives , especially to ensure that vulnerable consumers are being defined at national level and that national support schemes are being made available in a transparent and effective way .
In addition , the Citizens ' Energy Forum will be the driving force to establish competitive retail markets in the EU , while at the same time ensuring that vulnerable consumers are protected .
Following the Conference on the Rights of Energy Consumers on 6 May , the Commission has launched a process of consultation with all parties concerned .
On energy efficiency and promotion of renewables , the Commission fully shares the concerns of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , but we believe that the Internal Market Directive is not the best place to discuss this subject .
We believe the objectives of the committee can be pursued in the context of the new renewables directive presently under discussion .
Regarding the fight against market concentration , we share the committee 's view that this is essential , but consider that the Commission 's proposal already gives the right and powers to regulators to take measures to ensure proper market functioning .
On two important points , however , we do not fully share the conclusions reached by the committee : the use of comitology and some issues on the role of the Agency .
On the use of comitology , the general deletion of this procedure would render ineffective the whole process of developing rapidly and efficiently new , very detailed market codes .
They will be essential for moving towards truly integrated energy markets in years rather than decades .
The most important issue is the ability to make legally binding on all network operators the technical codes adopted under the oversight of the Agency .
For this purpose , the Commission needs to be able to adopt them in a fast and effective manner through the comitology procedure .
Otherwise , they could not be legally binding within a reasonable timeframe .
In more general terms , guidelines are needed , precisely to have a strong Agency , in line with the position in the reports by Mr Chichester and Mr Vidal-Quadras .
Without guidelines to frame its powers , the Agency would simply be unable to issue binding individual decisions on market players .
Provided these essential elements are preserved , in order to take account of the committee 's concerns , the Commission could , however , accept the deletion of some of the comitology procedures which , in our opinion , are less essential .
On the Agency , the Commission wants to establish an Agency with strong powers .
The Commission can accept amendments which give general tasks to the Agency , and also ensures more open and transparent consultation with stakeholders .
However , it is not possible to go beyond the EC Treaty .
A number of amendments proposed by the committee regarding the decision-making powers of the Agency are not compatible with the principle established by the Meroni judgment .
This concerns in particular the degree of discretionary power conferred to the Agency .
I fully agree with the need for a strong and effective Agency and believe that this can be achieved through the approach suggested by the Commission where the Agency will develop codes that involve real substantive discretion and that these are then adopted through comitology .
I will not end without tackling the issue of the effective unbundling of network operation from generation and supply .
The current rules mean that a large number of network operators can effectively discriminate against new entrants .
This has an especially stifling effect on investments in the grid and the introduction of new capacity .
The objective that we face , therefore , is to find an approach that will fully remove the inherent conflict of interest of vertically integrated network operators while providing them with the proper incentives to invest and to manage the grid in a non-discriminatory manner .
The Council reached a broad agreement on all essential parts of the package at the Energy Council of 6 June .
The objective , following your vote , is to be in a position to achieve the adoption of the package at second reading at the end of this year .
If the process is delayed , the package would be at risk of not being adopted before the 2009 elections .
I count on Parliament and on the incoming French presidency to make full use of the months ahead in order to reach an overall agreement .
Let me stress that at the Energy Council of 6 June the Commission formally reserved its position on the package , notably to take into account your vote tomorrow .
Honorable Members , you have provided a strong input to this process since its beginning .
I look forward to continuing to work together with you on these proposals in the coming months in the interest of European energy consumers .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I hope that if Parliament adopts the electricity report tomorrow , it will be an indication to energy companies all over Europe that we want the consumer back in the driving seat .
Before talking about the most controversial aspect of this directive , I would like to dwell on some of the areas where we have managed to find a consensus within Parliament so far .
There cannot be anyone within the European Union who has not noticed the massive increase in energy prices in recent months .
All over the European Union there are people struggling to pay their energy bills so we believe that the issue of ' energy poverty ' should be placed firmly on the EU agenda .
After all , the ETS system and the renewables targets are European and they impact on energy prices .
We have respected subsidiarity , Commissioner , in our request that Member States should come up with their own definitions of energy poverty and an action plan for dealing with the problem .
So , if the Council want a deal on this package , they need to understand that this is a central requirement of Parliament .
Already many rights for consumers exist in the energy field but they are not enforced .
So we have asked the national regulatory authorities to use incentives and sanctions to ensure the consumer is protected .
We have also listed additional rights which should be enjoyed by the consumer such as affordable prices for low-income families , an easier way to switch suppliers , increased representation for the consumer , especially when they have complaints , and a fair deal for people in rural and remote areas .
We believe there should be a roll-out of smart meters within 10 years , which should boost energy efficiency , and companies should be creative in the way they charge for energy and not reward people who use more as is currently the case .
Priority access should be given to renewables to enter the grid so that we can reach that 20 % target .
We have got to understand that when we talk about transmission systems we are talking about monopolies , so clearly there is a need for very strict regulation .
We would like to see much better cooperation between national regulatory authorities and competition authorities .
In this way , we might get to a point where we do not have almost half of the countries in the EU where one company dominates over 70 % of the market .
Now to the most controversial part of the report - the issue of unbundling .
The clear thing is that the current system has not worked .
There is a suspicion that some are not playing fair .
They are giving priority access to their own company ; they put obstacles in place which could stifle competition .
That is why I believe , as rapporteur , that total separation of energy supply from transmission companies or full ownership unbundling - as was suggested initially by the Commission - should be the only option for electricity companies .
It is only in this way you will remove the conflict of interest .
You can build as many Chinese walls as you want , but there will be no incentive for companies to encourage competition in the market if they also own transmission companies .
We need a level playing field : we need easier access for renewables and SMEs , but , probably more than anything else , we need a stable regulatory framework for the one trillion-worth of investment that is necessary in the EU market .
If we fudge this issue now , we will not be giving a clear signal to those investors and the lights could go off in Europe .
This issue will not go away and , if the lights go out , governments can fall .
So , who is resisting this ?
Germany , France , Austria , Luxembourg , Greece and Bulgaria : they think that strengthening these Chinese walls will be enough .
Some suspect also that there is an effort to protect national champions who are happy to invest in other markets but are reluctant to allow others into their markets .
We should not oversell the model however , we are not likely to see a reduction in prices under any model .
We know that the Council has come to an informal agreement on this issue .
They have suggested the strengthening of these Chinese walls .
Many of us , however , feel that this will not be enough for European consumers and have suggested sticking to a tough position .
I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs in particular and everybody involved in this package for the cooperation on this very complex dossier .
Mr President , energy is still , for many reasons , one of the European Union 's Achilles heels , mainly due to the unwillingness of some government or business elites to recognise that in order to achieve a common energy policy we need to have an integrated internal market that is open to competition , in which consumers can freely choose their suppliers and in which energy flows from Stockholm to Athens and from Lisbon to Vienna with no major obstacles .
In order to achieve this objective , which is still a long way off , we have much ground to cover and many barriers to remove .
In the report on the regulation for which I am the rapporteur , which was almost unanimously adopted in committee , we highlighted the importance of increasing interconnections between Member States , the need to harmonise technical rules at European level , the advisability of giving greater power to the regulators ' agency , of better allocation of the responsibilities of system operators , so that they take charge of drawing up network codes and consulting with interested parties during the drawing up of the codes , also giving them the opportunity to propose codes for themselves , provided that they do not contradict the framework guidelines .
These proposals arise from the desire that Parliament has already expressed , to have a European coordination body for national regulators , with the capacity to make decisions on matters with a European scope , avoiding duplication with decisions taken at national level , and to set up a European network of system operators to develop the necessary technical rules to ensure the fluidity of the European market .
In this respect , my report is entirely consistent with the Chichester and Paparizov reports .
In order to achieve an internal market for electricity , we need to establish harmonised rules and regulations , ensure that all the players are using the same rules , promote interconnections and have independent regulators with sufficient powers to guarantee investments .
The report by my good friend Mrs Morgan largely contains the right answers to deal with these problems .
The subject of ownership unbundling has been cause for a great deal of debate between us , which at times has been quite fierce .
However , we are still friends , which shows that Europe has a future .
I think that we are talking about a subject in which the national interest plays a principal role , in which different market models are contrasted , and in which there are established situations that we have to take into account .
However , it is precisely these disparities that are largely preventing us from making progress , and I do not think that drawing up a varied à la carte list of models is the solution .
Ownership unbundling is not a panacea , but it is a necessary condition , although definitely not enough on its own , for achieving an integrated single market .
Some of Mrs Morgan 's ideas are more debatable , such as social tariffs to deal with the problem of energy poverty , because by doing this we would run the risk of interfering with the markets .
The Council reached a general agreement on the package more than a week ago .
We will complete our first reading before the summer .
However , to conclude , I would like to convey to the Council representative , our dear and respected friend Mr Lenarčič , Parliament 's wish to negotiate an agreement at second reading that is satisfactory for the European Union as a whole .
The parliamentary term is coming to an end , and ' take it or leave it ' approaches would be wrong , because , President-in-Office of the Council , Parliament reacts very badly when it is not respected or feels that it is being put under too much pressure .
This is not the time to divide ourselves into those who take a hard line and those who take a softer line or to act solely from the perspective of national interest .
It is the time for sensible , balanced , and , in the best sense of the word , European approaches .

rapporteur . - Mr President , first of all I would like to acknowledge the major contribution of my immediate predecessor and , as it were , co-rapporteur , Mr Brunetta , who had to leave this House for another post in his mother state .
I would like to thank the shadows for their constructive cooperative approach , which enabled us to create a broad consensus .
It is an interesting challenge to find the right balance between leaving the national regulatory authorities alone to do their own thing and to create an EU regulator .
For markets to function well , the role of regulator is absolutely crucial .
This agency would complement at European level the regulatory tasks performed by the NRAs and do so by providing a framework for them to cooperate with each other by regulatory oversight of the cooperation between transmission system operators by giving the Agency individual decision powers and by giving it a general advisory role .
The Agency would have an advisory role vis-à-vis the Commission as regards market regulation issues and that is an important function .
In the course of the debate on this regulation we have become more convinced of the need to go beyond the Commission 's proposals for the Agency to create an agency with more independence and more decision-making powers .
If the Agency is to contribute effectively to the development of an integrated competitive energy market for the European Union , the Agency will need more extensive powers and be independent of the Commission in order to handle cross-border situations and deliver effective cooperation between the TSOs and the NRAs - the National Regulatory Authorities .
So we proposed new decision-making powers for the Agency , in particular over the development of the technical codes which my colleagues just mentioned , and the investment plans of the TSOs and a greater regulatory and financial independence .
However , with that greater power and independence should come greater accountability to Parliament in particular , but to stakeholders as well .
We have therefore proposed to increase the Agency 's requirement to consult , its requirement for transparency and its accountability to Parliament .
I should emphasis that we have sought to ensure coherence and consistency in this report and this regulation with the other parts of the package .
We have been aware of the issues raised by the Meroni judgment , but nevertheless are of the view that our proposals are appropriate .
The proposed changes to the structure are designed to secure the most effective balance between the needs for regulatory independence and appropriate political control on the other hand .
A key principle for me , and for us , is that the independence of the Agency is critical , not only for its effectiveness , but also for its credibility .
We therefore propose a stronger role for the board of regulators , a time limit to ensure speedy decision-making and increased financial independence for the Agency .
The future of the European energy market and its development after the implementation of the third energy package will require an important role to be played by the Agency , and that is why the power and independence of the Agency must be enhanced over and above the level proposed by the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the Morgan report and my report on a European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers must be considered together .
Today the structural unbundling of the energy sector is more necessary than ever , but it cannot be an end in itself .
The question is and remains : is it to the consumer 's benefit ?
That is not self-evident .
In this connection , I note that in my country , Belgium , consumers ' energy bills will be on average EUR 300 higher in 2008 than in 2007 .
I realise that rising oil prices are largely responsible - but certainly not entirely .
Commissioner Kuneva 's figures reveal , for example , that 20-32 % of Britons who have switched provider since the opening of the market are now worse off than before .
This is why it is essential that consumers know their rights with regard to the energy sector .
This is absolutely not the case at present .
There is a real lack of comprehensible information on these rights , hence the need for a strong , clear , comprehensible document enumerating existing rights : a charter .
Mrs Morgan has already talked about what this must contain .
I should like to add a couple more elements .
Consumers must be able to switch provider : of course . Free of charge and within one month : certainly .
This means that they must be able to compare offers , however , and that is why it is important that contracts and invoices be standardised .
To be able to make a comparison , consumers need to have an overview of their current energy consumption and to be informed of such consumption at least four times a year .
Mrs Morgan also talked about this - and I support these ideas , which are also contained in my report - the ' smart meter ' , and the addressing of energy poverty and the National Energy Action Plans that must be drawn up to this end , are a substantial step in the right direction .
As regards the social tariffs , I should like to say to Mr Vidal-Quadras that , in our view , application of these must be possible , must be an effective instrument , for the Member States .
That is the only thing we would say with regard to social tariffs , Mr Vidal-Quadras .
Thus , it does not strike me as impossible to support that .
In addition , it would seem important to have physical points of contact where information can be obtained .
After all , the digital divide remains incredibly real today .
I should like to conclude with what may well be the most important point .
In our view , if consumers wish to be aware of their rights and thus well informed , they need to be sent a copy of a charter enumerating their existing rights clearly and comprehensibly when concluding contracts .
This is what our group is calling for , no more and no less : that existing rights be compiled and that consumers be provided with these in the form of a readable document .
Therefore , I cannot understand the position of the Commission , Commissioner Piebalgs , or of the other groups .
A few months ago , the Commission announced a charter ; now , a few months on , all we have ended up with is a simple , informative checklist .
It strikes us as necessary to go further .
For this reason , I would appeal to the other groups to support the amendment tabled by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
We are not reinventing the wheel ; we are merely asking that consumers be informed of their existing rights by means of a copy sent to them when they conclude a contract .
If the most serious problem today - as noted by the European Commission - is clear information , or rather a lack of it , I believe that our proposal offers a solution .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( SK ) The energy situation in Europe and throughout the world is forcing us to seek new effective solutions for a secure supply in the Member States at reasonable prices , subject to further liberalisation of the energy markets , greater market transparency and non-discrimination .
I welcome the European Commission 's effort to achieve progress , to create a space for clear-cut rules and relations between the relevant parties within the energy markets .
On the one hand , this should lead to the creation of a better competitive environment , and on the other hand it should create an effective regulation mechanism capable of preventing crisis situations .
However , intentions and reality are two different things altogether .
Although it has been the subject of many debates and compromise proposals , the energy package still gives rise to many question marks and uncertainties .
We all know very well that the biggest stumbling block is the Commission 's proposal regarding ownership unbundling of production from transmission within the framework of vertically integrated companies .
Is this really the most effective model to ensure more competition , less discrimination , lower prices and higher investment ?
The numerous analyses that are supposed to confirm these benefits are matched by a number of counter-arguments that cast objective doubts over these benefits .
My opinion is rather simple but backed up by discussions with both the supporters and the opponents of ownership unbundling .
Those Member States that have other models in place must surely be able to make a choice .
Eight of them suggested the so-called third way , which I suggested as draftsman of the opinion of the ECON Committee , as an alternative to the ownership unbundling model .
Indeed , the above-mentioned committee has already adopted this proposal .
Before reaching the final conclusions , we should ascertain whether each proposed model is functional , provides a continuous energy supply , is transparent and non-discriminatory , and whether its transparency and non-discriminatory character can or cannot be achieved through more effective regulation .
We also have to clearly establish whether or not the proposed solution represents a breach of the right of private ownership .
In this context , I think that compromise Amendment 166 , tabled by 40 Members , which enables the application of the so-called third way , represents an optimal solution under the given circumstances and respects the demands of a significant number of Member States .

opinion draftswoman for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( BG ) The proposed Regulation of the European Parliament and the Council to amend Regulation 1228 concerning access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity aims to accomplish the setting up of the Community energy market .
The opinion of the Committee on Economic Affairs underscores the improvement of competitive environment , overcoming existing barriers for new market entrants to access the network and promoting investment which is crucial for national economies and individual consumers .
Regional cooperation and interaction among network operators help channel resources towards interconnectivity and diversification of supplies .
For my country , Bulgaria , being a border of the European Union , this is an opportunity to integrate actively in the European electricity network .
The energy area is driven by demand , supply and environmental impact .
Any decisions should take into account the impetus gained in the energy sector , and its strategic importance for the development of modern economies .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs went to Paris to examine all these directives .
We also met with both trade unions and electricity transmission system operators .
Everyone has campaigned for a stronger agency than the one proposed by the Commission .
We are familiar with the case law of the Court of Justice and we are fully aware of the fact that the Commission was proposing not to change the Treaty in order to avoid creating difficulties .
That is why in its opinion , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs recommends strengthening everything to do with monitoring , recommendations and suspensive power , but advises against giving the agency the power of administrative policing that goes as far as imposing fines .
Only the Commission has this administrative policing power .
I believe that in this respect , we can take account of the Treaties in their current state and also the needs for market regulation .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( HU ) Thank you for the opportunity to speak , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , dissatisfaction among energy consumers has increased noticeably in recent years as a result of rising prices and a lack of regulatory transparency .
It is for precisely this reason that it is so important that the European Parliament will shortly be giving its blessing to a legislative package that will help to ensure that the electricity market functions more effectively .
I am convinced that the sharp rise in prices and the increasing helplessness of consumers has largely been due to the inadequate functioning of the market .
In many Member States , it is still the case that consumers compete for suppliers rather than the reverse .
In Hungary , for example , market liberalisation at present means higher prices and deteriorating standards of service , thanks to the hotchpotch manner in which market liberalisation is taking place as a result of mistakes by the government .
Adoption of the package of reports we are debating today could put an end to this situation .
The new legislation may at last enable genuine competition to take place in the energy market , and suppliers may finally find themselves in the position of actually having to compete for the consumers .
In addition , the energy package also creates better conditions for the kind of investment that is absolutely vital for the future of Europe 's energy supply .
It will provide a stimulus for energy efficiency and , I believe , also facilitate the spread of renewable energies .
Another welcome feature of the proposals is that they reinforce consumer protection provisions , compliance with which is often lacking at present .
One of the reasons why this is particularly important now is because runaway energy prices are a major cause of poverty .
In my opinion , efforts in the field of energy policy should always be assessed in the light of consumer satisfaction .
We are taking an important step towards more effective regulation .
The package of proposals will boost competition while at the same time improving security of supply .
It is our hope that the adoption of this package will ensure that in future Europe 's energy consumers will not face unreasonable prices as a result of regulatory inadequacies .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
Rap avis IMCO . - ( RO ) Dear colleagues , the initial project of the Agency for the Cooperation of Regulators provided two possibilities to the Parliament : to reject a useless institution or create a more efficient one .
It has opted for the second solution , not despite the Meroni clause , but within the limits of the Treaty provisions .
The amendments adopted in committees , generally convergent , have changed the initial prerogatives significantly .
Consequently , at this moment , we are expecting that , by its activity , the Agency shall strengthen the role of national regulators and support their operation , allow the technical harmonization of European networks , as a condition for a real internal market and make possible the mutual supply of energy among the Member States , take into consideration the consumers ' interest and carefully monitor the developments on the energy market .
We are expecting the Agency to be a useful instrument of the common energy policy .
We are not expecting either the provision of these prerogatives to reduce the possibilities of the European Commission compared to the Parliament and in fulfilling the energy policy , or the decisions of a technical nature to substitute the political ones .
Our final goal remains the provision of sufficient energy at an accessible price for everyone .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( PL ) Mr President , deriving benefit from the energy package that has been adopted will depend to a great extent on political decisions .
Only France 's leaders have made energy and the economy independent of gas and oil imports to a great extent .
The leaders of the other countries lacked imagination .
The unforeseen massive rise in gas and oil prices is forcing us to decide on the scope we should give to developing atomic energy and other sources .
How should we exploit the network in order to ward off a crisis ?
The proposed regulations on access to the network in cross-border electricity exchange and common principles on the internal energy market should promote full synchronisation of the networks of the countries of old Europe and the new countries .
This will ensure greater security of energy supplies and may bring about a limitation of energy prices by increasing competition .
The Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators that has been set up should , in cooperation with entities acting in the market , ensure that the market functions properly .
The Agency 's powers should be increased to meet the needs of the market .
I support regulation that promotes competition and the expansion of power generation .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Morgan on her efficient work on the report .
I would just like to say one thing in response to her intervention earlier today : do not let Member States run away from their responsibility to fight energy poverty and secure the well-being of their citizens ; do not let any government abdicate that responsibility .

Having said that , I would like to emphasise what I think is the most fundamental question in this discussion , namely : Are the European energy markets good enough ?
Are they functioning well enough ?
Is the legislation good enough regarding consumers ' well-being , low prices , industry and competitiveness , and the opportunities to make the best use of all energy sources , not least renewables ?
I think it is fair to say that the answer is ' no ' if we are to respond to the challenges of climate change , to decrease energy dependency and to connect the European energy markets with each other .
That is why we need reform and why it is important to get a level playing field opening up for new entrants , ensuring that we have open and fair competition .
It is in this perspective that we need to look at the discussion about ownership unbundling .
I think the Council has a responsibility to make a compromise among its members .
Parliament also has a responsibility to try to contribute to the best possible solution and we have a common responsibility .
I ask both the current presidency and the incoming presidency to take this question seriously .
The energy markets of today are not good enough .
We have a common responsibility to achieve the best possible solution and that is why I hope you will listen to Parliament and we will listen to you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteurs and everyone else , but especially Mrs Morgania , who has seen though to its end what was a burdensome task .
We are proposing , among other things , that consumers should have the right to compensation if an agreed service and its quality are not delivered .
Consumers should have the right to change supplier quickly and have access to information on a product 's energy background : for example , its effects on the environment .
Both my group and the majority of the committee supported the Commission in the matter of ownership unbundling .
There should be a system of unbundling for energy producers , making them system operators independent of the owners of energy networks .
In other words we have no faith in the ' big ' model .
It lost by a narrow margin in the vote .
In some countries competition works , and it is easy for consumers to make choices .
In others , though , this is still virtually impossible .
Most countries have opened up their markets ; but a few continue with their decades-old protectionism policy , whilst they take over the markets of others at the same time .
In many countries it is in practice impossible for new energy companies to compete fairly in the market .
We want to do something about this .
The situation has led to the distortion of competition , poor investments and unreasonable consumer prices .
As much as 77 % of energy in the European Union is produced from fossil fuels .
Current wasteful ways of using energy have come to the end of the road , as fossil reserves are meagre and they are becoming scarcer , with fewer and fewer controlling them .
Only in a viable and successful market is it possible to develop an effective emissions trading system , industry based on emission-free energy sources , and a European Union which is self-sufficient in energy .
The agreement reached last Friday in Luxembourg could be something approaching what Parliament wants to see , though with a few extra features .
For example , consumer protection needs to be strengthened .
This is Parliament 's wish .
The Commission still has too many powers in the proposal before us .
The comitology procedure must not become a basic principle in lawmaking .
It is not a basic principle .
We need separate rules on sanctions in connection with the implementation of new directives .
The Union 's infringement proceedings are ineffective , too slow and too political .
Our aim is to achieve harmony during the French Presidency , and I hope that the forthcoming Presidency assumes its duties successfully , so that the present issue can be wrapped up before the end of the year .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Morgan , and express my gratitude to my fellow shadow rapporteurs for their constructive work .
This document is an important step towards the creation of a united and competitive EU energy market .
We have to take this step , as it is an essential condition for guaranteeing competition within the market and the interests of consumers .
In my opinion , the amended agreement is for the most part in line with the strategic goals of the energy policy of most Member States , that is the creation of an efficient , integrated EU internal market .
There are just a few things I would like to point out .
Firstly , in the context of the Directive , the issue of energy security continues to be of great importance .
In terms of energy projects intended to eliminate energy islands , such as Lithuania and other Baltic states , as well as certain other regions , the political willpower is vitally important , together with general EU policy based on common finances .
It is essential that the idea of cooperation between transmission system operators with a view to developing an integrated European energy market is actually put into practice and does not simply remain a topic of discussion .
I would therefore like to call on my fellow Members to support Amendment 168 .
That would help us reach a decision on the issue of connections .
Secondly , there is no doubt that the principle of mutuality remains vital in relations with third-country players .
Thirdly , the introduction of a European Agency would greatly facilitate cooperation between national regulators and the consolidation of the internal market .
The Agency should be given sufficient decision-making powers .
Fourthly , the issue of the independence of national regulators cannot be overestimated .
Their appointment must be transparent and open and their activities free from any influence by politicians or executive governance .
The authority of all the Member States ' regulatory institutions should be coordinated .
Step by step , both the common energy market and the common energy policy would then be developed , which would ensure security of supply along with the highest acceptable price for all consumers .
The sooner this is done , the better .
Mr President , I would like to join my fellow Members in expressing thanks for the very good cooperation between the rapporteurs on this package and would like to be the first to respond to an accusation that played a major role in the German discussion about the energy package and particularly about the unbundling of production and transmission networks .
We Europeans are constantly being charged with wanting to make life difficult for large , successful companies .
I did not find any such negative orientation in the debates held in the committees - not at all .
In my view , it is a positive list that cannot be represented often enough by Brussels .
We want fair prices for energy , particularly for electricity .
We want transparent pricing , fair market conditions - including for new and smaller production companies .
We also want better conditions for decentralisation - an important precondition for the organisation of transmission networks in order to be able to effectively take account of renewable energies and efficiency .
What also matters a great deal to us is to put an end to the wastage that is occurring everywhere in the existing network structures .
If that is not a positive list of goals for this energy package , then I do not know how it could be improved .
Many fellow Members who do not agree with the majority decision by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy say that the market , if it is functioning and is left alone politically , can achieve all these goals itself .
However , so far , the so-called energy market in Europe has pushed prices up to the highest possible level , and they are still rising .
In some countries , there is absolutely no transparency at all for price formation . There is continuing concentration in the energy market and climate goals , environmental goals , are being met either in an unsatisfactory or at best in a mediocre way .
The unbundling of production and transmission networks is an important step towards bringing us closer to the positive goals in this energy policy .
In the light of the Irish vote last weekend , it is also undesirable for a German-French political cartel to work against the suggestions of Parliament and against the original suggestions by the Commission , as that is a classic trade-off issue .
The Germans and the French , Angela Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy , are supporting domestic companies at present .
What we want to see taken into account are the interests of consumers and the question of whether we are really future-proofing our energy sector or not .
The majority of citizens would not choose a Europe of companies but , at this point , would choose a Europe of consumer protection and fairness .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in spite of the fine proposals adopted by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , which warmly welcomed the position put forward in the Morgan report - and I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur for the excellent work she has done - I am sorry to say that recently positions have emerged that in my view are designed to change the fine achievements of the committee .
I refer to the Council 's conclusions , which leave little space for a concrete change of approach to create a competitive and competition-based energy market .
The Council is proposing the ITO model , which is in fact very similar to the third way .
This position does not seem to me to be at all consistent with the work done by the committee , which has endorsed by a considerable majority full ownership unbundling and total opposition to the establishment of alternative systems , not to mention the marginal role of the agency .
I wonder , therefore , what is the point of creating an agency if it is only supposed to play a purely advisory role ?
If we tried to overcome the current diversity of legislative frameworks , according to the Council we would exacerbate the situation and create even more distortion .
I therefore hope that Parliament will exercise its vote with awareness and will stick to the line set out by Mrs Morgan .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) I would like to say that Commissioner Piebalgs is in a bind , and has basically become a victim of the bureaucrats who are making us take an action in a hurry , without giving it enough thought .
It is also true that the data available to us is not reliable .
The data they made available to us come from 2003 / 2004 , while the energy markets were in fact only fully liberalised in June 2007 , and the practical information concerning the differences between the old and the new Member States has not yet been evaluated .
It also has to be said that the practical information gained from the first two energy packages has not been evaluated .
I believe that in addition to this criticism , which also applies to the underestimation of the risks as regards the Member States ' energy security - risks that are too high because an absolute fortune was dumped on the market without any safety mechanism ensuring that it would not end up in the wrong hands - some positive solutions must be provided , too .
I think that the Agency should have the competences that would enable it to prevent electricity blackouts , and that the Commission should have the power to impose a price moratorium in case year-on-year average energy prices rise by more than 30 % in all the Member States .
If the average growth in Member States reaches 30 % , Commissioner Piebalgs and his colleagues should be able to impose a price moratorium , as the experience of some European Union citizens , namely fishermen and road hauliers , shows at present .
I think that this measure would receive a positive response in the EU Member States and would enhance the prestige of our Community .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , these reports bring the usual wish list of incompatible objectives : security of energy supply , an efficient energy market , reduction of CO2 , harmonised rules for all countries and cheap energy for pensioners .
Well , cheap energy for some means that the rest of us pay for it .
Perhaps we think we shall win friends by forcing governments to provide subsidised energy to those suffering from so-called ' energy poverty ' .
Is there no area of activity in which the EU will trust national governments to do what they think is best for their own peoples ?
One thing that these reports should highlight , but do not , is the foolishness of the targets for carbon and renewable energy .
The oil price is high and likely to remain high , yet the cost of energy to consumers is going to be higher still in order to subsidise renewables .
Ironically , sustained high oil prices are just what is needed to reduce CO2 emissions .
They will reduce consumption and stimulate the development of alternative sources far more effectively than any number of targets and directives . Who knows ?
We may eventually find that wind power becomes viable .
In the end it will be very hard to impose harmonised unbundling rules across 27 Member States , irrespective of the benefits that this may or may not bring .
Countries would indeed be foolish to rely too heavily on their neighbours for energy supplies .
When the lights go out , when hospitals have no power , national interests are going to prevail irrespective of orders from the proposed EU regulator .
That is how things are .
( CS ) I very much agree that the Member States should retain their power to freely establish ownership relations between energy producers and transmission networks .
I also welcome the strengthening of the independence of the rights and duties of national regulatory authorities .
Regarding access to the trans-European networks , I see explicit auctions as a good solution .
Of course , the proceeds from auctions should be invested in tariffs .
I also agree that the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators should operate on the principle of each country having one vote .
However , ladies and gentlemen , I must say that I am not convinced that ownership unbundling , auctioning or launching another Agency are the best ways of achieving better electricity markets .
We are facing the reality of rising energy prices and energy consumption , and this , in my opinion , calls for more power stations to be built and , in particular , for massive strengthening of the transmission networks .
It is also necessary to support and promote the nuclear option as a clean and safe energy source .
We have to stop fearing nuclear power .
Madam President , I believe that this House , along with the Council and Commission , believes very strongly that consumer rights in the energy sector in Europe should be clearly stated and well protected .
We are all convinced that mechanisms need to address the shortcomings that currently exist in our systems across the European Union .
We also all agree that we need a tool with which to clarify and consolidate energy rights that exist in European and national legislation .
We agree that this tool should be part of a broader communication strategy , of which the Commission 's checklist is an important part as well .
The report that Mrs De Vits has authored - and I would like to commend her on her work along with the work of the other shadows - is an important step contributing to this debate .
It answers some of the key questions that European citizens are asking us and I would like to focus very briefly on some of these questions .
European citizens want to pay for what they consume and they want to know what they pay for .
So firstly , the report talks very strongly about the need to have transparent prices and insists that these prices should be based only on consumption , that invoices should be developed along best practices existing in the European Union , that they should be comparable and that tariff simulators should exist so that consumers can see which company offers them a better choice .
Consumers want to have a choice and they want to be protected from the fear of being disconnected from the grid , and that is why the report focuses special attention on this .
It talks about the need to provide safeguards against disconnection and to use this only as a last resort in Member States .
Finally , it addresses the question of vulnerable consumers .
I agree very much with Gunnar Hökmark who said earlier that we should not let Member States get away from their responsibility .
The responsibility to protect vulnerable consumers lies with the Member States : that is what we pay our taxes for .
Ladies and gentlemen , I call on you to vote tomorrow in favour of the report as it has been submitted to plenary .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my speech will focus on the issue of ownership unbundling , although I do not think that this is the most important issue .
Actually , I think that we have wasted too much time on this issue .
To unbundle or not to unbundle , that is not the question .
Managing a network requires industrial expertise .
Electricity cannot be stored ; the frequency and voltage of the grid must be maintained according to market demand .
With ownership unbundling , the Commission still faces the risks of speculative or political system operation .
The question of ownership , industrial management and network security has not , in my opinion , been sufficiently analysed .
That issue aside , we have managed to promote the role of one of the key players in the functioning of the internal market : the regulators .
They must be given real powers so that they can exercise their rights and responsibilities .
Through the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators , regulators will have a pivotal role when it comes to cross-border issues and the harmonisation of technical codes to ensure that our networks function better and are more secure .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has tabled three amendments : the first is to underline that the functioning of the internal market must hinge on the interests of the private and industrial consumer .
This is self-evident , but it is still worth repeating .
The second concerns long-term contracts which are subject to compliance with certain principles .
These should be seen not as a barrier to competition but as a stabilising factor .
It should be stressed that this is requested by industrial consumers .
Finally , the third is there to provoke discussion .
It is a question of the Commission , in consultation with all the market players , contemplating the move to a European transmission system operator .
This may be a long way off , but it is an interesting point to consider .
The future of the internal electricity market could be guaranteed with a European electricity transmission network .
Madam President , this market is not a market , but a hold-up : one costing EU consumers something like EUR 70 billion a year in undue windfall profits going to 10 or 12 big energy oligopolies in Europe .
I can fully understand that these companies want to keep this going .
How do they keep those undue windfall profits ?
First , you prevent ownership unbundling .
I am sorry , but France and Germany are not small peripheral EU Member States .
If they do not unbundle , we will never have a really integrated grid and we will never solve the conflict between producing electricity , trading it and facilitating competition through your grid .
The second issue - and that is what is happening now - is that they are trying to escape regulation both from the regulatory authorities and from the cartel authorities .
Therefore they want to create regional markets .
However , if we do not have a strong EU agency , these regional markets will be a regulatory no-man 's-land : E.ON , RWE and EDF are too big for a regional market - France , Germany and the Benelux countries .
Therefore , without a strong EU agency and a better interface between regulatory agencies and cartel authorities , this EUR 70 billion hold-up will continue .
( LT ) I would like to start by thanking the rapporteurs for their balanced work and excellent cooperation .
They had to face a rather difficult challenge , as the Commission had proposed a very complex , novel approach towards the document , the package of documents .
The European electricity market ( the model established over the decades ) was based on national vertically integrated companies , which operated within their markets , protecting them .
To my mind , we have three main vectors and three main ideas : the development of the process of concentration on a European scale , the lifting of national restrictions through the implementation of the principle of unbundling activities ; I see the second principle as the enhancement of the process of centralisation by establishing a European Agency , with the aim of achieving better coordination with national regulators , which is very good , and most of us are in favour of this .

The third principle , which was not clarified and , to my mind , remains quite obscure and raises quite a few questions , is the principle of isolation from third-party investments in European transmission systems , which could possibly ...
The Commission failed to supply clear answers regarding its vision for the future and what political , financial and economic hazards might ensue as well as how the consequences of implementing this principle could affect the energy policy or general EU policy .

There is one more thing I would like to mention : the market impulses referred to and the principle of unbundling activities are not strong enough to change the nature of a natural monopoly in an energy market , as some isolated markets still remain , as well as regional markets ; therefore , political agreements would have to be achieved on a wide scale in such circumstances ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , the most certain end result of the liberalisation and harmonisation of the European Union 's energy markets is a hike in the price of electricity .
That will be because of electricity 's pricing mechanism , as Mr Turmes showed .
The market price is determined in the wholesale power exchanges .
There the price of all electric power is determined by the most expensive production cost of the most expensive product .
When the most expensive form of energy is coal-based , the exchange is a profit machine for the producers of hydroelectric and atomic energy .
The same companies will also gain from the EU 's emissions trading system .
Emissions rights at the exchanges will also be added to the price of the electricity for whose production they are not needed .
We need to learn a lesson from the experiences of the United States of America .
The NGO known as Public Citizen has estimated that in the 14 states in which the price of electricity is not regulated it is 52 % higher than in the 36 states where it is .
The problem with the electricity pricing mechanism has been ignored in Mrs Morgan 's report .
( SV ) The electricity market has been more or less monopolised in all the industrial countries .
Economic research has shown that national economies stand to make large gains from the introduction of competition into the electricity market , but in that case it is important to break up vertical integration structures .
The electricity producers should not also handle electricity distribution to customers ; there is a need to unbundle the electricity sector .
A small number of EU countries are carrying out such reforms .
These are the Nordic countries , the United Kingdom , the Netherlands and Spain .
The EU institutions were not required .
The countries are doing it in their own manifest interests .
Opposition is considerable in many major countries , for example France and Germany , which are more interested in an EU state than in the prosperity which a free internal market offers .
There are strong reasons for the EU to force the pace .
Effectiveness and prosperity will increase for all Europeans if competition in the electricity sector encompasses the huge EU market in its entirety .
Political pressure needs to be brought to bear on the Member States which do not want competition .
( DE ) Madam President , whether you like it or not , Ireland has voted .
Now you must respect their decision .
Europe has the opportunity of the century , by which I mean that Europe must finally become democratic and efficient .
For the energy market , this means not holding back . Get stuck in to the big tigers , the RWEs , the EDFs - get right into the thick of things , where the problem lies , unbundle and apply subsidiarity .
It is possible , it would be visionary , but it has nothing to do with the EU to date , controlled as it is by lobby interests and their centres of power .
On the other hand , if you do not change anything in this area , and if you do not take the vote in Ireland into account and pronounce the Reform Treaty dead , then the chance of the century for a democratic Europe and for a fair energy market will become a world in which extremists , on both the left and the right , call the shots .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we had all agreed that this was about better prices , more investment in transmission networks and cross-border connections to create more competition and a market that is not so much controlled by one or a few companies .
Then , when weighing up the facts , we found that those provided by the Commission do not add up at all .
There is no evidence , no facts to prove that ownership unbundling leads to better prices and greater investment .
It is not true - or can you tell me why prices are higher in the United Kingdom ?
Is there more investment in Spain ?
Is there less , or more , competition there than in other countries ?
The facts show conclusively that there is no one-size-fits-all solution .
The sensible thing to do , therefore , is to seek a compromise whereby Member States that wish to achieve this goal - which must be achieved - by taking a different route are free to do so .
That is the background to the attempt at a third option , a third way .
Incidentally , it is interesting that we in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy have moved some way on this over the last few months .
There are other committees that have voted against ownership unbundling .
In our committee , there is a new compromise on gas , worked out by Mrs Laperrouze and Mr Vidal-Quadras .
There is also a new compromise within the Council .
We are serious about voting again tomorrow on electricity to re-establish the way things were many months ago .
However , that has been superseded ; that will not be the result .
A parliament that wants to be taken seriously must be open to these new conditions and changes .
We have been rushed through the entire process and I was constantly told that we had to work fast , we had to hurry , we could still try the experiment of finding clever solutions that move in the direction of Parliament 's decision .
Therefore , I urge you to go beyond party lines and vote for the proposals we have presented here , to find compromises along the lines of what we voted for regarding gas and what the Council voted for .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , we have taken an enormous step this past year , because establishing a common energy policy represents an enormous step for the whole of the European Union .
We are talking about the kind of energy policy that simultaneously promotes the strategic interests of the EU Member States , the rights and protection of Europe 's residents , competitiveness and growth of the European economy , and conservation of our environment .
These five proposals raise the prospect of achieving the kind of market integration which will not only transform the way in which companies in the energy sector operate , and separate and increase the transparency of energy generation , transmission and supply functions , but also give greater priority than ever before to the fundamental rights and protection of energy consumers .
In the context of European coordination , the task of monitoring fair market competition , stimulating cross-border energy trading , and ensuring that high standards are met in response to consumer demands must be given to an authority invested with broader powers than hitherto , and which is independent both of governments and of the energy sector .
This is why the European legislature has moved decisively towards establishing an Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators .
The draft report produced by my fellow Member Mr Brunetta and later taken over by Mr Chichester has this as its aim .
I was pleased to have the opportunity of working with them as shadow rapporteur representing the Socialist Group in the European Parliament ( PSE ) .
I consider it a great success that , by establishing a responsible , independent and strong European agency , this jointly-produced draft regulation will not only promote cooperation among regulators in the Member States but also help to achieve the primary goal of fostering regional markets and developing the networks .
As socialists we insisted on the creation of a strong and independent authority , since we know that in a liberalised European market everyone wants to buy where it is cheapest , and to sell where it is most expensive .
We therefore really need the kind of regulatory authority that will take action to combat any market distortions that may occur .
It is in the interests of Hungary and of all the other small Member States to create a strong authority , thereby helping to ensure its independence , establish cooperation , enhance market transparency and secure investment for development .
Mr President , I would like to remind everyone that European energy supply is not an ideological issue .
The world has changed for ever .
Whole continents are beginning to compete in the energy sector , and let us be candid about it : no one can remain isolated from electricity or motorisation .
The goal of energy policy is to ensure Europe 's supply security and competitiveness .
I would nevertheless like to conclude by saying that the PSE Group believes that consumers should be treated as the key component of European energy policy .
We very much regret that our conservative fellow Members do not support making the Consumer Charter mandatory .
Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Madam President , in the last few minutes we have talked a lot about industry .
I am glad that Mrs De Vits addresses the rights of energy consumers very directly in her report .
Indeed , it is vital to ensure that consumers are aware of their rights and that they can also be certain that their rights will be observed .
Unlike Mrs De Vits , however , I do not believe that we need completely new laws -certainly not at European level .
It is more a matter of properly and appropriately implementing existing legislation into national law .
We therefore need strong supervisory authorities that take care of this , and we must ensure that we have sufficient transparency so that consumers really do know their rights .
The Charter can provide a meaningful supplement to this , not in the sense of becoming a binding legal document , but simply in the sense of providing a point of reference for politics and the economy by summarising consumer protection legislation relating to energy .
We all know - it is a matter of course - that our citizens can play a meaningful role in society and the economy only if they have access to appropriate provision of energy .
To that extent , it is certainly important that we ensure that everyone , even the poor and the poorest of the poor , gets what they have a right to .
However , I do not believe that it is for Brussels to prescribe social tariffs .
We should leave that to the Member States and industry in the Member States .
Otherwise we are not introducing anything more than a redistribution mechanism .
The best scenario would be to link protection of the poor with the efficiency measures that are required to achieve our climate protection goals .
Intelligent solutions such as digital counters can be very useful here .
In that respect I have nothing against encouraging the industry to introduce these within 10 years .
Then consumers will know exactly how much they are using and can plan around that and economise .
Madam President , I echo the congratulations to our rapporteurs made by previous speakers .
I think Parliament has done a good job today for Europe 's consumers , but I focus particularly on one issue and one amendment .
That is Amendment 161 to the Morgan report , pushing for better access to the grid for renewable operators .
I hope that amendment will be successful when we vote on it tomorrow .
I call now for stronger action on the part of the Commission in cases where the national authorities are actually part of the problem rather than part of the solution .
By way of example , in the United Kingdom we have Ofgem , our national authority , which has a locational pricing mechanism for access to the UK grid that actually discriminates against renewable operators within Scotland , my country .
I would like to see a greater degree of European coordination and action against the individual Member State operators where they are part of the problem .
I think we have made a good start towards that today and look forward to seeing more of it .
- ( PL ) My congratulations on the reports , which tackle the most important consumer and political problems facing our continent .
The unbundling of distribution from generation and trade in energy is of key significance for both individual and industrial customers .
Where unbundling is introduced , energy prices fall , or rise more slowly .
In countries where unbundling has been carried out , the mean rise in energy prices for domestic users was 3 % during 1998-2006 .
Where this was not done , energy prices rose by 28 % .
Similar trends are visible in the industrial customer market .
Energy these days , though , is also about security of supply - in other words , politics .
The Russian state monopoly has increasing investments in 16 EU countries .
In Germany , in France and in Italy Gazprom even has access to individual customers .
This is sufficient reason for execution of the principle of mutuality in commercial relations with third countries .
Otherwise we shall be defenceless , and we shall pay for it with our security .
( EL ) Madam President , the common theme of the proposals for the energy market is its restructuring in favour of private enterprises , while public energy suppliers are being weakened , despite being left to bear the underlying costs .
In my country , where the energy market is controlled by public suppliers for the public good , anything like this will have very unfavourable consequences .
The EU is asking for the base of the pyramid to be entrusted to capital enterprise so that the prices for other goods can be set .
This is because , to a large extent , energy determines the cost of the production process , which will be passed on incrementally to the consumer .
In these times of ever-increasing energy demand and steadily rising oil prices , leaving the energy market to the mercy of the private energy giants will be disastrous and cartels are likely to be formed .
The theory of price regulation through competition is simply a myth : in practice , it has led to the creation of powerful monopolies in a number of sectors of the economy , with devastating effects on the market and consumers .
( DE ) Madam President , surely , given the record prices for petroleum , energy independence for Europe finally has to be a top-priority issue !
The EU must reduce its current dependency on the Gulf States .
We need to improve our relationship with other countries besides Russia without becoming excessively independent .
We will also need to consider what to do about Iran in the long term .
If a study comes to the conclusion that we are putting too much faith in the vague promises of Central Asian dictators and unconfirmed reports of petroleum stores in relation to the Nabucco pipeline project , then we will have to develop a constructive relationship with Iran which , after all , has the second-largest petroleum reserves in the world .
It must not be forgotten that the ever-increasing profits of the Gulf States , thanks to rapidly rising petroleum prices , are also used to promote Islamic fundamentalism around the world .
This is another reason why , in my opinion , we in the EU must invest more in alternative energy suppliers .
Madam President , I congratulate the Commissioner , and also the rapporteurs on their excellent reports and their good work in drawing up directives that might unify the European energy market .
Long-term investment , the principle of solidarity , market access , regulation of cross-border flow - the important objectives of these regulations are all about this .
Let us not forget that at the end of the day the consumer is number one - and that is what all these regulations are about : protecting the consumer , users ' interests and energy in the European Union .
Let us also keep in mind that our regulations will not provide a solution to every problem , such as the rise in oil prices , nor will they prevent a rise in energy prices linked to the introduction of CO2 emission costs , but they will significantly simplify and support our actions to the benefit of energy users .
Let us tell ourselves that , yes , we know the solution proposed in Mrs Morgan 's report will probably not be final .
What we have here is a very good basis for discussions with the Council on the subject of a final solution .
This final solution , where electric current is concerned , must be moderately distant from the solutions in the second package , otherwise the introduction of the third package would not make sense .
At the same time the solutions for gas must be similar to the solutions for electricity , but they must definitely not be identical .
Today we are clearly seeing that ownership division for the energy market will be greater more and further-reaching than for gas . We must accept and respect this .
This point is also very important - third party access to the market , access to parties from third countries .
That is why this is also a key issue , in order not give privileges to investors from outside the European Union .
Just to conclude , I would like to say that this is one of the most difficult discussions that we have had , and it has been conducted very properly and with respect for all parties .
( DE ) Madam President , I am delighted that , in the De Vits report , we have a very good report before us and I am delighted that all our fellow Members are of one mind regarding solidarity , transparency and consumer protection .
I think this is wonderful .
However , I must say one thing : I find those on the right of the Chamber both cynical and hard to believe .
It is hard to believe them because they are not in favour of a binding charter on the rights of consumers - something that is incredibly important if citizens are to know what rights they have . I find them cynical because everyone in this Chamber was united in backing the idea that air passengers should be aware of these rights , and air passengers are not exactly the poorest people in our society .
For the poorest , however , who really do need to be aware of their rights , this will not be provided .
Therefore , I ask you earnestly to reconsider . Please ensure that we make this Charter obligatory .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this package is arriving at Parliament right in the midst of the great challenge that energy is posing for our society 's future .
What the unsustainable and unstoppable rise in crude oil prices , the perverse effects of the use of biofuels on the availability of food and the large energy demands of the developing countries are telling us is that action by the European Union is no longer just a necessity but is absolutely crucial .
Above all , we need a legislative framework that will finally create a European market in electricity and gas , a market that is able to regulate itself in a balanced manner , that has national and European regulators , that guarantees competitiveness , openness , transparency and efficiency for consumers too , that allows large businesses to remain strong and at the same time allows new entities to be set up and to grow , that makes progress instead of going backwards .
In this sense we hope that , for electricity , unbundling will not mean a step backwards , that is , that ground will not be lost as regards the good practices already in place in many countries in terms of separation of the network .
What we need is a market that provides certainty for investors and operators , but also real opportunities for consumers , whether they are businesses or individuals .
I would like to finish , Madam President , by saying that we must genuinely strengthen the hand of consumers by offering certainty , guarantees and fair prices .
( LV ) Firstly , I would like to thank the Commissioner and the majority of my fellow Members for truly liberal access to the electricity market , which together with energy efficiency measures will really allow us to reduce prices in the future .
Two theses - unbundling of ownership and transmission - are and will remain the basic model for genuine decentralised production and security for networks providing access to electricity produced from renewable resources .
I also have one more dream I would like to see this package fulfil : that finally a unified European electricity network will be created and that the Baltic States will also be among the members of this electricity supply network partnership , on which we have experienced an endless number of obstacles both within the European Union and outside it .
Thank you .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that in a Europe that every day is suffering from ever greater inflation and from galloping prices due in large part to the cost of energy , talking about a European charter of consumer rights is our clear duty and I therefore endorse the report and thank both my fellow Member and , of course , the Commission .
It is right to stress that an energy supply is a vital pre-requisite for participation in economic and social life .
Nonetheless , one point is that there is already legislation in force , but often citizens ' rights are not being respected with in terms of prices , tariffs or tariff transparency , with discriminatory rules that often prevent the comparison of tariffs .
I can therefore only hope that joint action by the EU and the Member States , always abiding by the vital principle of subsidiarity - as the excellent report by Mrs De Vits also stresses - is crucial .
The adoption of the third package , in my view , will also serve to ensure better protection for consumers as well as small and medium-sized professional users .
( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact is that the third energy package has divided the political groups , especially on the issue of ownership unbundling .
Clearly , this split is due not to ideology , but to the differing internal situations and starting points of the various Member States ; it arises from corresponding splits among the Member States in the Council .
These internal situations should be respected if we wish to avoid internal social upheavals .
Personally , I fully endorse the idea of ownership unbundling , but I am well aware that unbundling could under no circumstances be imposed in my country at this time .
There has to be an interim period to allow all parties involved to adapt to the new circumstances .
After lengthy and laborious negotiations , the Council has achieved conciliation on the ' third way ' .
I therefore think we have a duty in this difficult issue to support the conciliation by possibly improving it on certain points in the light of experience .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is important that we all come out of conciliation with our heads held high .
This can be achieved only if the vital interests of certain Member States are not put at stake .
We must make no compromises on the basic principles of independence and effectiveness that should govern the activity of energy transmission system operators and energy regulators .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs on their good work , and in particular express my support for Mrs Morgan 's position with regard to full ownership unbundling between generation and supply activities on the one hand , and network ownership and operation on the other .
Large vertically integrated companies obviously make it difficult for new competitors to come onto the market and , in particular , for renewable energy sources to be developed and installed .
All of this takes us further away from the objectives on competitiveness and combating climate change that we Europeans have set ourselves .
I would therefore like to invite the minority that is against unbundling to leave aside national interests , which disappear in the short term , and to take steps towards joining in building a Europe that is strong and secure in terms of its energy supply .
To conclude , I would like to point out that while network access for renewable energy sources is essential for achieving our objectives , developing electricity interconnection capacity is no less essential , especially for the most isolated countries in our energy market .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur who took this issue into account .
Madam President , the European energy market today continues to reflect , in my opinion , an old market structure dominated by national or regional monopolies , and this in spite of the evident benefits that liberalisation brings for European customers in terms of price , cost reduction and efficiency .
This is to say that liberalisation of the gas and electricity markets is still a work in progress .
For instance , we still need to move forward in eastern European countries to end state-owned domination of electricity production and to liberalise it , as we did in the distribution sector .
I also welcome the steps that we are taking to ensure ownership unbundling as a necessary measure to finally complete our liberalisation of the energy market .
In addition to liberalisation , Europe must also support the development of LPG and LNG terminals and technologies .
We need to encourage the creation of a world trade market for LPG and LNG to ease Europe 's dependency on a single source for natural gas .
Diversification and security of energy supply must now be as high on our agenda as liberalisation .
( SL ) Firstly I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs for the fine work they have done .
Europe started liberalising the electricity and gas market a decade ago , and right now we are closest to those genuine , long-desired results .
The proposed measures place at the forefront the consumer , who in a well functioning internal energy market will be able to choose from among suppliers and opt for the best one based on his own judgement .
I anticipate that an open and transparent internal market will also ensure access to the market for small companies and in this way increase competitiveness , improve conditions for investment in power stations and transmission networks , increase the security of supply and promote sustainable development .
The main precondition for a well functioning internal market is standard and clear rules that apply to all participants in the market .
Different models in individual Member States will certainly not lead to the goal that has been set .
Allow me this opportunity to congratulate the Slovenian Presidency .
Indeed the Presidency has been focused entirely on coordination and finding a compromise , and despite the strong national interests of Member States , it achieved agreement in the Council .
In the European Parliament , too , the path to compromise is not easy .
The pressures , including from Member States , are great .
I trust that Parliament will confirm the compromise we drew up in the ITRE Committee .
Despite the differences in the positions of the Council and Parliament , I believe that the compromise proposed by Parliament is a good basis for further negotiations and coordination among European institutions .
Finally may I also express my anticipation that in fulfilling the objectives of the third liberalisation package , the French Presidency will invest maximum effort in coordinating work , seeking a compromise and pushing private interests entirely to one side .
I also anticipate a similar commitment to finding timely common solutions on the part of the Commission .
In this context I am grateful to Commissioner Piebalgs , who stated at the beginning that we must reach a common agreement by the end of this year .
( Applause ) .
( DE ) Madam President , what particularly surprises me about this debate is that even though some of our fellow Members want to prescribe in detail how competition should take place - and there are several possible ways of doing this - they are not prepared to talk about more transparency , more incentives to save energy , opportunities for energy consumers to lodge complaints or the fight against energy poverty .
These are precisely the points that I believe are crucial in the Morgan report and naturally also in the De Vits report .
This is the signal we need to give to the citizens of Europe tomorrow : we have to say that people must not be affected by the full force of price rises but that there must be opportunities to avoid them by increasing the amount of energy saved and particularly by having more transparency in order to be able to choose other energy providers .
I believe it is crucial to give citizens this freedom of choice and also to give them the opportunity to complain when malpractice occurs .
I am very thankful to Mrs Morgan for this part of the report .
( FR ) Madam President , listening to all my colleagues this afternoon , I am quite surprised that we all agree on the need for a European single energy market , although I feel that we must work on energy efficiency so that consumers pay as little as possible .
We are therefore all agreed on the objective to be achieved , but not on how to go about achieving it .
I have not heard much talk or mention of the agreement secured by the Council on 6 June , which does not necessarily require the unbundling of ownership , production and distribution .
Now , if unbundling and the single market had triggered a fall in energy prices , it would be apparent .
This is not the case in Spain or in the UK , and the Commission has never been able to prove it .
Therefore , let us stop demonising certain companies which actually have the industrial expertise and have shown that they can operate efficiently .
When we want interconnection , when we want solidarity , it is doubtless preferable for Member States to be free to choose from several models .
Let us put an end to that single way of thinking that rejects the third way , that makes accusations of a ' Franco-German cartel ' .
We know that the market alone cannot solve the issue of monopolies , which in any case exist everywhere .
The Member States have taken a step towards an acceptable package that can be fine-tuned .
If we do not accept it , we risk having no text at all , while our citizens are kept waiting .
More importantly , I do not want to see good guys on one side of this Chamber and bad guys - i.e. those who still want to reach an agreement with the Council - on the other .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we all feel the same about the situation on the European internal market .
We do not yet have a European internal market ; we have national markets and we have monopolies or small groups exerting control over national markets .
We have a situation where energy prices are rising every day and we are dependent on imported energy .
We all see the situation in the same light and we also agree on the goal .
Many Members have spoken about this . We want more competition , falling prices , and more investment in transmission networks .
We want interconnectors to be extended in order to permit cross-border exchange .
We do not want the market to concentrate around only a few large suppliers .
The big question is how we want to achieve that , and that is where we come to a parting of the ways . Many Members , including some who have spoken today , believe that ownership unbundling is the universal remedy .
I say that if we go down this road only , then we are not seeing the full picture .
This is not the way to go !
Allow me to refer to certain countries ; Mrs Grossetête also mentioned the situation there .
In Spain , two companies , Endesa and Iberdrola , produce 48.3 % and 28 % of the electricity respectively .
In Sweden , Vattenfall is boss , also producing almost 48 % of the electricity generated ; while in Italy the market is concentrated around ENEL , which has a 43.9 % market share .
Nobody can tell me that ownership unbundling will achieve what we want , which is to break up the market and create competition .
Therefore , I would ask all fellow Members to support Amendments 165 and 168 tomorrow rather than continuing to see only half the picture .
As for everything else in the Morgan report , I find it very satisfactory .
My compliments to Mrs Morgan ; she has shown a great deal of energy and commitment .
However , on that particular matter , I think we should also open a second way for the countries that have unbundled in a different manner .
Countries in which the state still owns 100 % of the production and transmission systems - such as Sweden , for example - should not be required to change this .
However , nobody can say that tomorrow we will be passing a package that includes equal competitive conditions .
That is a fallacy .
( DE ) Madam President , I do apologise for my late arrival .
There are some very long distances to walk in this building and the lifts can be very slow sometimes .
The matter we are discussing today and will vote on tomorrow is not necessarily a question of left or right - although it is true that we also have that type of debate in this Chamber - but rather a disputed question about what instruments will achieve our goal .
We are agreed on the goal , and Mrs Niebler has just underlined it : we want more competition on the European market ; we want prices to be more transparent ; we want pricing that is easy to understand .
The instruments to achieve this vary greatly , however .
I am among those who proceed on the basis that the option of finding a third way can also be an instrument .
We have included these suggestions here and emphasised repeatedly that this has not only initiated the third way , the Council 's original suggestion , but that we have also introduced additional regulatory components because the third way that came to us from the Council was not enough for us .
From this angle , we should talk about it again , take stock of ourselves and allow this second and third way as an additional option .
What is even more important is that we in Europe achieve uniform regulations , and that the regulatory authorities in the Member States are given consistent competences and independence to implement what we decide here , because in the end , they are the ones who have to respond on the ground .
Recent weeks have given us two succinct examples of the Commission 's function of overseeing cartels and competition , although the timing does allow pause for thought .
However , a company that violates antitrust law deserves to be punished ; that is all there is to it .
I do not make any concessions here .
Nevertheless , we should discuss whether ownership unbundling is really the instrument we should be equipping ourselves and the regulators with , or whether we should offer more flexibility .
I hope that tomorrow 's vote will be such that we still achieve a compromise .
Otherwise , we will definitely have to work with the Council to seek and find a compromise .
Thank you very much and apologies again for being late .
( NL ) Madam President , speaking on behalf of the Dutch delegation of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I should like to compliment rapporteur Mrs Morgan most sincerely on the way in which she has prepared this opinion .
We are in favour of unbundling .
Indeed , this has already clearly been put into practice in the Netherlands with good results , including with regard to investment and the well-functioning market in both the gas and the electricity sector .
I think it very important to carry this through at European level , too .
I should also like to mention in this connection that Mrs Kroes , the Commissioner for Competition , has done her bit for this development , including by means of what she is currently doing with RWE and E.ON. I think that this is an important development , therefore .
The other aspect is energy poverty , and that is why we consider this a most excellent report by Parliament and hope that it goes through .
Madam President , I should like to give an example of where the Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers can make a real difference .
A small community organisation in Manchester asked for my help in resolving a complaint with its energy supplier .
For five years the company was reading the meter but failing to send any bills .
In March 2008 , the group received an invoice for five years ' electricity use totalling GBP 7 540.37 , pushing them into debt .
Ensuring consumers are aware of their rights - in this case the simple right to receive a regular bill - is fundamental to putting consumers in control of their energy consumption .
At a time when every consumer in every country across Europe is facing soaring energy bills , we must give consumers the information and tools to manage their bills , cut their use and costs and , at the same time , contribute to cutting CO2 emissions .
I urge the Commission to be bold in taking forward a charter of rights , working with regulators , Member States and companies to proactively promote and publicise these rights , and to abandon the notion of a watered-down checklist , which will not deliver a fair deal for consumers faced with today 's complex energy challenges and prices .
If we can have a charter of rights for air passengers , why can we not have one for energy consumers ?
Commissioner , I should like you to answer that question .
( DE ) Madam President , the European Energy Agency in Paris has determined that we will experience an energy shortage in 2012 .
It is therefore vital that we devote our urgent attention to creating incentives and investing more in transmission networks and production .
The present Electricity Directive provides a good incentive to also shorten the approval periods so that it does not come to a blackout in 2012 .
It is also important to strengthen the national regulators so that we can accordingly push for the interests of our own industry in neighbouring countries .
It would also be good if we had a regulatory agency for nuclear matters that could make pronouncements on safety and security according to the French model .
That is something that ought to be discussed this week in the Council too .
( RO ) I congratulate the Rapporteur Ms. Morgan .
The certainty of energy supply for the Union requires huge investments and investors need a predictable environment , which encourages long and medium-term investments .
In the context of climate change , the Union intends that , by 2020 , at least 20 % of its energy shall come from renewable sources .
Access to the network for energy transport is essential .
In recent years , we have had a rapid increase in energy prices and the European citizens are expecting an answer to their problems from the European institutions .
The accessibility and availability of energy are essential for economic and social life .
The setting-up of the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators will ensure better protection of the energy consumers ' interests .
I consider amendment 18 of the Chichester report to fall under the competence of the Council .
( LT ) I would like to congratulate the Commission on the proposed package of documents for the creation of a realistic EU internal energy market , as well as Mrs Morgan , who , in her report , has presented us with an expert assessment of the market situation along with possible solutions .
I am glad that attention has been drawn to the existence of ' energy islands ' .
Lithuania is part of such an ' island ' in terms of electricity and , in fact , gas supply .
This country 's situation after the closure of the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant in 2009 will become unpredictable because of its sole dependency on Russia .
Therefore , integration into a common EU transmission system is vital .
The suggested implementation of ownership as the sole means of guaranteeing the independence of transmission operators along with the exclusion of third countries from controlling the transmission systems and transmission systems operators , the priority of the protection of consumer interests - these are the means that will guarantee energy security in the EU and the wellbeing of its people .

( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur for the report by my fellow Member , Mr Chichester , I was one of the supporters of the proposal that in the event of a vote in the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators , the Commission 's original plan of one vote per country should remain unchanged .
Putting into practice the so-called ' weighted ' voting procedure would give an advantage to the bigger Member States , to the detriment of the smaller ones .
The majority in the ITRE Committee supported the fairer principle and I believe that the same will happen during the vote in plenary .
The majority of national energy market regulators also favoured the launch of an agency that would be more than just another bureaucratic debating club with no powers .
Applying unequal conditions to the individual countries would basically devalue the effort to create a respected and functioning agency .
Different national energy markets came into being under different circumstances and still have not been efficiently linked up .
The Agency has the opportunity to help to achieve real interconnection .
Madam President , I strongly support unbundling between generation and transmission , but I would say that it needs to be thorough and I question whether it can sit comfortably with any state ownership in either sector .
I say that in part from the experience of my own constituency , Northern Ireland , where we have recently entered a single electricity market on the island of Ireland , with much promise about what that would do for stability of prices .
The experience has been rather different .
A couple of weeks ago I visited one of the largest consumers in my constituency .
Three years ago they were paying just marginally more than the average UK price .
Today , under the single electricity market in Ireland , they are paying 76 % more than the average UK price .
In effect they have been decoupled without gaining any advantage , and the primary reason is , I believe , because that single market was created without adequately dealing with the issue of the state monopoly of the ESB .

( NL ) Madam President , to be brief , there has been a real decline in investment in the electricity market , particularly in cross-border grids , in recent years .
A new legislative package is now needed , therefore , and Commissioner Piebalgs knows as well as my fellow Members how important the level playing field is to me .
Splitting ownership is the best option , then .
Fortunately , the Energy Council has realised that this level playing field does not exist at present .
The ban on takeovers by horizontal non-split undertakings in the coming years is justified , therefore ; there is to be no cherry-picking of smaller-sized vital undertakings by non-split organisations .
This gives organisations in the Netherlands , producers such as Nuon and Essent , the opportunity to develop a European outlook .
It creates breathing space for the coming period .
From this point of view , I wholeheartedly support the splitting of ownership now being proposed in Mrs Morgan 's report .
Madam President , I congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work and support her position on getting a fairer deal for consumers .
Mrs Morgan has rightly indicated that this is best achieved through ownership unbundling and that means we need to reduce the concentration of power of large companies and allow better access for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Better regulation of electricity and gas markets is critical to ensuring fair competition and better prices for consumers and I am deeply concerned that soaring energy prices are putting Europeans increasingly at risk of energy poverty , especially the elderly , who are the most vulnerable .
Given the current conditions in energy security , we absolutely need a well-functioning gas and electricity market in Europe .
Recently we have experienced problems with the supply of energy and this report rightly seeks to resolve some of these .
I have received a number of letters from my constituents in support of Amendment 159 which would prohibit Member States from authorising the construction of new power stations that emit more than 350 g of carbon dioxide per kilowatt produced .
( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the regional integration of cross-border electricity markets must be seen not only in the light of what is being discussed today , but also in terms of creating a single European market for electricity .
Furthermore , the range of energy issues in the European framework deserves a more comprehensive and forward looking approach .
Hence the initiative we took on Parliament 's STOA Panel , drawing up energy scenarios for the coming decades , using 2030 as a base reference .
Parliament and some parliamentary groups are divided on the question of unbundling energy transmission networks and energy companies .
This is sometimes of more relevance to national situations than to political and strategic choices .
However , I would like to be perfectly clear on this matter , ladies and gentlemen .
Personally I am in favour of a clear unbundling between the networks / companies operating on the electricity grid and the company or body managing the grids .
I believe that this is the most beneficial solution for consumers that guarantees the possibility of setting up a truly internal market for electricity , which should be one of our objectives as MEPs and European citizens .
( SK ) European electricity and gas consumers have the right to a universal service , that is , the right to be supplied with a specified quality , at reasonable prices that are easily and clearly comparable and transparent .
I welcome the fact that the report by my fellow Member , Mrs De Vits , on the proposal for a Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers , is also included in the debate on the third energy package .
At present , energy consumer rights are laid down in various EU documents , but are often not transposed into national legislation .
I welcome the rapporteur 's effort to make consumer rights more transparent .
Consumers must have freedom of choice and the possibility of changing their supplier free of charge .
They must understand what they are paying for .
I want to thank the rapporteur for incorporating in her report my amendments in which I called on the Member States to provide financial support to consumer organisations in the area of consulting services .
Consumer organisations do a great deal of work on behalf of energy consumers , especially vulnerable consumers .
( EL ) Madam President , let me first endorse what the rapporteur , Mrs Morgan , has said about the need to protect the more vulnerable consumers in particular against rising fuel prices .
I also agree on the need to combat energy poverty and vigorously promote investment in renewable energy sources .
However , as for the major question of creating a single internal energy market , achieving this aim depends not only on mapping out and applying a single strategy , but also on awareness of the specific characteristics of each participant .
Complete ownership unbundling is not an unconditional , essential precondition for investments in improving the network .
The delays in modernisation may be due to a misguided energy policy that treats energy as a product to be distributed primarily with the aim of increasing profits rather than improving the system .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Permit me first one general thought .
The fact is that in the Council we most certainly agree with the finding that the situation in the internal energy market is neither good nor satisfactory .
For this very reason we have spent long years striving to reach an agreement on establishing a proper internal market in gas and electricity in order to establish true competition and equal conditions for all players in this market .
On 6 June , as I have already said , major progress was achieved in the Council .
Today several speakers , including Mrs Morgan and numerous others , have stressed that complete ownership separation is the most effective method of establishing a proper internal market for gas and electricity .
This is also the view of the Commission , and it is also the view of the majority of Member States .
Nevertheless , a compromise was necessary to reach an agreement .
This compromise was not easy , but we were able to secure it .
The compromise means that three options are available , and the Presidency 's assessment is that the application of these options in line with the envisaged rules can lead us to a situation where equal conditions will be established for all players in the internal gas and electricity market , once true competition is established .
Allow me to make some other points .
Mention was made several times of the issue of poverty , or rather energy poverty .
This is a very important issue , especially in circumstances where energy prices are rising in leaps and bounds .
The fact is , however , that this is the responsibility and duty of individual Member States in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity - and as was emphasised by Mr Hökmark and certain others , Member States are duty bound to ensure access to energy for the poor .
The issue of consumer protection was mentioned several times .
In fact a considerable number of speeches discussed this .
May I underline that the text of the Presidency , or the Presidency 's compromise , contains a most important provision in the area of consumer protection .
It requires that consumers are adequately informed about their consumption of energy , about the costs arising from this , and that they are informed with sufficient frequency to be able to settle their spending obligations .
Moreover the possibility is of course envisaged of changing supplier at any time and also of being promptly and regularly informed of prices set by suppliers .
Several speeches , including that by Mr Turmes , mentioned the powers of the Agency .
The Agency will be no paper tiger .
Particularly with regard to matters involving two or more Member States , the Agency will have the option of making binding decisions , which is a major innovation .
Several speeches , especially those by Mr Biruti , Mr Zile and others , mentioned the problem of small and isolated systems .
I should point out that the text of the agreement reached in the Council envisages derogations or exceptions for such countries and for such markets , up until their isolation is remedied .
A word or two perhaps regarding renewable sources .
Our package , the Council 's package , envisages priority access to networks for energy generated from renewable sources .
May I conclude with the following : I would like to salute the determination shown by Mr Vidal-Quadras to ensure that Parliament and the Council should reach agreement in the second reading .
This is also the wish of the Council .
The Presidency agrees that the agreement secured on 6 June has created the possibility of such an agreement being reached by the end of this year .
This is especially important in the light of our ambition to achieve an agreement on the climate and energy package as early as possible in 2009 .
I have ascertained from this debate that the positions of the Council and Parliament are not that far apart .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs and everyone who participated in the debate .
I think this debate will be most useful for the Council in its further work and in reaching our common agreement within the desired deadline .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , today 's debate very much focused on households , and the Commission proposal goes beyond households : it is definitely also industry .
With all due respect to vulnerable consumers , what we are trying to achieve is a well-functioning market .
You cannot ever subsidise everything because it means taking from somebody to give to someone else ; I know that there will be vulnerable consumers that we should pay due attention to , but basically what we are trying to achieve is a well-functioning interconnected European market based on the values and experiences that we have in other fields .
The energy market has only recently started to develop and it takes some time to put into place , but I believe that today 's debate really shows that the Commission proposal addresses all the main areas correctly .
There have been slight doubts about whether the change is necessary .
I believe that change is necessary : not only the Commission 's annual reports , but also the competitive sector inquiry has demonstrated this .
Parliament 's Vidal-Quadras report said that we need a change and we need proposals .
On the ground we have also had some developments in competition law recently .
The difficulty is that if you can discover anti-competitive behaviour , it is all ex-post : you impose fines but the consumer has already paid the price .
So it is structural change that is necessary and I believe that the proposals we have made are a response to it .
There are a couple of issues where I believe we are going beyond just an energy market proposal .
Let us start with the Agency .
I completely agree that an independent Agency is a key .
The difficulty I have is that we also have case-law which draws boundaries , and the Commission is made as strong as possible , within legal boundaries , if we have an Agency .
On comitology , I understand Parliament 's questions about comitology but this is the procedure that we have and we should use this procedure to achieve the result .
On infringement , it was Mr Paasilinna who said that this is the procedure we have , and we should use it because we do not have another procedure .
There was a question about consumer rights .
There is subsidiarity , but aviation is more of a cross-border issue .
I believe the Energy Charter is more closely related to subsidiarity .
We set a good example , but should we really bring in European legislation ?
I have some doubts .
I am not necessarily against it , but there is a boundary between where European legislation is needed and where national law starts in this respect .
At any rate I believe these are the issues , and Parliament will surely find the right approach .
I shall finish by thanking Mrs Morgan , Mrs De Vits , Giles Chichester and Alejo Vidal-Quadras once again for their excellent reports .
I think that the debate clearly showed that there was a lot of internal debate , and I am looking forward to the vote tomorrow , because the Vidal-Quadras report paved the way for us to make the proposal .
I know that Council and Parliament will need to work to find a balanced solution .
Both sides are ready .
Much depends on the vote tomorrow where Parliament will stand , but I clearly understand that there is political will to find agreement and we will have the proposal adopted during this legislature for the benefit of our consumers , and I think that is great .
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Morgan report
The Commission can accept Amendments 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 12 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 25 , 26 , 29 , 30 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 40 , 44 , 46 , 48 , 50 , 54 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 61 , 65 , 70 , 71 , 73 , 74 , 77 , 83 , 84 , 88 , 89 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 97 , 99 , 101 , 102 , 105 , 106 , 107 , 108 , 111,112 , 113 , 114 , 118 , 119 , 120 , 122 , 123 , 124 , 126 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 131 , 132 , 133 , 134 , 135 , 136 , 137 , 146 , 147 , 148 , 149 , 150 , 151 and 152 .
The Commission can accept Amendments 10 , 11 , 16 , 24 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 45 , 47 , 55 , 59 , 60 , 66 , 68 , 72 , 79 , 80 , 82 , 85 , 86 , 87 , 95 , 98 , 100 , 109 , 110 , 115 , 117 , 121 , 125 , 127 , 138 , 153 , 155 , 165 , 166 and 167 in part .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 3 , 7 , 9 , 13 , 27 , 28 , 31 , 32 , 37 , 49 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 62 , 63 , 64 , 67 , 69 , 75 , 76 , 78 , 81 , 90 , 91 , 96 , 103 , 104 , 116 , 139 , 140 , 141 , 142 , 143 , 144 , 145 , 154 , 156 , 157 , 158 , 159 , 160 , 161 , 162 , 163 , 164 , 168 , 169 , 170 , 171 and 176 .
Vidal-Quadras report
The Commission can accept Amendments 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 21 , 22 and 29 .
The Commission can accept Amendments 6 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 20 , 24 , 25 , 28 , 31 and 32 in part .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 13 , 19 , 23 , 26 , 27 , 30 and 33 .
Chichester report
The Commission can accept Amendments 1 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 16 , 45 , 48 , 49 , 53 , 54 , 64 ( regarding paragraph 3 ) , 64 ( paragraph 4 ) , 66 , 72 and 75 .
The Commission can accept Amendments 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 11 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 19 ( paragraph 1a ) , 19 ( paragraph 1da ) , 19 ( paragraph 1db ) , 19 ( paragraph 1de ) , 19 ( paragraph 1df ) , 19 ( paragraph 1dh ) , 23 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 35 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 47 , 51 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 61 , 64 ( paragraph 1 ) , 68 , 70 , 74 and 76 in part .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 8 , 17 , 18 , 19 ( paragraph 1c ) , 19 ( paragraph 1d ) , 19 ( paragraph 1dc ) , 19 ( paragraph 1dd ) , 19 ( 1dg ) , 20 , 21 , 22 , 25 , 29 , 30 , 34 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 46 , 50 , 52 , 55 , 56 , 60 , 62 , 63 , 64 ( paragraph 2 ) , 64 ( paragraph 5 ) , 64 ( paragraph 7 ) , 64 ( 8 ) , 65 , 67 , 69 , 71 and 73 .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I should like to thank all those who contributed to a very interesting debate .
I would like to reflect a little on what Mr Hökmark said about developing the best possible system to ensure security of supply , sustainability and competitiveness .
I must say that the position the Council has come up with goes too far .
I am disappointed with the informal agreement in Council , because it has bent too much to the will of the minority .
I understand , of course , that there is a time and a place and a need for compromise , but I think it has gone too far .
I am also disappointed with the Commission for not being firmer in defending its own position - do not forget that it is your own position that we are defending now .
I would just like to remind you that you have backtracked and we have not - we are defending your position .
What we have at the moment is not good enough .
We have large industrial energy users coming up to us and asking us privately to unbundle , but when we tell them that we will try to do that and ask them to come and say that to us publicly , they say they cannot do that as they are vulnerable !
That means that the consumer is not in charge - the consumer is not in control of the marketplace - and that is problematic .
I think there has been a misunderstanding on the matter of special tariffs for vulnerable customers .
I stand by this issue .
I want to see special tariffs for vulnerable customers .
However , we are not asking the EU to do this : we are asking Member States to do it and to take this issue seriously .
We , the Socialists , in particular , have listened to what our constituents are saying : that high prices are hurting and that they are really suffering at the moment , and we want the issue of energy poverty put on the agenda in the Member States .
It is not even there at the moment .
Only one country in Europe has a definition of energy poverty .
Put it on the agenda in your Member States because it is not there now !
My first words should be to say thank you for the excellent cooperation and the wonderful atmosphere that there has been in the work of preparing these reports , especially with Mrs Morgan , Mr Chichester and all the shadow rapporteurs .
We will see , ladies and gentlemen , that what this is about is knowing what we want and whether we all want the same thing , because what cannot logically be said is that ownership unbundling is some sort of magic master key that opens every door and is going to give us the solution to all our problems .
No one has said this .
Ownership unbundling of the transmission system and generation is a necessary requirement , which helps , facilitates and makes it possible for the market to function correctly , for third parties to enter the market and for investments to be guaranteed .
It does not , of course , solve all the problems .
Who said that it would ?
No one did .
In my country , for example , where we have ownership unbundling , there are many problems .
The regulators ' agency is not independent enough .
There is a tariff deficit , there are regulated tariffs that distort the market .
We are an energy island that needs more interconnections .
Does this mean that if we have ownership unbundling all of this will be solved ?
No , because this is due to other causes that have nothing to do with ownership unbundling .
We will see if we use logic , aside from politics and national interests .
Consequently , President-in-Office of the Council , I cannot speak on behalf of Parliament , because I am one MEP among 785 , but I can give you an impression , after 9 years in this House , and I can tell you one thing : there is a will to reach an agreement , there is a will to negotiate , there is goodwill , President-in-Office of the Council , but tell the Council that this goodwill needs to be mutual .
If it is mutual , as occurred in the case of the gas market , we will be able to arrive at formulas that fulfil our objective .

rapporteur . - Madam President , this has been a fascinating debate , the House is divided on a different basis from our normal left / right or even north / south antagonism and it has been intriguing to me , particularly as a British Conservative , to see how my colleagues from certain Member States have wriggled and twisted and turned in their desperate efforts to prevent change .
I never thought my German colleagues would be much more conservative ( with a small ' c ' , as in ' resistant to change ' ) than myself .
When I first came to this Parliament , I was a strong supporter and advocate of something called privatisation - Mr Allister mentioned this a while back - that is to say , removing ownership of these enterprises from the state and allowing private enterprise to run them more efficiently than a state monopoly does .
Now I appreciate that this is an alarming concept in Europe , but it may be that the ultimate direction in which we should go is beyond ownership unbundling to privatisation .
Can I say that I personally am persuaded of the importance of addressing fuel poverty : I think that block tariff reform could be a way to go .
It seems quite extraordinary that we should be putting the marginal price of energy lower than the initial price , and thereby encouraging consumption when surely we live in an age when we want to encourage conservation and efficiency and make it more expensive to consume more .
It may be that market forces will do the business for us : the oil price is making people in my country change their habits and I notice - and I enjoy reminding my German colleagues of this - that E.ON has seen the benefit of market forces in its decision to unbundle its distribution service .
We may need a fourth package in the future , but I congratulate Mrs Morgan on what she has achieved so far .
Hold the line : we look for a big majority tomorrow , because eventually those who are consumers in markets which are not unbundled will look to the other markets that are unbundled and say : ' We want that please ' .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , I am pleased that today speakers have discussed not only unbundling but also consumer rights .
Looking ahead to Thursday 's vote , I should just like to request support for three amendments seeking to further improve these consumer rights and to inform consumers regularly about their consumption .
I do not think it too much to ask that this be done four times a year .
There is also the concept of smart meters and the imposition of a deadline for their roll-out , namely 10 years after the entry into force of the Directive .
Finally , on the subject of the national action plans to tackle energy poverty , I should just like to say to Mr Vidal-Quadras that we are only citing the social tariffs as an example to Member States of a possible instrument .
These are three amendments for which we request support in order to improve consumer rights .
To conclude , Madam President , I am disappointed with the Commissioner 's response , in which he leaves the areas of consumer rights to Member States in the name of subsidiarity .
I would say to him that we are moving towards a European market in energy , and so tomorrow British citizens will be faced with a German supplier .
As I see it , this European market in energy means that we must also be able to give consumers a European answer .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the Morgan , Vidal-Quadras and Chichester reports will take place tomorrow .
The vote on the De Vits report will take place on Thursday 19 June 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) As regards the " Chichester ” report regarding the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators , I support the setting-up of this Agency and its provision with increased competences .
As regards the amendment for establishing the headquarters of this institution in Brussels , first of all , I would like to request the opinion of the legal service regarding our competence , of the European Parliament , to make a decision in relation to this subject because , personally , I have the feeling that this subject falls under the competence of the Council .
As regards the city of Brussels , I confess that I have nothing against the city itself ..... I even like it .
Nevertheless , I believe the vote the Irish gave last week is a new extremely important political signal , including in relation to the opinion citizens have on the Brussels bureaucrats and the way in which decisions are made in the " closed ” circle in Brussels .
All the European citizens must feel part of and close to the European decision-making process .
It is important that all the European citizens feel they are represented and the institutions should have locations across the entire Union .
Let 's bring the institutions closer to citizens and to get the citizens involved into the European debate !
If we centralize everything in Brussels , we will jeopardize the European construction .
I definitely reject the idea of establishing the headquarters of this new institution in Brussels .
in writing . - I fully support my colleague 's report , and would have done so in person had it been possible .
However , I do not believe that this means we cannot build new coal-fired power stations .
The coal industry is once again at the forefront of a revolution , with the 25th anniversary of the miners ' strike fast approaching .
This revolution is based on the clean coal and carbon capture and storage ( CCS ) technologies that are being developed at the Hatfield colliery near Doncaster .
CCS technologies would mean that 90 % of a power station 's CO2 emissions are captured and then transferred to geological storage .
Such technology could revolutionise the way in which the UK satisfies its energy requirements .
In addition to the benefits of using a natural resource that we possess in abundance , the jobs created within a nascent clean coal agency could give a lifeline to mining communities that have seen a quarter of a century of economic and social decline .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am very pleased to accept Parliament 's position on the European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers , particularly the proposal that the consumer be charged on the basis of actual energy consumption .
I hope this will lead to bills for all individual gas consumers being drawn up in kWh , and not , as in Poland , for example , in cubic metres .
Billing according to the energy value and not the volume of gas consumed would definitely meet with the approval of consumers , who suspect , justifiably or not , that they are paying for ' air ' .
in writing . - I agree with the Commissioner that if we agree to continue with the present status quo , protecting national interests more than standing up for common European interests and values , then the EU will be unable to address the dramatic challenges we face .
That is why the EU needs real reform .
I strongly advocate a national regulator - an efficient Agency having sufficient authority to supervise the fair functioning of the common electricity market .
However , my key point is this : as the EU is based on the principles of free competition , we are committed to ensuring , not only in theory but also in real life , that in each Member State the consumer will be able to choose freely and without any difficulties between different electricity producers and distributors and to decide which is the best offer .
So the real challenge for the Member States is to decide between consumers ' interests and those of the big companies .
Hesitations about putting the individual , the consumer , into the centre of our activities lead logically to events such as the Irish negative vote and the increasing indifference of our citizens towards the EU .
Full ownership unbundling is a key condition for reform .
The ' third way ' is not a credible solution .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , the way events are developing , EU energy priorities - environmental protection , security and market liberalisation - continue to be important , but their hierarchy needs to be re-evaluated .
Spiralling prices for energy carriers , with social tensions and anxieties , plus the Gazprom offensive - all this requires quick reactions and exposes the need for security and cheapness of supplies .
Meanwhile , the ambitious aims set for environmental protection and the battle against global warming are of a longer-term nature and bring with them challenges that could lower the competitiveness of the European economy and multiply social tensions .
One might regret that in our circle of 27 countries there is no determination to create a common and competitive energy market .
Demonopolisation is meeting with resistance in several countries that are otherwise considered to be leaders in European integration .
There is also a lack of solidarity in contacts with external oil and gas suppliers .
Bilateral negotiations , such as those entered into in the west and the east of the European Union with Gazprom , are weakening our bargaining position .
They are making it easier to engage in energy blackmail with those Member States that were historically linked to a monopoly supplier .
Differences in national interests are making themselves felt in the construction of a single energy market .
The European Union needs proof that it will be able to arrive at satisfactory compromises despite differences .
There is no area more important than energy , in which the capacity to build unity over and above divisions must be demonstrated .
Madam President , access to energy at manageable prices is one of the elements accelerating social integration and access to knowledge and education .
Energy supplies have a significant impact on the way citizens function in social and economic life .
Unfortunately , it is often the case that consumers , particularly private individuals and small- and medium-sized enterprises , have limited potential to make their interests effectively known where energy access is concerned .
According to the data available , the Member States have not satisfactorily discharged their duty to provide targeted public services that reach the least privileged social groups .
The European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers should resolve some of the problems that exist in this area .
This Charter is supposed to be based on the idea of cooperation between Member States with full application of the principle of subsidiarity , bearing in mind that certain practices in the sphere of consumer protection may result in different outcomes in different Member States .
Energy suppliers and network operators should place themselves under an obligation to function with respect for the environment and to restrict radioactive waste as far as possible .
Using renewable energy sources and guaranteeing consumers the right to make a conscious choice of energy source should also be made a matter of priority .
Limits should also be placed on the formalities arising from a change in supplier ; consumers should be protected against dishonest sales practices and consumer organisations should be set up .
Above all , though , a solution must be found to the problem of energy poverty in order to enable all citizens to take part in many important areas of life .
Commission Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0161 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .

( CS ) I would like to ask the Commission the following question : to what extent is it binding ... ( the President cut off the speaker ) .
I am sorry , but the questions are as printed on the paper .
There is an order and I am afraid you cannot come with a spontaneous question .
Part one
Subject : Mobile termination tariffs
On 4 April the Belgian courts ( Case 2007 / AR / 3394 ) suspended a decision by the Belgian national post and telecommunications regulation body ( IBPT ) setting mobile termination tariffs .
One of the main arguments put forward was the fact that large operators ' economies of scale must be taken into account in setting mobile termination tariffs .
Does the Commission look upon the Belgian court 's arguments as a guiding principle for its upcoming communication on mobile termination tariffs ?
Does the Commission share the view that the telecommunications companies which are now largely responsible for competition in the mobile phone market - the ' challengers ' - should be allowed enough time in the communication to bring themselves into line with any new rules ?
Member of the Commission . - The question posed by the Honorable Member concerns the decision of the Cour d 'Appel de Bruxelles of 4 April 2008 to suspend IBPT 's regulatory decision of 18 December 2007 regarding mobile termination tariffs in Belgium .
This regulatory decision was previously notified to and assessed by the Commission under Article 7 of the Framework Directive .
The Commission is aware of this court decision and was informed by the national regulatory authority , IBPT , that , following this annulment , it had launched a national consultation on a draft decision resetting mobile termination rates at the same asymmetric level as in its previous regulatory decision of 11 August 2006 .
In the context of the Community consultation mechanism ( the ' Article 7 procedure ' ) , the Commission has expressed its view on numerous occasions that the termination rates should be reduced to the level of the efficient cost .
This is to ensure a level playing field amongst different operators , to provide operators with the incentive to become efficient , and to bring more benefits to consumers , including lower prices .
The Commission has recognised the need for a transitional period for operators to achieve the efficient cost level .
However , the persistence of a higher termination rate would not be justified after a period long enough for an operator to adapt to market conditions and become efficient , unless there are objective cost differences which are beyond the control of the operators concerned .
The Commission is mindful of the fact that differing approaches to the regulation of termination rates have the potential to hamper the consolidation of the internal market and the realisation of consumer benefits from cross-border competition and services , and this is why the Commission has made it a priority to provide guidance and greater legal certainty to both operators and national regulatory authorities in the regulation of the termination markets .
To this end , the Commission is working on a recommendation on a common approach to both mobile and fixed termination rates which aims at promoting greater clarity and consistency in this important but also very complex area , ensuring maximum benefits to consumers in terms of affordable prices and efficient development of innovative services .
Such a recommendation may also give guidance to national courts .
Consolidation of the internal market could also be hampered if court decisions in different Member States result in a situation where different interpretations are given on how similar competition problems need to be addressed .
In any case , the Commission closely follows all court decisions and judgments , including in the area of termination markets such as the decision of the Cour d 'Appel to which the Honorable Member refers in his question .
( NL ) Madam President , I should certainly like to thank the Commissioner for her answer , as she analysed the situation very well .
My follow-up question is as follows : where do you see these differences between Member States ?
The judgment in Belgium would seem to indicate that there is still no effective level playing field between large operators and newcomers on the market .
Could this mean an extension of the transitional period ?
Could it mean more time being offered for such adaptation Europe-wide , as it were ?
After all , we are now seeing that it is the small operators who are the victims on this market .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission from the very beginning has recognised the need for a transitional period for operators , as I said in my first speech , to achieve an efficient cost level .
However , temporary asymmetries should be phased out within a reasonable timeframe .
The persistence of higher termination rates would not be justified after a period which is long enough for the operator to adapt to market conditions and become more efficient , unless - as I said before - there are objective cost differences that are beyond the control of the operators concerned .
Allowing prices above an efficient or cost-based level can reduce operators ' incentives to innovate and to try to minimise prices .
Furthermore , consumers may end up paying higher prices than would otherwise be the case in a situation of cost-based symmetric termination rates . And thus termination rates should be reduced to the level of efficient costs as soon as possible without - as I said before - hampering either the position of the companies or the position of the consumers .
Subject : Crisis management policy to deal with high prices on the market
The high prices on the market brought about by the increase in oil prices , the recent food crisis , profiteering and ineffective checks continue to have a negative impact on inflation and household incomes .
This critical situation calls for a concerted European response .
How and by means of what measures does the Commission intend to deal with the current crisis which is now damaging the development of the national economies and reducing household incomes , leading the public at large to call into question the role of the euro in relation to the price of oil ?
What measures will the EU take to stem the international surge of profiteering on goods ?
Will it set up a crisis management mechanism at Community and national level ?
How and by means of what measures will national bodies be assisted to deal with profiteering , which is primarily occurring owing to the dominant position of certain companies ?
Do the Commission 's priorities include setting a maximum selling price for certain basic foods ?
Is it acceptable that some governments are currently increasing indirect taxes in a bid to boost public revenue ?
Is it appropriate to lower VAT and indirect taxes on some basic foods and products at European level ?
Subject : Price rises in the EU
Demand for biofuels and the growth in demand for food are among the causes of a significant rise in the price of such commodities , which is hitting EU citizens with low incomes particularly hard .
At the same time , production restrictions on a range of items leave no scope for competition , which could keep price rises down .
What action has been taken with a view to restricting food price rises on the EU market ?
Member of the Commission . - As the two questions , as rightly said by the President , are more or less linked , I would like to take the opportunity to give a joint reply to both questions .
If we look at the euro area , inflation has actually come down from 8-10 % in the 1970s and the 80s to 3 % in the 1990s and has actually averaged at a bit over 2 % in the first decade of European Monetary Union .
But since the third quarter of 2007 , global shocks both to energy and food prices have put upward the pressure on inflation not only within the European Union but throughout the whole world .
The strong euro had mitigated to some extent the effect of rising or increasing prices of fuel and oil .
But we have to face reality that the inflation rate has actually increased from 1.9 % in August last year to 3.6 % in April 2008 .
The Commission has set out its views concerning the recent increases in food prices in the communication on ' Tackling the challenge of rising food prices : Directions for EU action ' .
Beside a set of other factors , higher oil prices have led to increasing agricultural market prices within the European Union ; both through higher agricultural input and also logistic costs .
Although demand for agricultural commodities is influenced by the biofuel market , all the analyses that the Commission has made indicate that the causes of the rise in global food prices are varied .
They spring both from structural and temporary factors - and the current EU biofuel production has actually very little impact on the current global food prices , with the latest estimations we have stating that approximately 1 % of the land within the European Union is used for biofuels .
But it is clear that the recent increase in agricultural prices can only partly explain the observed food-price rise at retail level so sometimes you can see a discrepancy between the price at the farm gate and the price at the supermarket or in the shops .
As the current crisis actually has many different aspects , the response proposed by the Commission is equally comprehensive and is designed to tackle both the short-term consequences and the long-term drivers of soaring food prices .
In order to mitigate price pressure in the agricultural sector , within the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) we have already set further incentives to enhance market orientation and to try to boost production : with mandatory set-aside put at zero for this production year and also an increase in the milk quotas effective from 1 April 2008 , we have actually been reacting very quickly .
Furthermore , the European Union has decided to suspend the import duties on cereals for the current marketing year , for most cereals .
It is obvious that we will tackle further these questions in the upcoming discussions on the health check of the common agricultural policy .
In order to be able to particularly address the needs of the most deprived people in the EU , a modernisation and an upgrade of the scheme are envisaged and we will be presenting a proposal later this year .
I think it is also important that we continue to encourage and promote investments in agricultural research , to enhance sustainable productivity growth in the agricultural sector , not only in Europe but worldwide .
Regarding agricultural market price formation , the Commission is committed to monitoring activities by speculative investors in commodity-related financial markets and also on their impact on price movements .
As regards the question of the dominant position , any abuse of dominant positions is subject to Article 82 of the Treaty or its equivalent in national laws .
The Commission and the national competition authorities are vigilant to any infringement of the European Union 's competition law .
The Commission takes specific care to ensure that concentration of a Community dimension will not significantly impede effective competition to the detriment of consumers and of different businesses .
In this context , the Commission will also examine the functioning of the food supply chain in parallel with the monitoring of the retail sector established in the context of the Single Market Review .
As provided by the Treaty , the measures taken by the Member States and the Community shall be conducted in accordance with the principles of the internal market and cross-border competition .
The setting of maximum selling prices for certain basic foods is not foreseen at the moment .
The Commission is aware of governments currently increasing indirect taxes in a bid to boost public finance .
Moreover , the Commission shares the view expressed by the Finance Ministers that distortive fiscal and other policy measures that prevent the necessary adjustments should be avoided .
Finally , the Commission considers that short-term targeted measures taken to alleviate the impact of higher energy prices on poorer sections of the population might be justified .
However , they should of course not have a distortive effect or delay the necessary structural adjustments .
A general decrease - I think we can all agree on that , in taxes or in VAT - is by definition not targeted at poorer sections of the population .
The Commission 's actions are not only concerned with domestic impacts ( I think we all have a commitment to securing a level playing field also when we talk about developing countries and so far the Commission has mobilised more than EUR 300 million in food emergency aid and we are actively promoting a coordinated response at international level in line with the conclusions of the FAO summit that took place only two weeks ago .
So I think we have reacted to the challenges that the new situation is posing all of us .
( EL ) Madam President , my thanks first of all to the Commissioner for the comprehensive answer she has given to my question .
Let me , however , highlight two issues that the Commission should address immediately rather than in the mid-term .
The first is price control , for food products in particular , as you have very rightly said .
This is not a matter so much of setting a maximum selling price , but of fixing the production cost and the percentage of profit that companies should receive , provided this limit is not an obstacle to the internal market or imports .
The second point I should like to make is that increasing the set-aside and milk quotas is a welcome measure , but in my opinion increasing the production cost of pesticides , in view of rising oil prices , may be a measure that will not pay off .
( PL ) May I begin by thanking the Commissioner for a very comprehensive response on this subject .
There are several problems I find interesting .
The first is the trade in sugar production limits .
Sugar production trading is known to limit the potential for the use of certain production capacities in various countries , and here concerns are imposing a certain policy in this sphere .
If sugar production is restricted , competition automatically disappears .
The second matter is that certain duties are applied to a number of basic items from which the poorest people benefit , such as bananas .
These duties need to be examined .
Bananas , after all , are eaten by children ; they are eaten by the children of poor families .
The imposition of duties on such necessities , which are not spirits , also needs to be examined .
I agree that the market must be monitored and controlled , just as market prices must be monitored , but does the Commission benefit from imports of some kind in order to lower the prices of certain items from the import of cheaper items onto the national market that have ( ... ) .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Member of the Commission . - Mrs Batzeli , I think it is important that we have a control system in place to see that prices are not going through the roof , and that is exactly the duty of the national competition authorities - that they keep an eye on this .
I can tell you , internally in the Commission as well , that we have had a discussion with the Commissioner responsible for competition and that we are very much aware of these problems .
To Mr Rutowicz : I do not know if you are referring to the sugar reform where we decided to reduce the production of sugar within the European Union by 6 million tonnes and finding a possibility to give the farmers that were stepping out of sugar production a very decent package .
However , this is a decision which was taken a few years ago .
On the price of imported products : yes , it is true that it depends on import duties and that is exactly what we are discussing these days within the WTO Doha Development Round - whether we can find an agreement on reducing duties in general .
And finally , on the benefits of eating fruit : I do not disagree with you , and that is the reason that we are presenting - in the next meeting taking place here in Strasbourg - a fruit and vegetable scheme for school children , which I am quite sure will be very valuable in giving young children good habits .
( LT ) My question concerns excise duty .
During the debates on excise duty on alcohol there were suggestions that zero excise duty be applied .
What is your opinion on excise duty on fuel , as the current situation is not suggestive of any temporary solutions such as this ?
Would it be possible to reduce excise duty on fuel , if only temporarily , in order to prevent price increases in the food and other sectors ?
( DE ) Commissioner , rising food prices is an EU-wide phenomenon and a particular problem for low-income families and low-wage earners ; it is driving them almost to financial ruin .
To what extent will the planned European Food Aid Programme for needy social groups be pushed ahead to provide rapid help to those people who are threatened by these increases in food prices and even facing hunger ?
Member of the Commission . - First of all I do not see a reduction of VAT as a possible solution .

Today we have oil prices of approximately USD 136-137 per barrel ; if we were to reduce the VAT what would be the next question if we then had an oil price of USD 160 - would we reduce it further ?
We have to be much more forward-looking when trying to find solutions and here we have encouraged investments in reducing the dependency on oil .
That is possible within the agricultural sector and we are now discussing it for fisheries as well , because fisheries is even more dependent on oil prices .
Therefore , investments in new technologies is much more forward-looking than just reducing the VAT .
In response to the other question raised , we will present a proposal this year for the most deprived people within the European Union .
We have a scheme in place already , but its survival is based on surplus stocks - intervention stocks of agricultural products - and we do not have anything on intervention any more .
Therefore we need the legal basis for a new scheme and I hope that the honourable Members will be satisfied when they see what we are considering as a way to continue or even increase the economic basis for such a scheme .
I completely agree that we need to find decent solutions .
Commissioner , in answering Question 27 , you told us that only 1 % of EU land was in biofuel production .
Perhaps the more relevant percentage , given how much we import cereals from there , would be to know the percentage figure that is rising in North America , causing many of us to believe that biofuels is indeed an animal feed price accelerator .
So could you enlighten us about that ?
Secondly , another accelerator in that regard is the continuing dilatory and reluctant attitude by the Commission to approve GM varieties , which would be much cheaper .
Could you update us on the progress there ?
Are we any closer to synchronised approvals in terms of key areas which also supply ?
( PL ) Madam Commissioner , I would like to ask whether the Commission intends to consider a reduction in VAT on children 's clothing , which would alleviate the tax burden on large families but not on affluent families .
Member of the Commission . - First of all I think it is important , when we have a discussion within the European Union on biofuels , that we do not point the finger at the European way of handling this issue .
This is because , if as a result bioethanol / biodiesel becomes a scapegoat , we will see a situation where nobody wants to invest .
Then we will be left totally behind , being dependent on imports of ethanol and biodiesel ; because if we do not have these in place we will not be able to meet the targets of 20 % greenhouse gas emission by 2020 .
So we need to find a solution , and today first-generation biofuel is the only solution .
But we need - and I think we agree on this - to give as much encouragement as possible to research and development for the second and even third generation of biofuels produced from waste , from slurry , from straw , from other products - such as wood chips - from the agricultural sector that are not used for anything today .
This is the future , but we need to be part of this development , and therefore we need the first generation as a stepping stone .
On GMOs , I know that in this House there are differing opinions , but it is obvious that we need to have a situation where we can import feed for our animals , for our meat production , at reasonable prices .
Otherwise - and this includes , by the way , GM cereals , mainly maize - if we do not find a solution , you will see that the production of meat in Europe will go down .
Then we will need to import meat from Brazil - meat or animals that have been fed with the GMs that we do not like , or that consumers do not like , but they will get it via the back door .
Then I think we would really be cheating the consumers .
So we need our own approval system to be in place and I think that progress is being made to claw back the applications that are not yet approved , speeding up the procedure in EFSA without losing the quality .
Finally , Madam President , could I say bluntly that I am not a specialist in VAT on children 's clothes so instead of giving a wrong answer I think it is better to put the question in writing .
Part two
Subject : Fish farming strategy
According to forecasts by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation , consumption of fisheries products is set to increase by 50 % by 2030 , the bulk of demand being met by fish farming , which would mean an increase in output of around 40 million tonnes .
In view of constantly diminishing fish stocks and rising world demand for fish and shellfish , fish farming is assuming ever-increasing significance .
In view of this , does the Commission 's EU fish farming strategy review include marine planning guidelines for the fish farming sector ?
What measures does it intend to take to make Community products more competitive with those of third countries , where production standards are less stringent ?
Is it envisaging other innovatory measures with a view to developing this sector ?

Member of the Commission . - First of all , I would like to thank the honourable Member , Mr Gklavakis , for raising , throughout his question , the importance of aquaculture , and I am very pleased to provide the Commission 's view on this issue .
As you rightly pointed out , and as highlighted by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation , the global aquaculture industry is gaining increasing importance and plays a key role in bridging the gap between a growing demand for seafood and the supply of fish products , especially in a context of diminishing wild fish stocks .
The Commission is at present preparing a communication on a strategy for the sustainable development of EU aquaculture , which should be finalised by the end of 2008 .
The strategy will seek to create the best environment for the sustainable growth of aquaculture , ensuring both adequate supplies of seafood to the European Union 's citizens and compliance with high environmental and public health standards .
Access to space for aquaculture has indeed been identified as a key obstacle to the development of aquaculture and marine spatial planning can play a role in addressing this issue .
The forthcoming aquaculture strategy will cover this issue .
The issue of competition from third countries with lower production standards could be addressed through market differentiation schemes such as certification .
Consideration will be given to this matter in the drawing-up of the strategy .
More generally , competitiveness and innovation will be central issues to be addressed in this strategy .
( EL ) Madam President , may I thank the Commissioner for his answer .
Let me also make the following point .
As you yourself have pointed out , Commissioner , consumers increasingly want to eat seafood - fish , shellfish and the like .
In recent years , there has also been a big swing in popularity towards organic products among consumers .
We see that many in the trade are turning to organic fish-farming , which not only provides healthier foods , but is also more environmentally friendly , and this is a very important consideration .
Is the European Commission considering taking measures to promote , strengthen and support organic fish-farming , and if so , could you tell us what these measures might be , and how to support this very important issue , which we want to promote ?
Member of the Commission . - With regard to the question concerning the increasing demand , there is undoubtedly an increase , an exponential growth , in consumption of aquaculture products , seafood and farmed fish and this is certainly welcome because , as we all know , fish stocks in various Community waters and worldwide are over-fished .
We have reached a situation where in the short to medium term it is impossible to envisage that there will be an increase in catches and therefore the increase in demand has to be met from increased production of farmed fish .
Having said that , this in itself can create problems with regard to special considerations , as was indicated in my response , and also problems with regard to the supply of fishmeal , since fishmeal itself is based very much on the catch of lower-quality , industrial fish , stocks of which are also being exploited at significantly high levels .
As regards organic aquaculture , we are ourselves encouraging its development .
The exercise that we have carried out in the public consultation process has indicated the need to further develop organic means of production and we are looking at ways and means to ensure that in the communication , in the package which will be coming forward later , there will be specific reference to organic aquaculture : to how we can help promote it further and what sort of measures , such as eco-labelling schemes , can be taken so as to increase consumer awareness that it makes sense to eat organic products .
We hope in this way to facilitate further the development of this important industry .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , at the close of your speech you indirectly mentioned eco-labelling .
The question that I also wanted to ask , indirectly , was whether we have any guarantee that not only the origin of the fish but also the production and production description will be transparent for consumers , so that consumers know where the fish come from and where they were farmed .
This is not about whether this process has biological merit , but rather about the question of origin as such .
Are there consistent regulations on this ?
( DE ) Commissioner , on the same matter , I would immediately add the following : I have recently been approached by several Austrian consumer protection organisations regarding the apparent increase , particularly with regard to shellfish imported into the European Union , which also come to Austria , in the treatment of these shellfish with antibiotics and other undesirable medications for economic reasons - perhaps because it makes it easier to farm them .
These substances are then passed on to humans through the food chain . Is the Commission taking measures designed to limit or prevent this in future ?
Member of the Commission . - On the question of the provenance of fish , I would like to point out two facts .
First of all , with regard to fish caught in the wild which often then end up in the processing chain - fish that are caught in the wild by third countries in particular , but also by our own fishermen - we are in the process of adopting a regulation in order to curb illegal fishing activities .
This in itself will strengthen our regime considerably , so that any fish that is illegally caught will not be permitted to enter the Community market , either in its original state or after processing .
That is one aspect of it .
With regard to aquaculture , we are looking at ways and means of ensuring that aquaculture fish that are imported into the Community meet the required health standards and requirements , so that our consumers can be guaranteed that the product that they are eating meets the levels of health protection that we apply to our own products .
That is something which DG SANCO is looking into , and there is also a certification scheme in order to certify that products that enter the Community market conform to the required health standards .
On a question also connected with all this , it is important to underline that we are looking at the possibility of eco-labelling aquaculture products , as I said before .
At first the discussion concentrated only on eco-labelling of fish caught in the wild because the parameters are different .
There , the main scope of eco-labelling is to guarantee that fish are sustainably caught and therefore if fish being sold are fish which are over-exploited , they should not benefit from any eco-labelling .
With eco-labelling of aquaculture fish the parameters are different , so here the basis should be other reasons , such as the fact that the fish are bred in conditions which meet certain environmental , health and sanitary standards .
We are looking at the parameters and obviously we will be coming back to Parliament later with proposals aimed at introducing or facilitating the introduction of , or establishing minimum criteria for the operation of , voluntary eco-labelling schemes in this regard .
Subject : Safety tonnage application
On 13 June 2006 , the Court of First Instance ruled in favour of 20 Irish applications seeking safety tonnage , which annuls Commission Decision 2003 / 245 / EC of 4 April 2003 for 20 safety tonnage applications .
The Court found that the Commission had used criteria not provided for in the rules ( i.e. vessels have to be at least 5 years old before being eligible to apply for safety tonnage ) and that it had exceeded its power .
All the safety tonnage applications were submitted to the Commission before 31 December 2001 , as required under Council Decision 97 / 413 / EC ( see Article 4 ( 2 ) )
The Court found that the Commission had not applied this article correctly in refusing the safety tonnage application for these individuals .
Could the Commission comment on why this decision was not appealed and why the successful applicants are still awaiting an answer from the Commission , almost two years later , on how it intends to comply with the Court ruling ?

Member of the Commission . - I would like to thank Mr Crowley for his question , which gives me the opportunity to address the question of the follow-up to the judgment of the Court of First Instance of 13 June 2006 concerning Ireland 's request for increase in capacity for fishing vessels on grounds of safety improvements .
The Commission decided not to lodge an appeal against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of 13 June 2006 .
The Court had stated that there was insufficient analysis of all relevant matters in the Commission 's decision of 4 April 2003 .
Following this judgment , the Commission opted to adopt new decisions based on a fuller analysis and providing clearer findings for each of the cases in question .
It is correct to say that the applicants are still awaiting the new decisions by the Commission .
It must be noted , however , that the Commission services have asked Ireland to send specific additional technical information in for all the requests for increase in capacity .
Despite reminders , Ireland sent such information only for a few of the requests .
The lack of complete answers by Ireland has delayed this new assessment .
The Commission is now finalising the new and thorough assessment of each of these requests .
It expects to inform Ireland of its results in July of this year .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
In saying that , however , there is some doubt as to whether the decision on safety tonnage will be based on automatic granting of the safety tonnage because of the incorrect decision originally taken by the Commission , or whether a fresh application has to be made .
That is why there is some dispute as to whether or not the information is coming forward .
Maybe the Commission could clarify for us the likelihood of a positive result from the new applications from the existing applicants ' , who were proven right in the Court decision .
Member of the Commission . - The decision of the Court of First Instance did not , as such , establish that the applicants were right in substance but that the Commission had taken a decision which was based on an insufficient analysis of all the relevant matters .
As a result of the fact that the decision that we took was not based on solid enough grounds , we required Ireland to provide us with additional information so that we would be able to base our decision on a more solid basis .
Because the first decision was taken with regard to all operators as a whole , we have asked for individual information to be provided on the individual operators .
Our forthcoming decision will relate to each individual operator .
If no further information has been provided with regard to particular operators , I do not envisage that there will be a change in the Commission 's position .
Where there is additional information , we are assessing that , and if , on evaluation , we see that that merits being upheld , then it will be upheld .
If we see that , notwithstanding the additional information , that does not merit being upheld , our decision would still be negative .
Subject : Impact of North American imports on Irish shell fishermen
Shell fishermen in Ireland are being negatively impacted by cheap imports from the United States and Canada due to the weak dollar .
Prices of shell fish are continuing to spiral downwards .
What plans does the Commission have to help these fishermen , who are very important to Ireland 's local coastal economies ?
Member of the Commission . - I am aware that the market for certain fish and shellfish products has dropped recently in Ireland and elsewhere in the Community .
I am informed that this question principally relates to the price of lobsters which normally would exceed EUR 15 per kilogram at first sale in Ireland but has now dropped to EUR 10 per kilogram .
In the specific case of lobsters the trade figures show an upward trend in imports in 2006 and 2007 as compared with the previous six years .
Total Community imports from Canada increased by 12 % in 2006 , compared with the reference period 2000-2005 and 7 % in 2007 ; in the case of the United States imports increased by 27 % in 2006 and 26 % in 2007 versus the same reference period .
Yet there are very few direct imports of lobsters into Ireland from the United States or Canada ; a total of 2.5 tonnes and 118 tonnes , respectively , in 2006 .
This does not mean , however , that North American lobsters have not reached Ireland via other Member States .
The price in euro has not declined over the past three years .
The average import price for the US in the period 2005-2007 was EUR 12.45 per kilogram ; for the first quarter of 2008 the price actually rose slightly to EUR 13.6 per kilogram .
In the case of Canadian lobster imports to the Community the price has risen slightly for the past three years and the average for 2005-2007 was EUR 12.12 per kilogram .
For the first quarter of 2008 the prices actually rose to EUR 12.48 reflecting a strong Canadian dollar .
Given the above , it would not appear that the current drop in the price of lobsters is strongly linked to imports from North America .
The drop may well be due to uncertainty on the market due to protests in certain Member States in recent weeks .
Because of the decline of sterling versus the euro it is also possible that Irish producers are facing competition from UK lobsters in the traditional continental markets .
There are no provisions under the common organisation of the market to compensate producers for a fall in the price of lobster .
However , lobster producers could set up producers ' organisations in order to strengthen their position in the market .
The European Fisheries Fund provides financial support for the creation of these organisations as well as for the implementation of plans to improve the quality of products .
For further action in the medium to longer term , aid is available under the European Fisheries Fund for collective action to promote fisheries products such as lobster which could help in attracting higher demand and better prices .
( GA ) Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer and I would like to ask a supplementary question .
As you know , Commissioner , the fishing industry has changed dramatically with the massive increase of late in the price of oil .
I would like to ask ; does the Commission intend to present proposals to support fishers in coastal areas , such as lobster fishers and the aforementioned fishers who are impacted by the reduction in the price of shellfish ?
Member of the Commission . - The problem concerning the huge increase in the cost of oil and its impact on fishers is very specific and very particular - I would say almost unique - when it comes to fisheries .
This is because we have a combination of factors that impact the fishers very negatively .
On the one hand the cost of fuel as a percentage of the total earnings of a fisher can go up as high as to represent 50-60 % of his total earnings .
In particular this would relate to distance operators because of the huge journeys that they have to undertake and also with regard to specific fishing activities like beam trawlers that consume a lot of fuel .
Apart from that , there is also the fact that fishers cannot , because of certain market constraints , pass on down the line the increasing cost to further operators involved in the marketing of fish products .
This in essence means that the increase in cost is actually borne by the fisher himself .
Adding to that , there are various measures that we have introduced in order to regain sustainable fishing , and that means that the fisher cannot try to improve his performance by catching more , because if he catches more , he creates further pressures on fish stocks which would then be , in the long term , counterproductive .
So fishers are faced with this enormous problem .
Today , in actual fact , I have presented to the college an information note on what we consider to be the way forward in order to engage with fishers in the very short term in a way whereby we give them assistance with a view to restructuring the whole sector and addressing the specific concerns of different fishers .
In this information note we have outlined a number of specific measures that we can propose .
Member States would be in a position to decide with their own fishers which of those measures would be best suited for the realities faced by the particular fishers .
Whether this could be available to lobster fishers and to what extent - one would need to look into it .
However , I have been authorised by the college to move forward on this .
I will be presenting these details - the basics of what we will be proposing in the very short term - to Council on Tuesday next week in Luxembourg .
I will then be going back to the college with the details of the changes that need to be affected to the European Fisheries Fund regulation and other measures that we are looking into , the possibility for example concerning de minimis .
I will then go back to the Council , hopefully as early as July , with the proposals adopted by the Commission so that - depending on the speed that both Council and Parliament would be prepared to take this - we would have the necessary measures in place hopefully in a question of a few months .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the question of agriculture played a relatively important role in the Irish ' no ' campaign .
Did the problems in relation to fisheries that we have been discussing here also play a role in that ' no ' campaign ?
If so , did the Commission attempt any publicity initiatives to mitigate this ?
Member of the Commission . - I understand that fisheries did also play a role in the ' no ' vote , particularly because , if one looks at the results in the various Irish counties , the results were particularly negative in the western coastal areas , where the majority of fisheries in Ireland are based .
We have been aware of the fact that the Community measures seeking to restore sustainable fisheries are affecting fishermen and impacting on their livelihood .
The cost of fuel certainly did not help .
We have been trying to address this in a number of ways , including by trying to highlight the uses of the European Fisheries Fund in order to create more awareness of what the situation is .
I myself have been to Ireland on a couple of occasions to talk directly to the fishermen .
We have formed regional advisory councils .
In the areas around Ireland in particular we have the North Western Waters Regional Advisory Council , and the North Sea Regional Advisory Council , in which the fishermen themselves take part in discussions which will lead up to decisions that we are required to take in December .
Notwithstanding all this , in spite of all the efforts made , my guess is that the Irish fishermen 's vote in the referendum was substantially significantly negative .
Subject : Promotion of environmental protection through enterprises
How does the Commission promote the integration of the environmental dimension into policies on behalf of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and the adjustment of the latter to the requirements of the new European legislation on the environment ?
What scope will SMEs be given to exploit the opportunities afforded by the new environmental policy in order to extend their activities ?
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , SMEs represent 99 % of European companies .
It is therefore obvious that without their participation no environmental policy can be effective .
SMEs face greater difficulties in complying with environmental legislation and in reaping the benefits of higher environmental performance .
In many cases , they do not have the information , specialisation , manpower or financial resources necessary to deal with environmental problems , risks and impact .
For precisely this reason the Commission has drawn up the programme to help SMEs comply with environmental legislation .
In view of the complex problems faced by SMEs , the Environmental Compliance Assistance Programme ( ECAP ) proposes a multiple action plan :
Firstly , improving and simplifying the legislation and its enforcement .
The aim is to reduce the administrative burden and to release funds so that SMEs can concentrate better on complying with environmental legislation .
Secondly , environmental management systems that are more affordable and better suited to the needs of SMEs , so that matters of environmental concern can be incorporated economically into the main business activities .
Thirdly , targeted financial assistance to promote initiatives undertaken by public authorities or business support networks with a view to sustainable production .
Further measures are included in this action plan .
The Commission aims to use them not only to secure the compliance of SMEs with production legislation , but also to help them take advantage of the financial benefits of better environmental performance , such as energy saving and improved resource efficiency .
( EL ) Madam President , may I thank the Commissioner for his answer .
This programme declaration bodes well for the action plan , and we hope it will produce concrete results .
However , we have one query : what responsibility is being placed on public bodies to provide SMEs with environmentally friendly infrastructures , and to what extent is this included in your plan ?
Madam President , there are many possible courses of action , and it is up to the Member States to implement them .
One example is to form a local environmental expert committee for SMEs in response to the lack of know-how at enterprise level .
This is a measure that the Member States can promote .
Another is to improve communication and more effectively target information to cover specific information gaps .
There are also special provisions for SMEs in various types of legislation that we are proposing .
One example is the new legislation we are proposing on a reform of the CO2 trading system : here we have special provisions on SMEs , as we define them in that particular legislation , so that they are not burdened by inclusion in the trading system , in cases where such an option exists in a Member State .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , you rightly said that SMEs are the backbone of the European economy .
However , as we know , European SMEs are exposed to global competition .
SMEs are sensitive to competition from other SMEs from different parts of the globe practising environmental dumping .
Would you agree with the idea of imposing a green tax on imports from countries jumping on the bandwagon of the international agreement on environmental protection ?
Madam President , this is essentially an issue that concerns not only SMEs , but all enterprises facing this kind of competition .
This is not only on purely environmental matters but , as has been debated a good deal lately , also in terms of the restrictions imposed and the resulting burden on European industries in connection with the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .
There has been plenty of debate lately ; various views have been expressed , and my fellow Commissioner Mr Mandelson has expressly voiced the Commission 's opinion on this issue .
Subject : International deliberations on the environment
What are the reasons for the lack of international deliberations on climate change for the post-Kyoto period and why has global environmental governance been only partially effective ?
Madam President , this question gives me the opportunity to state exactly what point we have reached in the negotiations .
The work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) and reports in November 2007 , and world leaders ' recognition of the urgent need for collective action to combat climate change , resulted in the agreement achieved last December in Bali .
The EU played a leading role in the agreement on the commencement of negotiations for the post-2012 framework for tackling climate change .
The Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change have agreed on the Bali roadmap .
The roadmap sets out the subject matter of the negotiations , which will deal with four key issues : the limiting of climate change ; adaptation , given that climate change has occurred to a greater or lesser extent and will be inevitable by 2050 ; technology and the relevant funding , both for adaptation and for reducing CO2 emissions .
The Parties also agreed that the negotiations should be completed by the end of 2009 , in view of the planned Copenhagen Conference of the Parties .
This will allow enough time for the process of ratifying the future climate agreement by the end of 2012 , when the first Kyoto Protocol compliance period ends .
The agreement reached in Bali took full account of the conclusions of the IPCC report .
It also recognises that a drastic reduction in greenhouse gas emissions will be necessary worldwide to prevent a dangerous increase in global temperature .
This increase , according to the report , must not exceed 2 ° C in 2050 .
Work has already begun ; four negotiating sessions have been scheduled for this year , and two of them have already taken place , in preparation for the Poznan Conference of the Parties .
This year 's Conference of the Parties will be particularly important for an assessment of the situation .
On the basis of this assessment the negotiations proper can begin next year .
The negotiation process will be particularly difficult if we bear in mind not only the complexity of the issues to be discussed , but also the tight schedule owing to the urgency of the matter .
Until last Friday , experts from all the Parties were taking part in discussions in Bonn on all the items on the agenda .
Although limited , the progress made will contribute towards a successful outcome to the Conference of the Parties in Copenhagen .
You also know that discussions are under way within the framework of the G8 and the Major Economies initiative ( the Major Economies Process ) launched by the United States .
The EU is actively participating in order to exert a positive influence on the negotiations on the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change .
At the same time , it is sending out a clear message that the developed countries will continue to set an example .
They are committing themselves to a further reduction in emissions , in line with their historical responsibilities , and the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities .
Achieving a comprehensive and ambitious post-2012 agreement on climate change is indubitably one of the greatest challenges for global environmental governance .
However , we are not starting from scratch .
I should mention that a few days ago the French Minister for Ecology and Sustainable Development described the Copenhagen Conference as the greatest opportunity for an agreement on the future of the planet .
We must make use of the mechanisms we already have , namely the UN Framework Convention and the corresponding Kyoto Protocol .
Under the latter , up-to-date means of enforcement have been developed , such as the Clean Development Mechanism made up of two flexible mechanisms , and the scientific expertise of the IPCC has also been developed .
I repeat , the negotiations will be difficult , but with the necessary political will and a shared sense of urgency , we shall be able to reach an agreement in Copenhagen .
Common sense demands an agreement in Copenhagen .
The work the EU is doing , the support we enjoy from public opinion in Europe , growing awareness worldwide , the backing of the European Parliament and the prospect of an agreement by the end of the year on the package of measures we have proposed in order to strengthen the EU 's negotiating power - all this will enable us to reach an agreement in Copenhagen in order to tackle climate change effectively .

( EL ) Madam President , may I thank the Commissioner , Mr Dimas , for his thorough , detailed answer .
Will the United States and China cooperate ?
Climate change reflects a situation whereby ' the underlying causes are in one place and the effects somewhere else ' .
The question therefore arises as to what position the EU will adopt in the unfortunate event that countries with a high environmental debt according to the international regulatory agreement for the post-Kyoto period fail to cooperate .
The primary cost is self-evident .
The derived cost - and here I am referring to assessments made by Mr Verheugen - would be the tendency for European enterprises to relocate in countries with a lax environmental protection framework .
Do you agree with this assessment ?

Madam President , for a start , not only Mr Verheugen , but I , too , am very concerned that there should be no carbon leakage .
This is for the very simple reason that if enterprises relocate from the EU to countries with no restrictions on CO2emissions , the environmental result I am seeking will not be achieved .
The problem of energy-intensive enterprises is above all environmental , and we should therefore not be creating the kind of competitive problem that forces them to relocate .
This is why we should be directing all our efforts towards achieving an international agreement , as therein lies the solution .
A key item in an international agreement would be the question of what happens to energy-intensive enterprises .
If such an agreement is not achieved - and I cannot believe the international community will be led to make such an irrational decision - we have in the proposed legislation all the provisions necessary to reform the CO2 emissions trading system so that industries exposed to international competition will regain their competitive capability .
As a result , without resorting to measures contrary to WTO principles or the UN climate change principle of a common but differentiated effort , we shall be able to provide the necessary guarantees that there will be no carbon leakage and that this kind of migration of enterprises will not occur .
However , I repeat , our plan of action must be to work towards an agreement .
I believe that we can join with the United States , especially under the anticipated new Administration , which takes over next year , given that both candidates have fully committed themselves to introducing a CO2 trading system , reducing emissions by 80 % by 2050 and taking decisive action against the greenhouse effect in cooperation with the EU .
Together , I believe we can persuade those who may have different views on this issue , and also with the cooperation of countries such as China .
As you have said , China fully understands the problems created for its own population by the greenhouse effect and has agreed to make its own effort , which will not be similar to that of the developed countries , but will be a reduction in the rate of increase of greenhouse gas emissions .
All of us together can achieve an agreement in Copenhagen at the end of 2009 .
I believe in this agreement , and I believe that all of us here together ( and the European Parliament has played an enormous part in this ) , with your continuing support , will achieve such an agreement .

Question 34 has been withdrawn and Questions 33 and 35 to 44 will be answered in writing .
( EL ) Madam President , as far as I know , we allow each Commissioner 20 minutes .
I have timed their contributions , and Mr Dimas , together with his colleagues , has not used even half of that .
I therefore request that Question 33 be answered in accordance with the procedure we have decided upon .
I take it that the Commissioner himself will have no objection .
We time it up here and he started at 18.32 .
That being the case , I am afraid we have had our 20 minutes , and it is only fair to colleagues who have asked questions of Commissioner Barrot .
I am sorry for that , but that is the position we are in .
It is always a question of trying to find a balance , and that is what we have to do today .
Subject : Frontex
The management of the European Union 's external borders and operational cooperation between the Member States as part of Frontex are vital for the EU 's security and may even prevent situations from arising .
The Agency needs to be effective and achieve concrete results .
What pilot projects and training actions are scheduled to be carried out in 2008 ?
With regard to Rabit , have any Member States requested the deployment of a rapid intervention team ?
Do the Rabit teams have their own equipment for border control and surveillance ?
Madam President , I would like to reply to Mr França .
The 2008 work programme of the Frontex Agency includes several pilot projects and training actions in the fields of operational cooperation and research .
Given that this question of controlling external borders concerns the powers of Frontex , the Commission has obtained a detailed response from the Agency , which is attached .
In terms of training , Frontex has three objectives in 2008 .
Firstly , to implement the common curriculum throughout the European Union ; secondly , to offer specific training actions according to operational requirements ; and finally to establish a European network for border guard training .
For 2008 , Frontex plans to conduct around 13 pilot projects at external borders : four pilot projects for land borders , three for maritime borders , three for air borders and three in the context of return operations .
These projects will allow us to test the working methods used during joint operations and to test relations with third countries for return operations and the acquisition of travel documents .
On the subject of RABIT - Rapid Border Intervention Teams - no Member State has as yet requested the deployment of a rapid border intervention team , Mr França .
In the communication of 13 February , the Commission emphasised that the deployment of a rapid border intervention team might be accompanied by technical assistance in accordance with Article 8 of the Frontex Regulation .
Consequently , the Commission has recommended that the Agency should make this provision more operational by purchasing or leasing its own equipment and that it can use the equipment listed in the central inventory of technical equipment .
To conclude , I would say that with Frontex we now have a tool which seems to work . We will look at what improvements can be made to Frontex and to its operations as the need arises .
( PT ) I should like to thank Commissioner Barrot not only for his answer , but also for the detailed information .
There are two points that I would like the Commissioner to shed some light on for me .
Cooperation with third countries is obviously very important , and is paramount for us as well , and I know that developing pilot projects with third countries is on the Commission 's programme .
With regard to North Africa , we would like to know if any countries are covered by pilot projects of this type to which the Commissioner referred .
Additionally , I would also appreciate it if the Commissioner could fill us in on the state of development of the European Border Surveillance System , Eurosur , that has been announced that is an important and necessary complement to Frontex .
Mr França , for Frontex to provide technical assistance in a third country , its regulation must be adapted for this purpose .
At the moment there is no legal basis .
However , I believe that there is justification for this , because we will receive requests from the third countries that we work with .
You mentioned certain Mediterranean countries ; I believe that Frontex will be asked to provide what technical assistance it can , but we have not reached that point yet .
As for the rest , in terms of border surveillance , we have , as you know , the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , which is already in development . We hope that this will be operational by autumn 2009 .
We will also continue to look at everything else that can be done to improve border surveillance .
( PL ) Because Frontex is in Poland , and I am a Pole , my attitude towards Frontex is rather personal .
Many unreliable opinions on Frontex are currently circulating , saying that sometimes it operates and sometimes it does not .
I would also add that this is the agency with the largest budget .
Could you please specify in a few words whether Frontex is operating and meeting expectations , or whether it still has a great deal to do to improve the way it operates ?
I think I can say that the initial actions of Frontex seem satisfactory , although admittedly the Agency does depend on Member States when it comes to the technical equipment needed for the operations that it coordinates .
It is true that this often involves very expensive equipment that the Agency is unable to purchase , given its limited budget .
The purchase of a helicopter would be equivalent to the annual operating budget of Frontex , i.e. EUR 40 million to EUR 50 million .
Frontex has therefore signed technical agreements with the majority of Member States on using the equipment made available to it .
In its evaluation report , the Commission recommended that Frontex should be able to buy or lease its own equipment , at least for certain small items of equipment .
That is all that we can say at present .
Thank you for reminding everyone that Frontex is based in Warsaw and that it has highly motivated people there .
I would like to thank you for establishing a link with Frontex .
I believe that in view of what Frontex currently does , we will be able to see , as the evaluations are carried out , what functional improvements can be made to it .
As the author is not present , Question 46 lapses .
Subject : Measures to combat terrorism and the fundamental right to privacy
There is a concern that certain EU policies to counter terrorism , particularly related to data retention , are not balanced against EU citizens ' fundamental right to privacy .
Will the Commission comment on how it is seeking to achieve a fair balance between respect for fundamental freedoms and measures to combat terrorism ?
I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
The Commissioner will be aware that the Shadow Home Secretary in Britain , former Minister of European Affairs , David Davis , resigned his position in Parliament last week on a principle in relation to the intrusion of the state into the privacy of the individual .
Whatever the merits of his resignation , I share the concerns that he expresses .
The state would never bring before a parliament or the European Parliament in one measure some of the extreme things the state or the European Union wants to do , so it is done incrementally .
I want all terrorists to be brought to book .
I grew up in a country where for 30 years terrorists wreaked havoc on our country , but we also had the rule of law which protected the privacy of citizens .
I want to know from you , Commissioner , what steps you are taking proactively to ensure that the rights of individuals to go about their business and their privacy is protected .
Madam President , I must say that 15 Member States have notified the Commission of their instruments transposing the Data Retention Directive , and the Commission has initiated infringement proceedings against all Member States who had not notified it of these measures by the end of November 2007 .
In answer to your question , the Commission has set up an expert group to assist the Commission with analysing the effectiveness of the directive and achieving the balance that you ask for .
The Commission will produce a report in September 2010 to review the contribution made by the directive to investigating , detecting and prosecuting serious criminal offences .
For this purpose , the Commission will evidently examine any observations submitted to it by the Member States or by the Working Party established under the directive .
We really need to make sure that this is in accordance with the directives on data retention and the directive on data protection .
I think that even if there is the odd infringement of data protection , we will immediately be able to draw conclusions from that .
It is my belief that we have really tried to satisfy the requirements of the fight against terrorism and to reconcile this with protecting fundamental rights .
In any case , this is what I must now focus on and , Mr Mitchell , I will take great care in doing so .
( PT ) As we know , this is an area of potential conflict between fundamental rights , respect for fundamental rights , and security .
Yet it also appears to me that this is an area where cooperation is very necessary .
I should like to ask the Commissioner what level of cooperation there is in implementing the directive between national data protection authorities as regards data retention .
There are specialised national authorities in each Member State , and it seems to me that it is the Commission 's role to kick-start and encourage this cooperation between the respective bodies .
What news is there on this , Commissioner ?
Madam President , you are right : we must ensure respect for data protection .
In any case , along with us , the European Data Protection Supervisor has the task of monitoring all of this .
You are right , we need cooperation : there is the Article 29 Working Party , which brings together the authorities in the various Member States and is specifically working to further improve respect for data protection , to which Mr Mitchell has drawn my attention .
I believe that this cooperation is progressing .
We call this Working Party the ' Article 29 Working Party ' , because Article 29 of the Directive states that the independent data protection authorities of each Member State must meet .
I think that this is a good tool and that it should be used .
That is all I can tell you .
Subject : European Arrest Warrant
The European Arrest Warrant ( EAW ) is now widely used to secure the arrest and surrender of suspected criminals across the European Union and has a key role to play in the fight against terrorism and in bringing those accused of serious crimes to justice .
However , at least in its initial stages , a degree of legal uncertainty seemed to sometimes surround it .
An earlier report by the British House of Lords warned that , until this uncertainty was resolved , the EAW might not be fully effective between Member States .
Could the Commission give its view on how effectively initial problems have been overcome and how effectively the EAW is now operating ?
Which , if any , issues does the Commission still consider problematic , and how does it intend to address them ?
I would like to thank Mr Moraes for raising this important issue .
The European Arrest Warrant has really delivered significant results .
The main change lies in the mutual recognition of judicial decisions , and the dual criminality requirement is no longer in place for 32 serious crimes .
Proceedings therefore take much less time .
Compared with the lengthy extradition procedure , which generally takes more than a year , under the European Arrest Warrant a surrender procedure takes only 43 days on average .
All of this is in fact handled by the courts .
The new procedure is widely used by Member States .
In 2006 , 6 752 European Arrest Warrants were issued .
A total of 2 042 people were arrested with the EAW and 1 892 people were effectively surrendered .
More than a fifth of the individuals surrendered in accordance with the EAW procedure were nationals from the executing Member State .
When you think that in 2006 we had practically as many arrest warrants as there were procedures over a 10-year period , it is clear that the European Arrest Warrant has been a success .
The initial constitutional problems of certain Member States have been overcome .

Nevertheless , Mr Moraes , we need to recognise that in terms of the surrender of nationals , we are occasionally seeing old extradition procedures being used which is a sign of the residual lack of confidence in some Member States and in certain criminal justice systems . However , we think that this will disappear and that the system will be able to function optimally .
Based on an analysis of the transposition of the framework decision into Member States ' legislation , the Commission reported in 2005 and 2007 on the functioning of the European Arrest Warrant .
This revealed that certain adjustments had been made in Member States .
Currently , a series of peer reviews are being carried out , in which the Commission is involved as an observer .
These reviews will conclude in early 2009 . It will be at that point , based on the results of the reviews , that the Commission will present a new report identifying the different practices , flaws and issues examined at European Union level in order to further improve how the European Arrest Warrant works , although it seems to me that this still remains one of the main success stories as regards the principle of mutual recognition .
The Commissioner is right to say that the EAW is the kind of measure which European Union citizens expect to see from the justice and home affairs portfolio .
It makes sense to emerge from very long drawn-out extradition proceedings .
May I , however , ask him to take a personal interest and personal involvement in this problem of the way that the framework decision has been transposed by some Member States ?
( The Commission has been critical of that . )
May I ask him to take a personal involvement in the fact that some Member States are sticking to old procedures and , as a result , the EAW is not as effective as it could be ?
There have been some very important successes , but unfortunately these have been dragged down by this lack of good transposition and good implementation of what could be a very important directive for the future in the field of justice and home affairs .

Mr Moraes , first of all I should like to remind you that , based on the current Treaties , the Commission does not have the power to initiate infringement proceedings against a Member State if incorrect implementation of the framework decision is discovered during the monitoring and review procedures .
Despite this , I can tell you that I will pay close attention to this implementation of the European Arrest Warrant .
The Justice Forum , which we will make a regular event , will be a chance for us to encourage magistrates from all Member States to work together .
We will also seize this opportunity to promote proper use of the European Arrest Warrant .
I would like to thank you for asking this question and I can tell you that we will do everything we can .
I should like to add that the strengthening of Eurojust will also allow us to make better use of the European Arrest Warrant .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I spent 17 years in courts as a lawyer and I am therefore well acquainted with the situation as regards justice in Europe , which , generally-speaking , is characterised by its slowness , by its extreme slowness .
This is something that we all need to overcome .
The European arrest warrant is very important - in fact , of the utmost importance .
Moreover , it is crucial that Member States understand how important it is and take this on board .
We know that the Commission has no powers to impose sanctions , but it can galvanise and stimulate matters and I fully support my colleague 's words , yet there is one further aspect of great importance , Commissioner , which is probably in your hands , which is to foster cooperation between police and judicial bodies .
It is vital that police and judicial cooperation is promoted in the Member States and between the Commission and the European institutions .
You are absolutely right - the European Arrest Warrant must be a success , because it means truly embracing a system of mutual recognition .
This means that at this point , the various judicial authorities are really beginning to work together in a climate of confidence .
This is why proper use of the European Arrest Warrant - which has greatly expedited and simplified procedures - must exemplify this new justice , which you want to be much faster and clearly much easier to use .
That is all that I can tell you .
We will keep a close watch on the use of the European Arrest Warrant which , to my mind , is one of the best tools that we currently have for judicial cooperation in criminal matters , which clearly needs to be improved still further .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.20 and resumed at 21.00 . )

Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Import of poultry carcases ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the import of poultry carcases .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on this issue I had exhaustive discussions with my colleagues on the authorisation of the use of AMT substances as a decontamination measure to clean the surface of poultry carcases , during the college meeting of 28 May .
As you know , the possibility of removing surface contamination with substances other than potable water was approved by Council and Parliament in 2004 in the hygiene regulations .
In order to approve substances for use in decontamination of any meat , the applicable law requires a positive , evidence-based finding in comitology , indicating that the use of the substances does not pose risks to health or the environment .
Let me remind you that there was a long-standing request by the USA for approval of four AMT substances for use in decontamination of poultry carcases .
Against this background , we have requested various scientific opinions which have assessed the risk of the use of the four AMT substances from the point of view of health , environment and anti-microbial resistance .
On the basis of the outcome of the various scientific opinions , we decided to present a proposal .
The scientific opinions allow us to proceed with a proposal for authorisation , but not at any price .
Pursuant to the scientific opinions , a number of risk-management conditions had to be formulated .
In proposing this text , my bottom line is very clear : no matter which commercial partner is at stake , no international commitment can be allowed to undermine the principles of food safety and the health of EU consumers .
Hence the need to ensure that any use of such substances would not replace the obligation to comply with the hygiene conditions along the food chain as set by Community legislation , and that such use would not make up for prior poor hygiene conditions .
In fact , in its opinion , EFSA has indicated that AMT could be considered as a useful tool to complement the hygiene practices already implemented in the European Union .
This is why I have imposed strict , yet proportional conditions .
Under these conditions , we can assure a proposal which is defensible from the point of view of public health and safety .
The conditions that we propose are the following .
First , one single substance is applied .
Time of exposure and concentration of the substances are defined .
The poultry carcases are rinsed with potable water .
No residue is left on the final product after the use of the substance .
The efficacy of the rinsing is monitored to ensure the absence of residues .
By setting these conditions , we ensure that the use of AMT substances will not make up for poor hygiene conditions , and that no residues are left in the end product .
I would also like to stress that the use of AMT only reduces the number of bacteria and does not replace good hygiene practices as a core requirement , equally applicable in third countries as in Europe and applicable from the flocks to the processing of poultry carcases .
We will maintain a holistic approach to the reduction of salmonella at all stages of the production chain : feed , farms and slaughterhouses .
Moreover , the proposal provides for appropriate labelling .
As with other approved substances such as additives , the consumer has the right to be informed .
Thus we suggest two alternative descriptions .
Appropriate environmental medication measures on waste water effluent quality standards , as proposed by DG Environment .
These consist of conditions for collecting and treatment of wastewater in slaughterhouses .
Last but not least , the proposal foresees a review within two years of the date of application of the authorisation , allowing further collection of data from food business operators regarding the use of the substances so that scientific questions on antimicrobial resistance can be addressed .
This review will place the burden of proof on the food operators rather than on the Commission 's scientific bodies .
That said , when the proposal was presented to the Standing Committee of the Food Chain and Animal Health on 2 June , 26 Member States expressed a negative opinion and one abstained .
The Commission will now transmit the proposal to the Council of Ministers to decide .
You will ask why the Commission went ahead with this proposal despite the EU domestic opposition to it .
Firstly , because the legislative framework foresees the possibility of approving such substances .
Secondly , because there has been a request for approval which could not be left unanswered , considering also our international commitments .
Finally , because there are scientific opinions which indicated that we could proceed with the authorisation provided it is flanked by a number of strict conditions , as we did .
It was , therefore , for the Commission to stand up to its institutional responsibilities and make the proposal .
What happens next is part of the decision-making process .
In this sense , I have taken good note of your strongly held position .
The Council will now be asked to pronounce on the text .
As you know , if a qualified majority of Member States is against this proposal , it will not be adopted , so we will see the end result under the French presidency .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the Commissioner said that this chemical chlorine is not dangerous .
If that is the case , why is it banned for use on chickens in the European Union ?
Secondly , Commissioner , you said that we have obligations to the United States .
We are part of the WTO negotiations and part of the WTO , but - correct me if I am wrong - there is no ban on chicken meat coming out of the United States , provided it meets EU standards .
Why on earth are we putting in place legislation in the European Union when we are in effect wasting our time ?
We have just adopted a report on a directive on safe water .
We have taken a number of chemicals out of the text and yet here we are , bringing chlorine back in .
You mentioned quite rightly on 2 June that there was a vote of 26 to 1 against .
The one that abstained was the United Kingdom .
You have to remember that the United Kingdom is governed by the greed of the supermarkets and I would suggest to you that the reason the United Kingdom abstained is that it was pressurised for cheap food from the supermarkets .
I believe that in actual fact this is having a detrimental effect .
You say there will be no residue left on the products .
Can you wholeheartedly put your hand on your heart , Commissioner , and say that you will be able to monitor this , because in the past we have had problems with products coming into the EU ?
I was responsible for the report on chemicals in food coming into the European Union and food within the European Union , and we are having real problems monitoring them .
I believe that you are laying yourself open to a real risk , and not just to public health .
It is not a trade issue - it is about public health , public confidence in the product .
The last thing we want to see is loss of public confidence in the European Union and in the food we produce .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank the Members who contributed to the drafting of this resolution .
I would like to stress that this is supported by all the political groups .
Why such unanimity ? No doubt because it reflects our dissatisfaction with the attitude and approach of the Commission , which stems from a denial of democracy that the European Parliament has faced on this dossier for several weeks now .
The Commission 's determination to disregard the opinion of MEPs and experts on the issue of importing chlorinated chicken is truly appalling .
Yes , Mr Verheugen is in charge of negotiating with his US counterpart to promote trade between our two regions , but can he do it by sacrificing European health standards ?
How can the Commission have given the go-ahead for this kind of project , merely proposing compulsory labelling and a review of the provisions in 2 years ' time etc . ?
Can the Commission explain why , after acknowledging that it lacked information about these substances , it is not adopting a precautionary approach ?
The absence of references to the conclusions of the US Center for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) is also curious , since a few weeks ago it revealed an increase in contamination and infection from salmonella , listeria and other bacteria .
Why should we import a method which has not already been tried and tested ?
Another important point to remember is that the implementation of European food safety legislation required years of work and collaboration with industry professionals , who agreed to invest in order to meet the expectations of European citizens .
This approach , which involves the entire food chain , is the most sustainable way of reducing the level of pathogens .
This was the choice we made , and do you really think that a relationship of trust and a strong and reliable partnership can be built by failing to reaffirm our own principles and values to our US partners ?
I have one more question : would the imported products be subject to the same rules as European poultry ?
Finally , I will finish by pointing out that this decision is all the more incomprehensible as the European Commission has decided to counterattack the WTO over the decision of its Dispute Settlement Body on hormone-treated beef .
I find that there is enormous confusion and misunderstanding among consumers faced with this diametrically opposed position . It really calls into question the political line taken by the European Commission on food health and safety .
The European Council will shortly issue an opinion on the Commission 's proposal .
We ask it to take into account the position of Parliament and the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health : to put health before trade .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I can only endorse the words of Mr Sturdy and Mrs Ferreira .
I do not actually understand why the Commission persisted in tabling these proposals on 28 May .
The pressure from the United States must have been enormous .
This pressure is of an economic nature .
The United States is losing markets here in the European Union - including , perhaps , in the new Member States that joined in 2004 .
What do I note from all the studies carried out ? I note that the United States ' approach to the use of antimicrobial agents is not really efficient .
The number of cases of contamination with salmonella or campylobacter has not gone down .
Our approach , on the other hand , is very effective .
We have a ' farm to fork ' approach , covering every stage from the farm to the consumer 's table .
Since the Commission White Paper in 2000 , we have adopted strong legislation on foodstuffs .
I do not now want to see this undermined .
Nor do farmers want this , as they have invested in this approach .
They do not want unfair competition from competitors in other parts of the world .
Besides , they do not stand alone ; they have the support of the consumer and environmental movements .
I would ask the Commissioner to have a rethink , therefore , and to withdraw this proposal : she has no support for it in the Council and no support for it in this Parliament .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I fully support the draft resolution that has been put forward .
I identify with the full content of the proposals contained in the draft resolution .
A very important matter has been raised in this document .
In our debates on the situation in agriculture , but also in international trade , we have called numerous times for respect for the principle that requirements must be identical for producers in the European Union and for those entities that export their products onto the European market .
This principle is not generally observed , and in particular it is not observed in the sphere of agricultural production .
We must make a firm demand for this principle to be observed .
We cannot continue with a procedure in which certain standards are required of producers in the European Union and different standards of those who export their products onto the European market .
The situation in the poultry industry is very difficult in a number of European countries .
My country , Poland , is one of them .
I have personally had the opportunity to take part in many discussions on this subject .
Poultry organisations have pointed out that competition conditions are unequal , and that the European market is exposed to unequal competition in relation to other countries of the world .
I am pleased that this initiative was raised , because this is exactly the direction in which it is facing to make for equal competition conditions , that being what elementary justice demands .
I therefore support this draft resolution .
Mr President , by lifting the ban on the import of chickens from the United States , the European Commission is once again showing that it places the interests of the food multinationals above the health of the people and workers .
For decades , the United States has been pushing for the import of hormone-treated meat .
Now it is doing the same for its chickens .
In previous years the ban was based on the danger posed by the chlorine and chicken dips .
According to the scientific community , chlorinated chickens endanger the health of consumers and slaughterhouse workers and make for dangerous waste material with carcinogenic residues .
The substances used in the United States have obviously not stopped being carcinogenic , just as the scientific community has not changed its mind .
The question is , then , what has led the Commission to give in to pressure from the United States and the multinationals , and what does it get in return for this change in position ?
The food production chain is increasingly in the stranglehold of the food multinationals .
Just a few days after the scandal of sunflower oil mixed with mineral oils , and the discovery that legislation allows the transportation of oil in the same tankers used to carry fluids dangerous to health , the European Commission did not bat an eyelid in announcing the lifting of the ban on chlorinated chickens .
One food scandal follows another .
The EU is shifting the responsibility of inspection on to those who should be inspected ; it is abdicating its own responsibilities , just like the governments of the Member States ; it is transferring responsibility to consumers , on the grounds that they have the right to choose , provided the products are labelled .
The workers demand properly inspected , healthy foods at affordable prices .
The opposition by the workers , their organisations and the scientific community to the lifting of the ban must oblige the Commission to revise its decision .
The ban on chlorinated chickens for consumption must continue to pertain .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , transatlantic trade is currently worth about EUR 600 billion a year .
Now the Commission is suggesting that we open the market to poultry that has been disinfected in a chlorine solution .
I say strongly : I greatly regret that the Commission has not managed to claim - and gain - access to the market in the United States for our unchlorinated poultry at last .
However , I would like to say that I support the Commission 's suggestions in principle , because the scientific experts ' reports are conclusive .
The European Food Safety Authority provided a very conclusive expert report ; we do not require any further expert reports .
Here , as on the other side of the Atlantic , nobody wishes to see people 's health put at risk by food , but if there really are misgivings about the substances used in the United States , then I ask myself why these substances are permitted here in the European Union as an additive to animal feedstuffs , potable water and other foods ?
I know how much importance many EU Member States attach to food quality and food safety , and just as well .
What would France be , for example , without its coq au vin ?
This product , exported from France and famous the world over , is also prepared for export to the United States with a chlorine treatment according to the American method .
Apparently , this method is so good that it is considered suitable for the export of quality products from Europe .
From my point of view , then , this is a rather dishonest discussion .
The Commission has made clear suggestions to guarantee the safety of European consumers .
I believe that labelling , in particular , must be clear and visible , so that consumers really know what they are buying , but I know , too , that consumers will choose European poultry anyway .
However , I call on everyone to stop hiding behind supposed environmental or health arguments and clearly state what this is really about .
It is a question of honesty and honesty in politics is vital , especially when it comes to discussing a topic with friends like the United States .
( PT ) I understand the need to improve trade relations with the United States and in this regard , I would like to congratulate the Commission on the work it has done in this area .
There are , however , ' red lines ' and one of these is safeguarding the legitimate interests of European producers and consumers .
I believe that in this specific case , we are faced with a situation where these lines are clearly being violated .
There are two different concepts here , perhaps even two contradictory concepts , relating to health protection and environmental protection .
From the European perspective , there is a core concern , which is ensuring safety throughout the food chain .
From the American perspective , the idea is merely to deal with this matter at the closing stages of the process .
We cannot renounce our convictions , customs or standards in this area , and we must not just seek to have them respected in Europe , but should rather try to project them on the international stage .
The European Union will be standing on very shaky ground in terms of projecting its standards internationally if it gives up on ensuring that they are protected within Europe .
For this very reason , I believe it is essential to highlight the need to express clear opposition to the Commission 's proposal in this area .
Crucial issues are at stake that have to do with environmental protection , public health and the fundamental rights of European consumers .
Yet they also have to do with European producers , as European producers have been made to respect these standards and over the last few years have had to make significant investments to make sure they respect these requirements .
Now , suddenly , they would be left completely unable to resist competition at this level .
This is why , in the name of healthy and fair competition , too , it is our view that the European Union must make the protection of European producers a major concern .
With this in mind , and without calling into question the efforts to improve trade relations with the United States ( which are vital for the European Union ) , I believe that this proposal is a bad one and I naturally would like to express my support for the motion for a resolution .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , the decision to lift the veto towards almost everyone on the import into the European Union of chlorinated chicken is a real textbook case of what the Commission , which is supposed to protect the higher public interest of Europe 's citizens , can no longer and should no longer do .
As with all food sectors , poultry farmers , and particularly chicken farmers , have made enormous efforts in recent decades .
They have invested heavily in order to comply with standards and are subject to no fewer than 70 regulations , directives and other European decisions .
The sector is also subject , as we know , to fierce competition in Europe but also from Brazil and the US .
Need we remind you , since no one has mentioned it yet , of the bird flu outbreak in Europe - this was only three years ago - when poultry meat consumption fell by more than 20 % ?
Why should we now subject this sector to such a distortion of competition in relation to US farmers , who are not in any way subject to the same health and safety constraints ?
The purpose of this brief review is to underline the essence of this matter .
Perhaps this is not an environmental and health issue , or at least so I have heard people say . However , I would like more clarification and research on the subject .
Our refusal , Commissioner , is essentially an industrial and cultural decision , and ultimately a political one .
It is a cultural decision because Europeans have the right to choose their food model ; as we know , they are very attached to their traditions and to diversity , as the French Agriculture Minister , Michel Barnier , recently reminded us .
Secondly , it is an industrial decision .
I have already mentioned the production methods , laws and high standards observed in Europe .
A good trade deal must also be fair .
The Commission stands no chance of convincing us that importing 300 000 tonnes of chlorinated chicken , without any compensation , is good news for the European poultry industry .
Finally , it is a political decision .
Now I am coming to the crux of the matter , as it is above all a question of confidence : confidence among producers and consumer confidence .
Given the current climate , can the Commission really allow itself to scorn - and I am coming to an end , Mr President the opinion of the Council , of Parliament , of operators on the ground and of a good number of your own Members ?
I think that just asking the question is an answer in itself .
( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
The job of the EFSA is to determine whether something is dangerous .
The job of the Commission and Parliament is to determine whether something is in conformity with public policy principles such as good animal husbandry , not to mislead consumers , and to maintain a high-quality environment in accordance with the precautionary principle .
Hence this proposal is unethical and inappropriate and is an undesirable method of treating chicken .
Besides , the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health has come out almost unanimously against the method .
I will add a further dimension : fraudsters have long applied chlorination to chicken in order to make it look pinker and fresher .
Are we to favour fraudsters over farmers who have invested millions , not least in my own country , in order to improve the situation ?
A few labelling rules will not work , especially in places such as restaurants .
Turn this into a victory now , withdraw the proposal and go forward on the basis of unanimity in Parliament and unanimity in the Council and say to the United States : no , we do not accept your methods .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , in rising to speak in the debate on poultry imports into the EU market , I have three matters to bring to your attention .
Firstly , agricultural products produced within the European Union have to meet very stringent environmental , sanitary and health requirements , and meeting these requirements significantly increases production costs , thus making European agricultural products relatively uncompetitive in price terms on world markets .
Secondly , given this situation , the European Commission 's proposals to amend the regulations to allow the import of chlorinated poultrymeat from the United States should be seen as a completely unacceptable proposal , especially for European consumers .
Thirdly and finally , it should be pointed out that the European Commission 's proposal on this subject is supposed to be a sort of special gesture by the Union aimed at ensuring a good atmosphere for the talks and making for more friendly contacts prior to the June summit between the European Union and the United States .
I am in favour of having warmer relations , but I would rather this did not take place at the cost of the health of many EU citizens .
( EL ) Mr President , experts in the EU Member States have come out almost unanimously against the Commission 's proposal to lift the ban on the import of chlorinated poultry .
These imports , even under the conditions proposed by the Commission , run counter to the steady demand from European citizens for the distribution of safe , high-quality , high-nutrition products .
The European poultry-rearing sector has heavily invested in compliance with the Union 's strict regulatory framework that applies to the entire food chain , from production to distribution .
Quite apart from anything else , the matter of the European poultry-rearing sector 's competitiveness is under scrutiny , and we know the Commission 's proposal is an expression of support for US interests in the Transatlantic Economic Council .
As a member of the Committee on International Trade , I am basically in favour of smoothing out differences with our trading partners .
However , I cannot under any circumstances accept solutions that endanger the health of citizens and adversely affect the European food model .
This applies both to the case we are discussing and to the Euro-Atlantic dispute pending before the WTO regarding the import of genetically modified organisms .
The EU must comply with the strict rules on food quality , hygiene and safety .
We are opposed to any relaxation of these rules .
What we need is a strengthening of the international standards and production methods .
We therefore call on the Council to maintain the ban on the import of chlorinated poultry .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , European poultry farming , along with other animal production sectors , is going through a difficult period .
In this context it is even more surprising that the Commission has been so quick to ask for Europe to allow poultry meat treated with chlorinated products to enter its territory , a request that appears to be solely and exclusively aimed at satisfying the commercial needs and aspirations of the United States of America .
I do not need to remind you that , in Europe , the poultry sector does not receive any direct support from the CAP , despite the fact that since 1997 our producers have been banned from using the very same substances that the Commission now wants to authorise , and moreover they are submitted to exhaustive controls throughout the production cycle to prevent the development of bacteria and to comply with the high Community hygiene standards .
However , in relation to third-country producers , the Commission considers that a chlorine wash alone is more than sufficient , and in my opinion this means that the efforts made by our producers are and have been completely futile .
If you will pardon my saying so , it is not possible for us to be so stupid and them to be so clever .
In my opinion , we need to oppose this request from the Commission .

( NL ) Mr President , we have already heard a very great deal in this debate and I certainly would not want to repeat it all , but I think that two fundamental issues are at stake here .
The first is fair competition - the level playing field - between European producers and producers from third countries .
On the basis of European rules , the European poultry sector has invested millions of euros in the advanced control of salmonella and other contaminants throughout the production chain .
Authorising products that do not meet these requirements threatens this fair competition , which should be a keystone in our trade policy .
What is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander , as they say .
If we required it recently of meat from Brazil , we must also require it of chicken from the United States .
The second is the precautionary principle .
After all , reports on the consequences of this technique for both health and the environment still cast the appropriate doubt .
The Commission proposal to authorise this for two years , followed by a review on the basis of new data , is of course totally at variance with this precautionary principle .
We need clarity on safety first and a debate second , not the other way round .
Even the idea of labelling chlorinated poultry from the United States is unacceptable , as there remains a disparity between farmers here and farmers there and , furthermore , processed products are likely to escape this labelling .
These processed products include the considerable amounts of chicken nuggets and drumsticks that will be consumed in front of the TV this evening by Dutch , Romanian , French and Italian football fans .
I should like to conclude , therefore , by calling on the Commission to remain committed to these two basic European principles - the level playing field and the precautionary principle - in order to respect the wishes of a large majority in the management committee and in this House by abandoning this unfortunate proposal .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , now the European Commission wants to allow chicken from the USA treated with bleach and , moreover , it wants us to accept it without complaining in order to improve trade relations with the United States .
The frivolousness of the European Commission in this matter is very much at odds with the seriousness with which it produces new texts on food safety , which at times impose so many restrictions on Community producers that it is sometimes no longer viable for them to continue to operate .
The Commission is losing credibility with consumers and public opinion with this type of proposal , and I do not think that we should succumb to pressure from the Member States , trade pressure from the United States , even if the European Commission asks us to .
In January 2008 a study published in the US magazine Consumer Report revealed a 70 % increase in the incidence of zoonosis in chickens treated with antimicrobial processes in the United States , compared to 2003 .
There has also been an increase in antibiotic resistance in infected people .
At the time in the European Union there was a decrease in the incidence of zoonosis in chicken , without using the US methods .
The European Union is doing its duty , because it is controlling zoonosis from the start of the production chain , and because it applies the principle that ' prevention is better than cure ' , which it is following rigorously , at a very high cost to producers and to the industry in the European Union .
In the specific case of the fight against zoonosis , in 2003 a very strict regulation was launched , which took a great deal of time to get off the ground , that increases the monitoring of diseases communicable to humans .
The result of implementing this regulation is a reduction in the incidence of these diseases .
European producers and the European industry in general have to comply with these rules , because if they do not they could be penalised .
Why not continue to strictly monitor the US producers ?
( FR ) Mr President , this chlorinated chicken affair illustrates the divide that unfortunately exists between the European Commission and citizens who expect to have confidence in Europe .
It is a blow to our food policy with its high level of consumer protection .
There is a complete lack of understanding .
It is unfair competition for our farmers , who have made enormous efforts to improve production , and our abattoirs , which must abide by strict rules .
All of this costs money , and so this competition is unfair .
This will allow cheap chicken to be brought into the European Union , which will unfortunately affect the most disadvantaged people who shop in discount supermarkets , and we will find this chlorinated chicken in processed products , catering trays and school canteens .
None of this is acceptable .
It is unthinkable that we can even allow it .
Please do not tell us that labelling will solve the problem , because unfortunately the labelling on processed products does not give any information .
Therefore , in view of recent food scares , citizens need to be able to have confidence in the food chain .
Consequently , we must say a categorical ' no ' to chlorinated chicken imports .
( PL ) Mr President , back in April I sent a written question to the Commissioner , in which I firmly objected to the planned admission into the EU market of chemically disinfected chickens from the United States .
Fortunately this proposal has encountered resistance from the Member States .
Commissioner , our farmers and processors comply with standards that are among the most restrictive in the world .
They look after the environment , animal wellbeing and the maintenance of biodiversity .
Adapting to these standards increases costs and weakens their competitive position .
This is why I am surprised by the Commission 's proposal .
The American way of producing chickens does not meet these standards .
The European consumer has no wish to see such food on his plate .
If we are interested in taking care of the safety of our EU consumers , we cannot allow low-quality foods to be imported .
Mr President , if we accept the chlorination of American chicken , how can we stop demands for the chlorination of other products in the future , for example other meat products - beef or pork - either imported or produced inside the EU ?
What about eggs , cheese , vegetables or fruit ?
All the conditions that the Commissioner has told us would apply , in exactly the same way , to all the products I have just mentioned .
What about the use of other antimicrobials ?
Perhaps in the future we will have demands from the Americans to be able to use penicillin or other antimicrobial agents on our imported chicken .
In any case , even if tests on the outside show that there are no microbes on the surface of the chicken , perhaps there are a lot of microbes inside the chicken and we will not be able to detect them because the surface would falsely show that the chicken is free from salmonella or other microbes .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to say at the outset that I respect the honourable Members ' opinions and I wish to repeat that this decision has not been taken lightly .
There has been an exhaustive discussion in the college .
Secondly , I want to clarify once again that we are not putting aside our hygiene regulations .
As I think I mentioned , EFSA said that this decontamination with AMT substances can only be allowed if the hygiene regulations are applied , by whoever produces the chicken .
So in conjunction with preventive measures at farm level , cleanliness of the animal sent to slaughter , hygiene measures and control procedures based on the HACCP principles at slaughterhouse level , all these have to be applied .
I must tell you when the Americans heard about all these conditions , they were very displeased but we told them that these conditions cannot possibly be withdrawn .
The second thing I want to clarify is that the proposed measures would not be applicable only for American chicken , but will be allowed for our producers as well , so we are not differentiating between foreign producers and our own .
As I said , this decision now lies with the Council and from my experience in the Agricultural Council , where I was present , it does not seem very likely that we shall have a positive reply .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 19 June 2008 .
Protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users ( debate )
The next item is the report by Francesco Ferrari , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users - C6-0331 / 2007 - .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , according to the statistics before the Commission , more than 8 000 people are killed each year on the roads in the European Union and 300 000 are injured .
This is an intolerable situation and that is the reason why we have spent the last few years working hard to ensure greater safety on the roads .
Several years ago , the European Parliament accepted a proposal for a Directive relating to the protection of pedestrians , which was then adopted in 2003 .
This was one of the first regulations in the world that related specifically to pedestrian protection .
This legislation required manufacturers to ensure that new vehicles were less dangerous to pedestrians and to prove this in relevant tests .
Since then , due not least to pressure from the European Parliament , legal provisions have been issued to counteract the hazard to road users by frontal protection systems on motor vehicles .
The existing legal provisions on pedestrian protection acknowledge that , in certain circumstances , it can be difficult to fulfil the requirements laid down in them .
The Commission has taken on the task of examining the extent to which it is possible to satisfy these requirements and the possibility of using new , active safety systems .
The Commission has commissioned a study , the results of which you are aware , and this study confirms the assumption that , indeed , not all of the requirements can be met and that , on the other hand , active security systems are suited to improving pedestrian protection .
Based on this information , the Commission has presented the proposal that is before you today - a combination of passive safety systems and a Brake Assist system , the installation of which will be made mandatory .
This will achieve an even higher level of safety .
The Commission estimates that this proposal will lead to approximately 1 000 fewer deaths on our roads every year .
Naturally , the Commission will continue to work towards implementing similar regulations at international level , even after the proposal is accepted .
Allow me to mention some of the key elements of the proposal : the regulation proposed by the Commission lays down requirements for passive safety that can indeed be met and makes it obligatory for vehicles to be equipped with an active safety system , known as the Brake Assist system .
In addition , provisions on pedestrian protection will now also apply to off-road vehicles , also known as SUVs .
This combination will improve the safety of vulnerable road users considerably .
The regulation brings together the tests required to prove adequate pedestrian protection by vehicles and frontal protection systems .
The requirements to be met in the tests are laid down in this regulation as implementing measures .
Essential aspects of the proposal include the use of active systems which , in the Commission 's view , can provide considerable safety gains both now and in the future , and the abolition of the weight restriction for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles , to which the regulation will also apply .
At this point I would like to convey my special thanks to your rapporteur , Mr Ferrari , for his efforts to achieve mutual agreement on the review and acceptance of the proposal .
That is what made it possible to achieve consensus on this proposal .
Mr Ferrari 's report supports the Commission proposal , for which I am very thankful , and the amendments he suggested will indeed assist in further clarifying certain points .
Mr Ferrari , you propose continuing to observe and monitor the use and improvement of passive safety systems and the potential use of new active safety systems and then , if necessary , suggesting amendments to existing legal provisions .
The Commission is more than willing to do this , and will indeed do so .
Other amendments are designed to ensure that , on the one hand , the requirements of the regulation apply to the relevant vehicles as soon as possible and , on the other hand , to allow manufacturers sufficient time to implement the necessary changes to construction methods .
For a large number of European vehicle manufacturers , the new provisions mean that significant changes must be made to the design of their vehicles , necessitating major construction changes .
I am delighted to be able to tell you that the Commission finds all the amendments proposed in Mr Ferrari 's report acceptable .
As far as the significance of the regulation for improving road safety and the planned schedule for the introduction of the tests specified in the regulation are concerned , the Commission is sure that the proposal can now be adopted at first reading .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have reached the end point of this Regulation on the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users .
The aim of the Regulation is to change the safety requirements for pedestrians and other vulnerable road users in the event of injuries resulting from a collision with a motor vehicle .
The scope of the Regulation is significant because it has incorporated two previous directives , one from 2003 and the other from 2005 .
The first directive set out the safety requirements that cars had to have , to be implemented in two phases .
The first phase was launched in 2005 , while it turned out that the requirements of phase two were not fully feasible from the technical viewpoint for all vehicles .
The second directive relates to the use of frontal protection systems on vehicles and indicates various levels of protection for vulnerable road users in the event of a collision with vehicles equipped with such systems .
Among the most sensitive points , I would like to mention ABS , the brake assist system : this is a system that will make it possible to reduce deaths on the roads by 35 % .
The greatest victory , though , has probably been succeeding in making the instrument applicable within 24 months of the Regulation 's entry into force to all categories of car , from small cars to SUVs and to vehicles of a larger size which often , because of their large weights , are the ones that cause the most physical damage to citizens .
It was not easy at first , partly because the car industry needs time , in industrial and physiological terms , to apply certain measures .
I am , however , happy that all the parties understood the issue and its delicacy and I appreciate the efforts made to put this system into practice .
A second aspect of the Regulation was frontal protection systems .
The 2005 Directive , in fact , will be incorporated through this regulation , and thus cars that decide to install ' bull bars ' will not obtain approval if the safety requirements for frontal protection systems do not provide the same level of safety as that laid down for vehicles without frontal protection systems .
I realise , in any event , that while we have certainly accomplished a significant amount , there is still much more that could be done , and in particular research will always go further in the direction of increasing safety for pedestrians and vulnerable road users .
I have also felt the need to leave a door open for improvements to this text .
I am referring particularly to collision avoidance systems .
Currently there are no effective structural systems for pedestrian safety on the market , but some years hence they may be developed .
This is why the text stipulates that if , five years following entry into force of this Regulation - as the Commissioner said - the industry were able to present passive safety systems of a type that could guarantee pedestrian safety , the Commission would have to put forward a new text to Parliament and the Council , taking technical developments into account .
The issue of safety is a very important one to the people of Europe and I have personally undertaken to send a strong message to all the citizens of the European Union .
It is the delicacy of the issue that has led me to ensure that the Regulation will be adopted at first reading , to avoid a second reading with the Council , the only effect of which would have been an excessive delay in the date of entry into force of the regulation .
This position was shared by my colleagues on the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
All the amendments tabled were designed , first and foremost , to protect pedestrians and vulnerable road users .
I therefore hope that this Regulation will be the first strong signal from the European Parliament of an increasingly rigorous approach to safety regulation on Europe 's roads , demonstrating that Europe is united , alive to the issues and in tune with the concerns of its citizens .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of pedestrians aims to minimise the effects of collisions between pedestrians and motor vehicles .
In my opinion , the Regulation goes too far .
It sets requirements for the construction and functioning of motor vehicles , including frontal protection systems .
Requirements for manufacturers are nearing the limits established by the laws of physics , the construction of the human body , a sensible compromise between the protection of vehicle passengers and pedestrians , and by other motor vehicle construction parameters .
This puts motor vehicle manufacturers under enormous pressure .
We must remember that compliance with the requirements as defined in the Regulation will result in high costs for the manufacturers and logically will then be reflected in car prices .
It will have a negative impact on the vehicle mass , on vehicles ' aerodynamic properties and , consequently , on fuel consumption and ipso facto on the environment .
On the other hand it will lessen the consequences of collisions between pedestrians and motor vehicles .
Introducing intelligent systems that prevent collisions and minimise their consequences has the greatest potential for improving pedestrian safety .
Improving road infrastructure and , where possible , separating pedestrians from road traffic also seem to be effective solutions .
We can rightly assume that money spent in this way will be more effective than imposing yet stricter requirements on cars .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Ferrari , on behalf of my group for his excellent , constructive cooperation , including with my colleague Mrs Ayala Sender , who was unable to join us here this evening .
I wish to thank him in particular for having succeeded in bringing the Commission and Council together and ensuring that we have been able to incorporate a set of amendments by Parliament at first reading that further improves the text .
This is an important dossier that , being very technical , may not make the headlines , but will help prevent the loss of a great many human lives and the resulting family tragedies .
Last year , a staggering 43 000 people lost their lives on Europe 's roads and , as the Commissioner has already said , 8 000 of them were pedestrians , vulnerable road users .
As we all know , preventing this requires a combination of a great many measures .
Changes in driver behaviour are needed - that goes without saying - but it has also been proven that technical innovations and all manner of rules also have an important role to play in preventing major accidents .
The vehicle 's design can make a big difference in the event of an accident : the bumpers , the whole design of the vehicle front end , the bonnet and so on .
Under this regulation , design engineers will have to comply with stricter standards and to prove this compliance through various crash tests .
The main innovation of the proposal is that , besides the choice of materials and the rules governing this , it also works on active safety , namely by making Brake Assist systems compulsory from next year or thereabouts .
This is another important innovation .
One thing that is essential as far as our group is concerned is that this also be applied to vans , that it be phased in .
We think that this is a good deal , therefore .
We are not yet at the end of the road - we expect to see even more rules in the coming years to the benefit of human safety , and for these , too , you can count on our support .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , congratulations to the rapporteur on his excellent report .
As already mentioned , many thousands of pedestrians and cyclists are killed or injured every year on the roads of the EU .
Our aim as MEPs is to help reduce these numbers as much as possible .
One way of trying to do so is to alter the technical specifications of motor vehicles .
Some of these - for example , frontal protection and brake assist systems - have been considered in this report , but one of the most important of all life-saving vehicle specifications is not given attention : this is a speed limiter .
Such a system would limit the maximum speed of a car to the maximum permissible speed in any given country .
This limit , in most EU Member States , is 100 km / h on the motorway , and 50 km / h in built-up areas .
Through relatively simple and cheap electronic gadgetry , it would be a straightforward matter to fit vehicles with a device which would ensure that these limits are not exceeded on the motorway or in town .
Such speed limitation would probably prevent a third of all deaths of pedestrians and cyclists .
Such a speed limiter could also be adjusted to control the rate of acceleration of vehicles , and this would save even more lives .
We must ask ourselves how necessary and wise it is for our vehicles to be able to accelerate from 0 to 100 km / h in five or six seconds , and how important and legal it is for our vehicles to be capable of doing more than 200 km / h , if the relevant speed limit is only 100 km / h ?
I can understand how a rapporteur with the name ' Ferrari ' would find it difficult to agree with me on car speed reductions , but the real truth is that speed kills road users in excessive numbers , and at some point we , as law-makers , will have to make up our minds on the following . What is most important : fancy fast cars and speed-enthused drivers , or saving thousands of human lives ?
Mr President , I do not think that Mr Ferrari has been the worst in this connection .
As a matter of fact , my experience has been one of very constructive cooperation with someone who did not give the impression of being under the thumb of the automobile industry .
We should of course have preferred to see a report that went even further in its endeavours to protect pedestrians and other vulnerable road users against cars , and the ideal scenario would have been to get many more drivers using public transport or bicycles .
Nevertheless , since this goal lies so far in the future , we are pleased to have done something about car equipment .
As many have mentioned , it is to be welcomed in this respect that the legislation is now to cover heavier vehicles , so that stricter requirements on car equipment will counter the trend towards ever larger cars .
I should also like to commend the rapporteur on pressing for BAS - Break Assist systems - to be made standard in cars without delay , to help drivers stop in time .
It is also to be welcomed that requirements on the design of car front ends have been imposed , so that any collision with a vulnerable living human being does as little harm as possible to the unlucky person .
However , we need to go down to 40 km / h for this to make sense .
The requirements on this should have been even stricter , as should the time limit .
After all , there are already products on the market that offer significantly better protection for pedestrians without jeopardising the safety of drivers or passengers .
It is not the rapporteur 's fault that this has been progressing so slowly .
There is much to indicate that there has been another case of lobbying by the German automobile industry , in particular , which these days is at the most reactionary end of the scale compared with the rest of European industry .
It is depressing if this is the reason why we have again ended up with a proposal that falls short of our wishes , by which I mean the wish for fewer deaths and injuries on the roads .
Why are we simply taking the automobile industry 's word for it - and we have just heard this again - that the technology is not yet sufficiently advanced ?
It is !
I very much hope that my fellow Members will now at least vote in favour of Amendment 25 .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , road deaths are reported in the media on a daily basis .
Car accidents , pedestrians struck by cars on the roads - each death a tragedy in its own right , then at the end of the year these deaths become statistics .
It is our responsibility , both Member States and the Union , to try to reduce those statistics and to protect our citizens from such tragedies .
Deaths on the road can be prevented , and I would like to congratulate Mr Ferrari on his excellent report and commend the cooperation that exists between the Council , Parliament and the Commission on this issue .
The title of the proposal refers to vulnerable road users and those who suffer the most .
First of all , pedestrians are often the innocent parties in accidents involving vehicles , yet they end up suffering most .
In my own country , Ireland , it was shown recently that it is more likely for an elderly person to die from a road accident than it is for those who are under the age of 65 .
Ireland , of course , is no exception .
More than 8,000 people die from accidents on European roads each year .
Proposals to protect the vulnerable have been made in recent years and although the situation has improved , it is worth noting that tragic consequences will ensue from policymakers shirking their responsibilities .
I mentioned the invaluable cooperation between the European institutions in drawing up this report .
For this cooperation to blossom Member States will have to work hand in hand and the national authorities must engage with road users .
The responsibility lies with us , as legislators , and we must stand together if we are to achieve our target .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the car has of course been steadily gaining ground for a long time now .
In towns and cities , areas that used to be the domain of pedestrians , children playing , trees , parks , gardens or free-standing tram tracks were converted into space for cars between 1950 and 1980 .
Even country roads have been widened or supplemented with wide transit motorways .
Public transport , on the other hand , has become more expensive , whilst routes and frequencies have been cut .
Even the construction of underground rail networks has by no means always been aimed at faster public transport with more room for large numbers of passengers ; it has been more a case of making room for cars on the roads above the underground rail tunnels .
The location of their workplace and the lack of alternative modes of transport means that many people are now condemned to travel by car .
This takes up a great deal of space and energy , harms air quality and causes an unnecessary amount of noise .
Primarily , however , it is a danger to pedestrians and cyclists , who have to share scarce public space with cars .
When we in this Parliament talk about measures to protect pedestrians and other vulnerable road users , for the most part we are not referring to alternatives to cars , sadly , but rather how to design these so as to limit the harm caused in the event of a collision .
For years we have been focusing our discussions here on headlights , brake systems and vehicle front ends capable of injuring pedestrians .
The European Commission is now proposing to replace the 2003 and 2005 Directives , which required Member States to incorporate better safety measures into national legislation , with a regulation by means of which the European Union directly imposes its own legislation .
The choice of a regulation is a quick way of offering the most safety and uniformity for automotive engineering companies , but is not without disadvantages .
For example , we are pushing democratic considerations within Member States further into the background .
In addition , this regulation would not enter into force until 2014 , and in the case of phase II would be more moderate than the provisions of the existing Directive .
I support the aim of the rapporteur , Mr Ferrari , to introduce safety measures as quickly as possible .
My group can endorse this modest improvement , as every little helps , but more is required to bring about genuine safety .
Combating a further increase in the number of cars and reducing the number if possible would be the best contribution to safety .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the report by Mr Ferrari concerns the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users .
I am pleased that Mr Ferrari has succeeded in reaching an agreement with the Council at first reading .
I wish to thank him for his work and compliment him on his sound report .
I should like to make a couple of comments , however .
Let me begin by saying that the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users is a matter close to my heart .
As you know , in my country , the Netherlands , the more vulnerable road users constitute a large proportion of the total number of road users ; this proportion is particularly large in commuter and school traffic .
Recreational walking and cycling is also growing in importance .
These walkers and cyclists are very valuable to our society .
This is because walking and cycling are extremely environmentally friendly modes of transport and , in addition , cycling and walking are very beneficial to the health of citizens , provided that the air quality is good .
Many of the car journeys undertaken in European towns and cities are shorter than five kilometres .
It is important , therefore , to encourage citizens to opt for clean , healthy modes of transport where they , as more vulnerable road users , would enjoy sufficient protection .
After all , even though I have just praised the Netherlands because so many of its citizens cycle and walk , increasing numbers of its citizens also no longer dare let their children cycle and walk a short distance to school for fear of accidents .
However , the measures that have been included in the compromise will help reduce the frequency of accidents and the harm caused by any that do occur .
For this reason , I welcome this compromise .
I hope that , in any case , citizens increasingly opt to travel by bicycle and on foot in their own conurbation instead of by car .
On the other hand , we must beware of slipping into a situation in which we attempt to reduce road risks to zero , as it is impossible to exclude all risks .
It is also very important to make drivers aware of their own responsibility .
For all the measures that are being taken in this policy area , it should be emphasised that road users themselves remain primarily responsible for their own safety and that of their fellow road users .
I should like to conclude by saying a few words about the legislation actually proposed .
I welcome the choice of a regulation instead of a directive .
This makes the application of this important legislation unambiguous , which prevents differences arising between Member States once more with regard to the protection of pedestrians and other more vulnerable road users .
I am also pleased that this new proposal devotes more attention than the 2003 and 2005 Directives to active safety systems .
Active solutions , such as ' Brake Assist ' , have the advantage over passive safety systems that they also prevent a great deal of additional adverse effects of accidents , such as hold-ups , traffic jams and non-material harm , that cannot be limited by applying passive safety systems .
I wish to add as my last point that I also welcome two procedural aspects of this regulation .
I support bringing forward the dates for stepping up the type-approval requirements .
The safety of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users is not a subject on which we can afford to lose time .
In addition , I welcome the fact that amendments to Article 11 are to be made via the codecision procedure .
It is not desirable for essential amendments to be made via the comitology procedure .

( DE ) Mr President , human beings do not have crumple zones .
Things can happen very quickly and lead to serious injuries , as we saw just recently , in the France-Italy football match where it was immediately apparent that Franck Ribéry 's leg had been broken .
Because people do not have crumple zones , we must ensure that road users with less metal are protected from those who have more . We have to equip vehicles technically in such a way that pedestrians have a chance .
The present text calls for a package of passive and active safety systems .
Quite rightly , we are calling for permanent updating .
In fact , we also want to provide appropriate deadlines for manufacturers , so that everything can be achieved within a reasonable time .
There is one thing we must not forget , however , which does not necessarily belong in this regulation , although it relates to it , and that is psychology .
We must not lead drivers and pedestrians to believe that they are safer than they really are .
From this aspect , I make the case for establishing accompanying measures in other areas too .
We need a comprehensive overall package , and the various legislators at both European and national level would be well advised to ensure that this feeling of safety does not ultimately come at the expense of more safety than it provides .
One final point : like others before me , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ferrari , for his excellent work .
In the Committee on Transport and Tourism we reached an agreement on his proposals after a good discussion - and not only us , but apparently also the Council .
All credit to Mr Ferrari , on this point at least .
We have consensus at first reading , and that is a good sign .
Thank you very much !
( RO ) In 2007 , approximately 43,000 people died in the Union and approximately 1.7 million people were injured in road accidents .
Therefore , every year , the population of a small-sized European town disappears from Europe and the economic costs of these accidents amount to 200 billion Euros , which represents 2 % of the Community GDP .
Every year , 8,000 participants in road traffic as pedestrians or cyclists die in road accidents .
Every year , other approximately 300,000 people , pedestrians or cyclists , are injured in road traffic .
For this reason , I ask you to take action for the protection of these categories of participants in road traffic .
Europe must invest in research in the automotive industry , in new materials and the designing of safer vehicles , equipped with frontal protection systems and collision avoidance systems .
The introduction of brake assist systems and other active safety technologies allow an improvement of the protection of vulnerable road users .
Nevertheless , Europe must improve its road infrastructure as well .
This regulation has major implications because , 6 years after its coming into force , the registration , sale or entry into service of new vehicles of category N1 , which do not meet the technical requirements regarding the protection of pedestrians , shall be prohibited .
I consider that this regulation depends on the specific approval systems used in the Member States .
I also draw attention to the importance of the education of pedestrians and cyclists .
They must know and respect the traffic rules , respect the markings , and cyclists must wear protective equipment .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Ferrari and congratulating him on this report .
The way this report is so broadly imbued with compromise shows that this is something the European Parliament can be proud of .
We are talking about matters that can genuinely bring people relief .
We speak of statistics .
How unreliable statistics are .
It is not just a matter of more than a thousand human beings being lost each year , people who die in various kinds of accident .
It is also a matter of tens of thousands of human beings being injured in accidents like this that happen to pedestrians and cyclists .
With our regulations we are obviously taking small steps forward , and all the time we have to bear in mind that this report is neither solving nor redeeming the problem in general .
Clearly we must look for various instruments ; we must look for instruments relating to the highway code , for instruments relating to driving speeds , for instruments relating to traffic lanes , to make them as safe as possible .
I want to make it very clear , however , that Mr Ferrari 's report is not only heading in the right direction , but is a very significant achievement that we shall be able to present in our Member States ; we shall be able to present it to our voters as something concrete to which the European Parliament is giving its attention and in which reality is being changed for the better and for people 's benefit .
Naturally , I understand and am in a position to share arguments concerning industry , concerning impositions , but let us not forget that our European Union is such a large body that we must set a certain standard , a standard that from an economic aspect we set against the size of the market , against the fact that this market is so receptive and so large .
Finally , I would like to make it clear that the matter of protecting pedestrians and cyclists is one that is important not just for urban areas .
In very many countries , like Poland , this is also a matter for rural areas , where each day there are a great many movements of individuals in areas next to highways .
Mr Ferrari 's report is very good in this regard , too , and marks further progress along the road .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , mobility is a fundamental right of every individual .
It is also the foundation of economic , cultural , social and ecological dynamism in a society .
However , it does not become a blessing until it minimises danger to life and health for all road users .
Better protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users has not lost anything in topicality in the last decade .
Traffic density has increased appreciably , but the number of accidents and the seriousness of injuries to pedestrians and other vulnerable road users in collisions with the front section of vehicles both with and without frontal protection systems decreased over the same period , albeit not to the desired extent .
I very much welcome a regulation to extend the efforts of vehicle manufacturers to improve passive measures for pedestrian protection - for which , my particular thanks - by using active vehicle components .
Brake Assist systems are capable of resolving conflicts in connection with goals relating to energy , the environment and safety .
The Brake Assist systems currently available will bring with them a major boost to accident prevention .
Developing them further technically and combining them with information and communications technologies will open up even further potential .
It seems the ' intelligent car ' is just around the corner .
Be warned , however : we can call for as many good safety measures for vehicles as we like , but if Joe and Josephine Citizen cannot afford a new , safe vehicle , then we have achieved nothing , absolutely nothing !
Already the average age of our vehicles is more than 10 years old .
Young people in particular are finding that new , safe vehicles are further and further out of reach .
Yet that is what we want , is it not ?
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as responsible decision-makers we must be aware that every measure has an effect that goes beyond the area it was intended to target and may even be contradictory to what it was supposed to achieve .
In the interests of protecting the environment , we have popularised cycling and the use of public transport , but have we given any thought to ourselves , the people ?
Pedestrians and cyclists are defenceless and often threatened by vehicles .
In Europe every year some 8 000 vulnerable road users die , and another 300 000 are injured .
I would therefore like to thank my fellow Member Mr Ferrari for his work .
His report is clearly aimed at decisively reinforcing the Commission proposal .
It is my conviction that efforts to reduce traffic accidents would be enhanced by reducing the time allocated for preparing for the introduction of the package of measures contained in the proposed regulation to strengthen active safety systems .
Development of effective collision avoidance systems could also help to further enhance protection of pedestrians .
I agree with Mr Koch that such systems would of course also have to be suitably inexpensive and affordable .
In addition to continuously improving active safety technologies , manufacturers must also devote ongoing attention to developing passive safety measures , since both are needed in order to achieve the goals that have been set out .
I believe it is important to ensure that we are constantly able to assess changes in the technology options we apply against changes in technology .
Thank you very much .
( BG ) Mr. President , Mr. Commissioner , colleagues , I welcome the efforts of European institutions to reduce road accidents and casualties .
The number of those killed or injured is a huge humanitarian , health , financial , social and demographic issue , and the cost involved in this tragedy has a variety of negative implications for quality of life , sustainable development and , last but not least , global warming .
That is why I take the liberty to encourage you in initiating more stringent measures and legislation to extend the scope of existing standards and implement best European practices so that they become binding on all Member States .
I suggest a standard approach to monitoring , control and sanctions throughout the European Union , and above all a targeted policy to encourage Member States to contain the level of accident casualties so that it would not significantly exceed the EU average .
I am confident that in the future our common policy concerning roads in the European Union will improve the quality of road control and monitoring .
( SK ) Statistics show that every year as many as 8 000 pedestrians and cyclists are killed and 300 000 are injured on our roads .
These alarming numbers show how important it is to implement a more effective and strict regulation in order to lower the number of deaths of , and injuries to , pedestrians and other road users .
I endorse the rapporteur 's requirement for the timetable for the implementation of the new regulation to be shorter than that proposed by the Commission .
There is , for example , the estimated 33 months lead-time for the implementation of BAS ( Brake Assist System ) for cars , although the implementation process is really fairly simple .
I also agree with the view that it is important to monitor constantly the technical possibilities in the area of safety , with the aim of further increasing the safety of pedestrians and especially cyclists .
Last but not least , I am convinced that limiting car traffic in town centres and the use of public transport and bicycles are important indirect ways in which each of us can contribute towards the safety of pedestrians on our roads .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this may be a very technical affair , but it is a very important one .
It really puts the Union on the map .
It makes it clear that the EU is truly important .
I very much welcome the combination of the 2005 Directive on frontal protection systems and the 2003 Directive on the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users into a single regulation .
In that sense , I do not understand the comment by Mr Meijer of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
I must say that I have taken the floor here in this debate because this subject is very close to my heart : in 2003 I was draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the 2003 Directive , for which Mr Vermeer was rapporteur .
I am delighted with the report and with Mr Ferrari 's proposals .
I am also particularly pleased with the choice of active systems , with the choice of ABS .
I endorse Mr El Khadraoui 's remark that this must also apply to vans .
Let us be fair : this legislation will mean we can soon ensure a substantial reduction in the number of tragedies befalling European families .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , just to clarify , sadly , many more than 8 000 people die each year on our roads .
The figure of 8 000 relates to road fatalities in the most vulnerable group : pedestrians and cyclists .
Furthermore , it relates to the year 2004 and applies to the EU-25 .
Therefore , the real number is higher .
Secondly , I agree with those who say that a lot more could be done to protect this most vulnerable group , by taking measures in the area of traffic management , road safety , road infrastructure and road rules .
The Commission agrees wholeheartedly and supports this too .
However , at this point we are talking about the technical possibilities offered by the vehicles themselves .
Thirdly , therefore , in the high-level ' CARS 21 ' group ( Competitive Automotive Regulatory System for the 21st century ) , which discussed the future of the European automotive industry and made recommendations , there was complete clarity regarding the fact that , in the long term , the European automotive industry can be successful only if it offers not only the best and cleanest cars in the world in technical terms , but also the safest cars .
Therefore , the measures that we are agreeing on today have the support of European vehicle manufacturers .
Finally , I agree with those who say that this is not the last word on the matter .
We must keep a close eye on technical possibilities .
I myself have already seen the technology of the future in development and have even been able to test it in some vehicles .
These new technical possibilities such as automatic distance control and automatic obstacle recognition are already available in some top-of-the-range vehicles .
However , they are not available to the majority .
Nevertheless , we can already see where this is all leading and that we will be able to talk about the next steps in a few years ' time .
Thank you for the broad support that the Commission proposal has found in this Chamber .
I believe we are truly making a very useful and important contribution to road safety in Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the speakers , partly because I believe that this is a job that we have accomplished together and I think that it demonstrates the validity that both Parliament and , in particular , the Commission , have together been able to impart to a proposal that is , in my view , in the current times , quite significant and important .
This is also because the major problem - I wanted to reply to the first speaker - is not an increase in the weight of cars , as improvements are made to them .
In fact , for years cars have been becoming less heavy , and this is partly because technology , science and research have brought us this system .
I also believe that the most important point is that 80 % of fatal accidents occur in towns and cities , that is to say , at 35 , 40 or 50 kilometres per hour .
This means that the problem is not only on the motorways with vehicles travelling at high speed , the problem is that so many deaths of vulnerable people actually occur in towns and cities , at 40 kilometres per hour .
This means that we need to find technical systems that will allow us , in the event of an accident , to cause as little damage as possible .
That is why the second aspect is , in my view , important and so I must thank the Commissioner and the Commission for the political will that they have shown in creating a system of that type in this Regulation .
As for the other basic concept , I wonder : how much do 300 000 accidents cost the coffers of the mutual funds or the hospitals , and the health services of each individual Member State ?
How much does it cost ?
That is why , here too , if there are fewer accidents there are also fewer systems with payment deficits , particularly for hospitals and particularly for assistance .
Furthermore , there is the fact that if someone suffers injuries to 70 % or 80 % of their body , that means that there is a pension to be paid etc .
That is why I believe that both the European Parliament and in particular the Commission have considered it appropriate to create this Regulation , because it will be in force in all the Member States and it pays special attention to the search for suitable technology by giving a period of five years after which the Council will be able to consider whether technology has made further progress , and can see whether the system can also be modified .
I would therefore like to thank all those who have spoken , as well as the President , and I believe that tomorrow the vote in favour will be an achievement for the European Parliament and especially for those who have worked over this period .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 18 June 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Pedestrians need to be protected to the utmost .
The number of accidents involving pedestrians continues to rise .
This may be due to a number of factors .
The worst is reckless or drunken driving .
Drivers who cause fatal accidents have to carry the responsibility for their actions .
Unfortunately I feel that in my country there are three main factors why pedestrian accidents occur .
First : a large number of drivers have managed to obtain their licence to drive through illicit activities .
The Government did not respond adequately when this was uncovered .
Second : the state of many pavements in Malta and Gozo is in a shambles .
Even in the twin capitals of Valletta and Victoria the Government has not been able to provide decent pavements .
This is shameful .
Third : the courts in Malta are too lenient when sentencing drivers who have caused fatal accidents .
It is about time that magistrates sent to prison drivers who have caused the death of third parties through reckless or drunken driving - rather than imposing suspended sentences , which is unheard of in many European countries .
Adaptation of a number of instruments to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , " omnibus " Regulation , Part One - Adaptation of a number of instruments with regard to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , " omnibus " Regulation , Part Three ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Mr Szájer , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council adapting a number of instruments subject to the procedure referred to in Article 251 of the Treaty to Council Decision 1999 / 468 / EC , as amended by Decision 2006 / 512 / EC , with regard to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny - Part One - C6-0432 / 2007 - ; and
the report by Mr Szájer , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council adapting a number of instruments subject to the procedure referred to in Article 251 of the Treaty to Council Decision 1999 / 468 / EC , as amended by Decision 2006 / 512 / EC , with regard to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny - Part Three - C6-0474 / 2007 - 2007 / 0282 ( COD ) ) .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the ' comitology dossier ' has two main features .
On the one hand , it is extremely technical , and probably any common citizen would find it difficult to understand .
On the other hand , it is very important since it concerns how Parliament exercises its control over implementing acts .
The 2006 reform of the Comitology Decision introduced something called the ' regulatory procedure with scrutiny ' , giving Parliament a veto right on measures of general scope that amend a legal act adopted under codecision .
By the end of 2006 , 26 acts identified as particularly urgent were already brought into conformity with the new procedure , which ensures a stronger role for Parliament , and I am happy to see that today we are here to welcome further progress .
Between November 2007 and February 2008 the Commission proposed to bring more than 220 acts into line with the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny .
To facilitate Parliament and Council examination of these files , we opted for grouping proposals in a so-called ' omnibus ' approach .
Four omnibuses were adopted .
The Commission is now very pleased to see that a first-reading agreement is possible on the first and third omnibus proposals and that good and fair compromise solutions have been reached between the three institutions .
I would like to thank in particular the rapporteur and the parliamentary committees which worked very hard and very rapidly .
The Commission would like to make the following declaration . In the context of the review of Directive 2005 / 36 / EC , as provided in Article 60 of the Directive , the Commission will assess in particular the implementation of its delegated powers under the Article 61 derogation clause of the Directive .
The Commission strongly supports the political will to move ahead on this topic and the will of Parliament to move forwards as quickly as possible .
We hope to see a strong commitment from the Council as well .
I will raise this issue with the French presidency and I am confident that it will be active on this dossier .
We will continue to cooperate closely with the two institutions to reach an agreement on the two remaining omnibus proposals .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , I would like to begin by repeating what the Vice-President of the Commission said , namely that this really is a two-sided issue we are dealing with .
On the one hand it is a highly technical matter - although I would add that it is our job to solve technical problems and carry out any related tasks , so we must understand these things .
On the other , meanwhile , it provides a new opportunity for citizens , since the new procedure , the procedure involving scrutiny for the first time actually gives citizens the chance , through their freely and directly elected representatives , to scrutinise the implementing measures and normative measures of the European Commission .
You will have heard many stories , largely put about in eurosceptic circles , of how the European Commission and the European bureaucracy want to regulate a whole host of minutiae .
We are all familiar with some of these - from the size of eggs or the colour of paprika , the horror stories abound .
Of course we do not know how true any of these stories are , but in any case the myths surrounding the Brussels bureaucracy have proved persistent .
One of the reasons why the myths have persisted is that until now the European Parliament did not have genuine and effective powers of scrutiny regarding the normative measures delegated to the Commission .
The present process , which will conclude with the two votes tomorrow , will enable Parliament at least partially to exercise this sort of scrutiny ; from now on , these normative measures will be subject to political scrutiny .
In terms of what is habitually referred to as the democratic deficit issue , I have to say that this is a significant step .
It is also a significant step in terms of eliminating the democratic deficit without involving amendments to the Treaty .
I have always done my best to achieve this , and so has Parliament ; it was the agreement reached in 2006 between the European Commission and Parliament that served as the basis for the changes under discussion today .
I have always supported the idea that we should not wait for the Lisbon Treaty to extend these powers to Parliament .
There is no need to wait , since the agreement between the two institutions and the proposals now before us largely resolve these problems .
Moreover , I doubt that anyone can say for sure today when the Lisbon Treaty will actually come into effect .
Parliament needs these powers .
A word of warning , however : this is a huge task , and one that the Council has been carrying out for a great many years via the comitology committees .
For Parliament it is a completely new function , and a great deal of work will be involved in ensuring that we are genuinely able to exercise the new powers assigned to us .
Moreover , it is not just a case of being able to exercise these powers as the European Parliament ; from now on it will actually be an obligation , since the citizens of Europe can call us to account as their elected representatives over the manner in which we deal with these matters .
I would like to thank the Commission sincerely for putting forward these proposals , and I would like to draw attention to the fact that only twelve of the thirty , or rather forty-six or so acts included in ' List 3 ' have so far been submitted , and we would ask you to submit the remaining thirty-four acts as soon as possible so that we can deal with them .
Negotiations with the Council on the first and third omnibus packages have been concluded successfully .
I have every confidence that the Council will continue this process - indeed the Council has given its commitment to do so - and if possible resolve matters and conclude the process by the end of this year .
In order for this to happen , all of the institutions must of course continue cooperating with one another .
Another reason why this is important is because in this case both the Commission and the Council are relinquishing important constitutional powers to Parliament .
I could therefore also say how commendable this is , and how grateful we are to have been granted these powers .
However , I sincerely believe that they have taken this step in the interests of democracy in the European Union , and in the interests of eliminating excessively bureaucratic procedures and ensuring a more efficient , more transparent and more democratic European Union .
I thank the institutions for their cooperation , and I thank all of the committees for proceeding swiftly to enable Parliament to resolve this matter , at least with regard to the first and third omnibus proposals . Thank you for your attention .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner Wallström , ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission plays an irreplaceable role in implementing European legislation .
Its task is to implement European legislation at Community level and to ensure that the legislation is complied with in individual Member States .
Comitology is one of the key instruments for managing this process .
Comitology is justifiable and has an irreplaceable role within the policy-making and law-making process .
It was created as a response to the practical need to change and amend Community regulations , often rather technical , so that they fit the reality and the situation on the ground .
However , this does not mean that the existing system is ideal .
Within the framework of comitology , first of all we have to look for the balance between the Commission , the Council and / or Member States and the European Parliament .
The importance of the European Parliament and its role in adopting European legislation is irreplaceable .
That said , we have to remember that the possibility of monitoring the implementation of legislative instruments is limited by time , technical aspects and knowledge .
In my opinion , Parliament has too much involvement in the process , thereby adding more bureaucracy and jeopardising the whole process .
Our aim should be exactly the opposite : decreasing bureaucracy .
Hundreds of comitology committees , thousands of meetings and implementing acts hardly contribute to the transparency of comitology .
In my opinion , there should be a higher degree of formalisation of the comitology system .
There is no doubt that the whole process must be streamlined and simplified .
Ladies and gentlemen , comitology , just like the Lisbon Treaty , is something the citizens do not understand .
For the purposes of our debate on comitology we should therefore see the Irish ' no ' as a warning .
Mr President , this evening Parliament is doing something new .
I think that all the speakers , starting with the Commissioner , have highlighted the somewhat abstruse nature of comitology .
The proof of this is that we do not have anyone from the public following this debate this evening , and if I had to explain to my electorate what I am doing here tonight at eleven o 'clock , it would be very hard work .
I think that the various speakers have mentioned this difficulty , and I think that , with our concern to make the EU institutions a little more attractive , we will need to find some sort of procedure for explaining to citizens what we are actually discussing .
Of course , the package of measures that we are considering is quite broad .
As the Commissioner said , there are four omnibus packages .
We are only looking at the first and the third , and article by article we are seeing the problems that arise from the point of view of implementation .
As the rapporteur and the other speakers said , this is a necessary exercise , but obviously we should try to clarify it .
Perhaps it is worth mentioning some of the subjects .
For example , Council Directive 76 / 160 / EEC concerning the quality of bathing water or Council Directive 91 / 271 / EC concerning urban waste-water treatment .
The procedure adopted will have practical consequences for citizens , but the question is how to make them aware of it .

I think that Mr Szájer has done a good job , that in Parliament we have tried to act with a sense of responsibility , that we are going to continue doing so and that the only thing that is going to remain for us to do is this part , which is conveying to citizens what we are really doing here , and this is quite difficult .
I think that this will be our challenge , and , continuing what we have achieved and what we are doing this evening , I think that we will have to do that second part in the future so that the parliamentary debate then will not be as bleak as the one we are having this evening .
( PL ) Mr President , the inclusion of the European Parliament in comitology procedures is necessary in view of the development of its legislative competences and especially as part of the codecision procedure envisaged in Article 251 of the Treaty .
This is the direction followed by the Council Decision of 17 July 2006 and of Article 5a introducing the new procedure under which Parliament will decide jointly with the Council on the grounds for proposing certain implementing powers .
The new ' regulatory procedure with scrutiny ' will relate to measures of a general scope which seek to amend non-essential elements of a basic instrument adopted in accordance with codecision .
The Council Decision is of revolutionary significance for the course of the legislative process , as it enables Parliament to veto a Commission proposal relating to implementing powers .
As a result it will be possible to modify a proposal or return to the legislative path .
It is very important that the alignment package is adopted as quickly as possible , in order for the new procedure to be applied straight away to the existing acquis .
I am therefore calling for us , in the forthcoming vote , to adopt the Commission 's proposal covering a list of legislative instruments that are to be aligned to the new procedure along with amendments proposed by the competent parliamentary committees .
At the same time I would like to point out that what will be of crucial importance to the success of the current comitology reform is the way in which Parliament makes use of the potential that is appearing before it .
The requirement for an absolute majority of votes to reject the Commission 's proposal on implementing powers or extending the procedure caused by , for example , the need to translate documents into the 23 EU languages may have a negative impact on the progress of the procedure .
We should also bear in mind that Parliament may become the target of enhanced pressure from various circles that have an interest in influencing the final shape of implementing powers .
An extra challenge , both in general and for organisational reasons , will also be to take into consideration the enormous number of implementing instruments that will come before Parliament in the future .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , there is not much left for me to do other than to thank my fellow Members in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the other Committees for their close cooperation .
I also thank everyone who worked alongside the Committee and provided me with assistance in this highly complicated and difficult matter .
I am very pleased that we have managed to reach an agreement with the Council on this issue and hope that we can conclude the process at the first reading .
I would also like to express the hope that this process will continue at the same rhythm and tempo in the case of the second and fourth omnibus proposals - the fourth is possibly somewhat tougher and trickier .
Negotiations on these have already begun , and I have every confidence that there is a good chance of concluding this process by the end of the year or even sooner , and that the official process can get under way .
The Lisbon Treaty will introduce this system in the context of secondary legislation , but it would not have been right to waste two years without the comitology procedure .
I am convinced that Parliament needs this learning process ; it needs to learn how to handle these matters .
One speaker mentioned that it is crucial that we ourselves should be able to distinguish between important and non-important matters ; the role of the legislature is really to concentrate on vital matters and for this reason it needs to delegate certain powers to the executive , in other words to the Commission , but we must retain the possibility and the right to scrutinise implementing measures drawn up by it .
The comments made have been incorporated into the proposals .
Thank you very much for your attention , and I wish every success to Parliament , the Commission and the Council in carrying out the tasks that are still to be done , given that this piece of legislation is number sixty-something and the bulk of the acts are still to be dealt with , and I hope that the matter can be resolved in the second half of the year . Thank you very much for your attention .
Thank you for listening .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 18 June 2008 .
Autonomous Community tariff quotas on imports of certain fishery products into the Canary Islands ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Galeote , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation opening and providing for the administration of autonomous Community tariff quotas on imports of certain fishery products into the Canary Islands , - C6-0153 / 2008 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all allow me to thank the rapporteur , Mr Gerardo Galeote for this report , which I can fully support , and for his efforts in dealing with this file in the most diligent manner .
I am also pleased to note the strong support of the Committee on Regional Development for this proposal .
The Canary Islands are one of the European Union 's outermost regions and are characterised by their geographical and economic isolation .
The European Union has long recognised the need to reduce , eliminate or temporarily suspend customs tariffs in order to encourage production in such regions by facilitating the supply of raw materials .
Since 1991 , the European Union has suspended , partially or in full , the common customs tariff duties on imports into the Canary Islands of a number of products .
In the case of fisheries products , such measures applied only to raw materials to be used in products solely intended for consumption in the local market .
The import quotas at reduced tariff proposed now by the Commission follow on from similar measures laid down in Council Regulation ( EC ) No 704 / 2002 of 25 March 2002 , which covered the period from 1 January 2002 to 31 December 2006 .
The tariff quotas are to be seen , in terms of support to the Canary Islands ' economy , as complementing other measures taken on the basis of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , in particular the scheme to compensate for the additional costs incurred in the marketing of certain fishery products from the outermost regions - implemented by means of Council Regulation ( EC ) 791 / 2007 of 21 May 2007 .
In order to align the proposed measures with the latter scheme , the Commission proposes that the tariff quotas should apply for seven years to cover the period 2007-2013 .
This is two more years than provided for under the previous Regulation and should come into force retrospectively as from 1 January 2007 in order to ensure continuity .
Turning to the report , I would like to comment on the amendments proposed .
The Commission notes that three amendments relate to the fight against illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
In this regard , I would like to underline that the Commission has recently proposed a comprehensive system to prevent products resulting from IUU fishing activities entering the Community market , a proposal for which Parliament has expressed broad support .
The Commission considers that it is not in the proposed tariff quota regulation that measures to combat IUU fishing should be included .
Therefore the amendments cannot be accepted .
Instead of having a piecemeal approach , the Commission is of the view that the issue of illegally harvested products should be dealt with by means of horizontal instruments , applying to all products imported into the Community market , including the Canary Islands .
I would once again like to thank Mr Galeote for the report and the Committee on Regional Development for its attention on this very important issue .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , the exceptional geographical situation of the Canary Islands in relation to the sources of supply of certain fishery products which are essential for domestic consumption entails additional costs for the sector in this region and , as the Commissioner has just said , since 1991 the European Union has tried to remedy this natural handicap by , among other measures , temporarily suspending customs duties on imports of the products in question from third countries .
This proposal for a regulation aims to guarantee that the measures set out in the 2002 regulation currently in force continue for the period 2007-2013 .
That regulation established a series of autonomous tariff quotas on imports of certain fishery products into the Canary Islands , for the period 2002-2006 .
I would like to point out that the suspension of customs duties is only granted for products destined for the domestic market , and also say that this proposal was adopted practically unanimously in the Council and by a very large majority in the Committee on Regional Development .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has tabled four amendments which , Mr President , we cannot support , because they mix concepts of illegal fishing with the content of this regulation , whose operation in practice has shown that the control filters established by customs in Las Palmas have worked correctly .
This is endorsed by the report sent to the European Commission by the Spanish Government , which is of a different political persuasion than the one that I represent .
The European Commission accepted this report , validated it and largely incorporated it into its proposal .
The current European Commission proposal specifically ratifies the existing protective and control measures to avoid diversions of trade .
To summarise , the appropriate anti-fraud measures are being implemented , and along with the customs filters previously mentioned they constitute an adequate set of instruments , under the control of the Community institutions , for the correct functioning and monitoring of the Community quotas , which , as has been proven , have nothing to do with illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
To conclude , Mr President , the imports of fishery products included in the quotas for the Canary Islands are legal , reported and adequately regulated and therefore I ask for the European Commission proposal to be supported and for the amendments tabled to be rejected .

Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will vote in favour of adopting Mr Galeote 's report on imports of certain fishery products into the Canary Islands .
As the Commissioner said , it is about continuing with an instrument that has already been in force for many years - since 1991 - that expired in 2006 , thus filling a regulatory gap that existed until today .
From a legal and budgetary point of view this regulation is justified .
It is also justified from a political and economic point of view in order to maintain an activity that is essential for the Canary Islands .
Since the loss of our fisheries in what were formerly known as the ' Canary Islands and Western Sahara fishing grounds ' , we have been forced to import products for domestic consumption , as in this case .
The activities of a significant fishery products processing industry have been lost in the Islands since then .
On some islands this activity was essential in order to prevent them from being solely dependent on tourism .
With demagogic arguments and false accusations , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is tabling amendments against this regulation .
In the Canary Islands Regional Parliament there are no Green members ; in the 88 councils in the Canary Islands there are no Green councillors ; of the 29 councillors on Las Palmas City Council there are no Green councillors ; the Greens are barely present on a couple of councils in the Canary Islands , where they are definitely in a coalition with the People 's Party .

I think it would be good to have a greater political presence of the Greens in the institutions of the Canary Islands , but with initiatives like this , full of demagogy and false accusations , believe me , I would like to say to the Member tabling the amendments , you are going in the wrong direction and you will have less and less political and social support in the Canary Islands .

Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I stand in support of Mr Galeote 's report as well as the comments made by Commissioner Borg , and the information from Mr Fernández Martín .

I think that the regulation is absolutely necessary , because the Canary Islands is a region with 2 million inhabitants , that attracts many millions of tourists , and as Mr Fernández Martín said , having lost the Western Sahara fishing grounds the Canaries depend on fish imports to survive and to supply the tourist industry .
To suppose that at the moment , in the customs of the Canaries , that are subject to strict controls by the Spanish State and the European Union , products entering under a special tariff system are going to be diverted is a serious accusation against the functioning of the institutions of the Spanish State and also shows that those tabling the amendments know very little about the real situation in the Canaries .
They should visit the Canary Islands and see how the port operations run before tabling hasty amendments .
I think Mr Borg said that the procedure , or the monitoring of the entry and exit procedures for fishery products , was going to be done by the Commission , and that is happening right now .
If any anomalies are revealed , action will have to be taken accordingly .
We should not , however , accept this type of amendment , that would result in the removal of the concessions that the European Union makes so that , in our region , this small and modest region , with a surface area of only 7 500 km2 , and 2 million inhabitants , we can continue to survive .
If the amendments are adopted , those who have tabled them will have succeeded in putting up prices for the citizens of the Canaries and making the difficult task of maintaining the tourist industry still more difficult .
I therefore hope that , as occurred in the Committee on Regional Development , the plenary of the European Parliament will give overwhelming support to the proposal that Mr Galeote has put to us .
I would like to take this opportunity to say that within the European Union the difficulties faced by the outermost regions are not generally understood .
We are currently also discussing the subject of emissions trading .
The measures that can generally be adopted by a central region of the European Union can have a devastating effect on the outermost regions of the Union .
We are talking about small territories , in total a population of 4 million inhabitants , distributed in islands in the Pacific , the Atlantic and the Caribbean , which will find themselves in difficulty if special measures are not applied to them .
I therefore ask my fellow Members who tabled these amendments , before acting in this way , to find out what the real situation is and to understand the problems faced by these outermost regions .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I take note of Commissioner Borg 's statement that fraud involving illegally harvested fish is to be tackled by means of horizontal measures .
To the Spanish Members who have alleged here in a particularly vigilant and occasionally even aggressive way that I am telling lies , I would say that they are really burying their heads in the sand .
I do not obtain my information from just anywhere .
I obtained this information from answers to parliamentary questions , from the Commission 's answer to a question by a fellow Member .
To these Spanish Members I would say that the Commission has sent Spain a reasoned opinion on grounds that there is some manner of fraud taking place at all the country 's ports .
This includes Las Palmas .
The Commission told me itself that the number of inspectors has been increased from two to seven , which it still regards as insufficient .
Sources have told me that inspections only take place on working days between 8 a.m. and 3 p.m.
I wish to investigate this further , and I shall undertake further parliamentary initiatives in order to find out how the fight against fraud is progressing throughout Europe and most particularly in Spain .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , from the debate it is clear that our objective is a shared one , both in terms of our support through the proposed measure for the outermost region of the Canaries , but also in our commitment to combat IUU .
I repeat what I have just said , that we are committed to fighting IUU and have proposed a comprehensive regulation which we hope will be adopted in two weeks ' time in the Council meeting on 24 June .
Therefore , we believe that the approach to IUU should remain horizontal and that , consequently , proposing amendments to this regulation is not the appropriate way of moving forward .
With regard to the comment made by Mr Staes , I would like to say that the infringement procedure , which is infringement procedure 2002 / 2184 , is still active .
The information received as a result of the various inspections carried out indicates that there have been improvements , though the Commission will further evaluate the situation and , more specifically , it will decide whether a final inspection is needed to bring this procedure to a conclusion .
By this I mean to say that either the procedure will be brought to an end if Spain is found to comply , or we will continue proceedings before the Court of Justice in order to attain a decision on this whole question .

Mr President , I am going to be very brief because of the late hour , but especially because , firstly , the European Commission , which I assume is not suspicious , has been decisive in endorsing the controls established by the regional and national authorities and , in fact , here we are debating its proposal ; secondly , because 27 of the 27 Member States have given it their support ; and , thirdly , because the Committee on Regional Development adopted the proposal practically unanimously .
The attitude of Mr Staes reminds me of the mother who went to see her son at the passing out parade for his military service and said to the person beside her : ' Look how good my son is , because he is the only one who is marching properly , all the rest of his company are out of step ' .
I would ask those tabling the amendments to think again .
Could it be that in this case they are the ones who are mistaken and not the rest of humanity ?
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 18 June 2008 .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.15 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
1 .
Approval of the new allocation of the responsibilities of Vice-President of the Commission Jacques Barrot ( vote )
2 .
Approval of the appointment of Antonio Tajani as member of the European Commission ( vote )
3 .
Missing persons in Cyprus - Follow-up (
4 .
Common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals (
- After the vote on Amendment 74 :
( PL ) I should like to draw your attention to the fact that some Members on the left of the Chamber are displaying banners .
We were informed this morning that holding up banners on the right of the Chamber contravened our procedures .
In principle , anything that does not directly disrupt our work does not have to be banned , but if the House thinks that these placards are disrupting the work ...
Well , I do not think that there is a majority that considers itself to be disrupted .
We shall therefore continue .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Welcome
As President , I would today like to welcome 10 members of the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly , led by its Speaker , Mr Wani Igga , who have travelled all the way to Strasbourg to visit the European Parliament .
( Applause )
The Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly , in which they sit , was set up as a result of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed in 2005 after a long and brutal civil war .
The Assembly plays a crucial role in monitoring the implementation of legislation and implementation of the Peace Agreement .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I wish to say that we support your Assembly , which has to cope with the challenges currently facing Sudan , especially with the prospect of the elections scheduled for next year .
We hope that your visit will help you to find a peaceful solution to the Sudan conflict and that it will stimulate political dialogue between the European Parliament and your Assembly on the reconstruction process following the conflict in your country .
I therefore welcome you to the European Parliament .
Formal sitting - 2008 , European Year of Intercultural Dialogue

Ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the President of the European Parliament , I have the great honour and pleasure , in this European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , of welcoming to the European Parliament the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief , Dr Asma Jahangir .
Our Parliament attaches particular importance to this Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
Through a series of events and initiatives , our Parliament provides a forum for the exchange of ideas between citizens from different cultures and communities , and between citizens of different religions and beliefs .
In the course of this year , we have already invited politicians and religious leaders from around the world to address us .
We hope that our Parliament will also serve as a forum for communication , the spreading of a common message and the promotion of genuine free dialogue and better mutual acquaintance .
It is my particular pleasure to welcome you , Dr Jahangir , to address the plenary on issues of vital importance to world peace and development .
As part of our common mission to promote democracy and human rights , we have been closely watching events in your country , Pakistan , and during your detention last year , the European Parliament passed a resolution calling for your immediate release .
For this reason above all , we are particularly glad to have you with us today .
There is another reason why your visit is especially significant at this time .
This year we are celebrating the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 10 December 1948 .
This Declaration heralded a new era in a world that had just survived the tribulations of the worst war in history , a war that began in Europe .
The Declaration laid down the first international , formal obligation regarding the dignity and equality of all human beings , regardless of colour , belief or origin .
Article 18 of the Declaration states that ' Everyone has the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion ; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief , and freedom , either alone or in community with others and in public or private , to manifest his religion or belief in teaching , practice , worship and observance . '
Your task as Special UN Rapporteur is to identify existing barriers or possible future barriers to the exercise of this right , and to propose methods and measures to counteract and overcome them .
In your reports , you emphasise the importance of ongoing , intensified dialogue with communities that adhere to different religions or beliefs .
This is a dialogue that must be held at all levels , by all social groups .
In particular , you emphasise the need for widespread participation by women in promoting greater tolerance , respect and mutual understanding .
In many of its resolutions , the European Parliament has highlighted the fact that women play a vital role in promoting dialogue and peace , as was also underlined at the conference that we organised on the occasion of International Women 's Day .
You yourself have participated in many conferences on the promotion of dialogue , for example in the context of the Alliance of Civilizations , and have taken many initiatives to give women a greater role .
You have also stressed the role of education as the most important factor in preventing conflict .
Education can teach respect and the acceptance of pluralism and diversity in the context of religion and beliefs .
It thus contributes to the dissemination and enforcement of human rights in all societies .
What you are advocating is in line with the motto of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , ' Together in Diversity ' .
It complements the leading role assigned to activities promoting knowledge , respect , and tolerance of different beliefs .
Today 's meeting is a grand occasion .
For those wishing to continue the discussion with you , there will be a special meeting tomorrow morning , organised by the Subcommittee on Human Rights .
Dr Jahangir , I have great pleasure in inviting you now to address the European Parliament .
( applause )
United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief . - Madam President , distinguished Members of the European Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , dear friends , it is a great honour and an immense pleasure to be here with you today .
I would like to very warmly thank the President , Hans-Gert Pöttering , for having invited me to address the European Parliament .
I must also thank you for the support that you have given me , both as a UN Special Rapporteur and , personally , when I was a prisoner last year .
Your decision to designate 2008 as the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue and develop various related initiatives is indeed timely and very important .
The history of Europe has been shaped by many positive instances of intercultural dialogue .
However , a lack of such constructive dialogue is also noticeable , for example when we remind ourselves of the religious wars or the ghettoisation of certain believers in the Middle Ages .
In my speech I would like to share with you some thoughts , mainly on interreligious dialogue , based on the experience I have gained in the past four years as the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief .
I would like to raise four questions , basically with regard to the what , why , who and how of intercultural dialogue .
Let us start with the first question : what do we mean by intercultural dialogue ?
Already the terminology seems to be tricky : does ' intercultural ' also include ' interreligious ' dialogue ?
Of course , I would answer this question in the affirmative , since religions are part of culture .
At the same time , ' intra-religious ' tensions also need to be adequately addressed .
Consequently , intercultural dialogue should also take the believers of different denominations of the various religions on board and their ideas into account .
What about dialogue between theistic , non-theistic and atheistic believers ?
All of these believers are protected under international human rights law , as well as the right not to profess any religion or belief .
So , in my opinion , these dimensions should also be included in initiatives of intercultural dialogue .
At the level of the United Nations there are further terms , such as the Alliance of Civilizations or ' International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures 2010 ' .
These titles avoid the often contentious word ' religion ' , but they are very much designed to foster interreligious and intercultural dialogue , understanding and cooperation for peace .
So ' intercultural dialogue ' could be seen as a comprehensive term , including the various dimensions mentioned earlier on : interreligious dialogue and intra-religious approaches , also when they involve atheistic non-believers .
I very much like the way the European Parliament and the Council have described the goals of intercultural dialogue in their decision No 1983 / 2006 / EC , which established the European Year ' to strengthen respect for cultural diversity and deal with the complex reality in our societies and the coexistence of different cultural identities and beliefs .
Furthermore , it is important to highlight the contribution of different cultures to the Member States ' heritage and way of life and to recognise that culture and intercultural dialogue are essential for learning to live together in harmony . '
More importantly , the state must abide by policies and develop its governance skills to include diverse interests .
Both government and civil society have a role in creating an environment where people of various religions and beliefs can effortlessly interact .
As such , the concept of intercultural dialogue must be broadened .
This leads me to the second question : why is intercultural dialogue important ?
I am convinced that maintaining an intercultural dialogue is of the utmost importance in order to overcome sectarian and intransigent attitudes and to enhance religious tolerance all over the world .
Apart from education , interreligious dialogue constitutes one of the principal means of preventing misunderstandings , conflicts and violations in the area of freedom of religion or belief .
If conducted successfully , intercultural dialogue can indeed promote tolerance , respect and understanding .
Although cultures and religions may be quite different , there is no justification for saying that , because they are different , they do not have equal status .
While a vast number of people , regardless of their religion or belief , adhere to universal values , there have always been individuals who try to prove that their culture , their religion , their language or their history is superior to that of their neighbours .
My predecessor as United Nations Special Rapporteur , Professor Abdelfattah Amor from Tunisia , has already asked if there is anything that people have not done throughout history ' in the name of religion ' .
Nevertheless , religions share many moral values which could and should make it possible for them to come to a common understanding of respect .
During my country visits I have seen how beneficial efforts to engage in interreligious dialogue can be .
At the same time , the absence of such a dialogue may be an early-warning sign for forthcoming interreligious tensions and conflict .
It is evident that dialogue alone does not solve the underlying problems ; it may , rather , be a first step in the right direction .
Interreligious dialogue should not only be an intellectual and theological exercise , it can also activate the silent majority to look for a common strategy on how to find harmony and peace .
There are true success stories of interreligious dialogue ; however , the grass-root efforts rarely make headlines in the media - unlike interreligious violence .
Let me share with you two experiences from my recent fact-finding missions , which demonstrate that interlocutors do not have to go far in order to conduct a meaningful dialogue .
During my visit to Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory , I was informed of various interfaith meetings where Israeli and Palestinian residents come together and do not let recent political events hamper their dialogue .
One NGO reported : ' both Israelis and Palestinians spoke of frustration and despair about the extreme attitudes in each society and the reluctance of the majority to work together non-violently to find solutions .
Both spoke of the need to hear the other side acknowledge their own violence and express regret . '
Furthermore , in Northern Ireland I witnessed the importance of interreligious dialogue in the neighbourhoods : in Belfast there are many initiatives at the grass-root level that bring together people from different political and religious backgrounds , some of them living next to each other but partitioned by the so-called ' peace lines ' .
This brings us to the third question : who should be involved in intercultural dialogue ?
The Millennium World Peace Summit , held in New York in August 2000 , brought together over 1 000 religious and spiritual leaders .
In their final Commitment to Global Peace they emphasised that no real peace could be achieved unless all communities acknowledged the cultural and religious diversity of the human family in a spirit of mutual respect and understanding .
Such meetings of religious leaders are important , but , at the same time , interreligious dialogue at the grass-root levels should also be encouraged and nurtured .
In my opinion , exchanges of views should , if possible , also include believers who are dispassionate about their faith , as well as atheistic and non-theistic believers and members of religious minorities .
Any dialogue would also greatly benefit from the perspectives of women , who tend to be marginalised in major events of interreligious dialogue .
Women are one of the worst sufferers of religious intolerance , yet I noticed that women 's groups across religious lines have been very effective human rights advocates in situations of communal tensions .
Sometimes it may also be useful to have present people of the same faith with contrasting opinions .
One good example from my recent visit to the United Kingdom is a roundtable discussion in London which also dealt with legislation against discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation and statutory exceptions to organisations relating to religion or belief .
That discussion would have been completely different without the participation of members of the Lesbian and Gay Christian Movement .
Artists may also play an important role in public education regarding religious tolerance and in building bridges between different communities .
One good example is the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra , which is composed of young Israeli , Palestinian , Lebanese , Syrian , Jordanian and Egyptian musicians .
Its founder and conductor , Daniel Barenboim , described the humanitarian idea of this orchestra as follows : ' We don 't see ourselves as a political project , but rather as a forum where young people from Israel and all Arab countries can express themselves freely and openly whilst at the same time hearing the narrative of the other .
It is not necessarily a question of accepting the narrative of the other , let alone agreeing with it , but rather the indispensable need to accept its legitimacy . '
My most recent visit to India , however , has also shown how vulnerable even artists feel vis-à-vis mob pressure on the streets .
The visual arts industry there has played an important role in public education regarding religious tolerance .
However , some Bollywood films have effectively been banned by non-state actors through intimidation .
Regrettably , professionals of the audiovisual arts industry seem to routinely seek the approval of self-appointed custodians of religious sentiments before going ahead with a film which touches upon communal issues .
This shows how important the artist 's contribution to intercultural dialogue is - or at least could be .
Journalists and lawyers can also make a difference , especially when their statements and actions transcend religious lines .
There are innumerable examples where individuals have come to each other 's rescue , crossing all religious boundaries .
Furthermore - and more importantly - politicians would need to undertake a joint brainstorming on how to address the new challenges in a world that is getting even more globalised .
Such brainstorming could eventually lead to concrete actions with regard to mainstreaming diversity , for example in housing projects , school curricula and nominations to statutory bodies .
Finally , I would like to raise the fourth question : how can intercultural dialogue be conducted effectively ?
There are different levels of intercultural dialogue : international and regional organisations such as the UN , EU and OIC can play a role in facilitating platforms for intercultural dialogue .
Furthermore , NGOs are currently proposing to advance the culture of peace through dialogue and cooperation between individuals and communities of diverse religions and beliefs through a UN Decade of Interreligious Dialogue and Cooperation for Peace , possibly to run from 2011 to 2020 .
In this regard it seems vital to have a multitude of good initiatives at global , regional , national or local levels .
Let me highlight that it is also possible to use old , new and creative means of communication to establish intercultural dialogue at low cost , for example through penfriend programmes in schools or via Internet chats on specific topics , street theatre and puppet shows .
The EU 's Lifelong Learning Programmes can - and already do - serve as perfect platforms for intercultural and interreligious dialogue .
The various programmes are indeed examples of good practice : Comenius seeks to develop understanding of and between various European cultures through exchanges and cooperation between schools in different countries ; more than 1.5 million students have already participated in the higher education exchange programme Erasmus ; the Leonardo da Vinci scheme funds transnational mobility in vocational education and training ; the Grundtvig programme provides new learning opportunities , especially for adults at risk of social exclusion and for older workers ; and , finally , the Jean Monnet network is stimulating teaching , research and reflection on European integration at higher education institutions throughout the world .
Let me emphasise how important it is for the European Union to reach out to the whole world , especially in the framework of intercultural dialogue .
The role of educational institutions is vital .
They could either inculcate a spirit of tolerance or promote tensions , even at an early age .
Therefore , the emphasis must lie on enlightened education that teaches children to recognise the diversity that exists .
There is a significant potential of voluntary school exchanges with other countries , both in Europe and elsewhere .
In this regard I would like to refer to the 2001 International Consultative Conference on School Education in Relation to Freedom of Religion or Belief , Tolerance and Non-Discrimination .
It adopted by consensus the Madrid Final Document , which recommended that teachers and students are provided with voluntary opportunities for meetings and exchanges with their counterparts of different religions or beliefs .
The family is another entry point where open-mindedness can either be hampered or nurtured , very much depending on individual upbringing .
Furthermore , mixed marriages - quite naturally - give new perspectives and may facilitate intercultural or interreligious dialogue .
In my opinion it is important to start at an early age with getting acquainted with the approaches of your neighbours or of other religions .
This would not necessarily need to involve long-distance travel , but , for example , could be organised by setting foot and meeting people at your local church , mosque , synagogue , temple or other places of worship .
The size of the groups - especially for grass-root interfaith meetings - should not be too big , in order to give the interlocutors an opportunity to speak and to get to know each other personally .
However , there are several potential risks to intercultural dialogue : if not properly conducted , it may turn out to be a superficial , vague and ineffective exercise .
Furthermore , intercultural dialogue can also be used as a tool for emphasising the evil sides of the ' other ' .
Participants may feel tempted to convince their interlocutors of the superiority of their religion or culture .
Concerning the possible substance of dialogue , there is also a fundamental question to be answered : Should the participants also ask about their respective religions and theological approaches , or would this be dangerous ?
A positive aspect would be that the interlocutors can become aware of similar approaches but also of differences .
However , these differences may be interpreted as sensitive or even offensive .
Just think of a discussion focusing on contentious issues such as : Who was the last prophet ?
Did God have a son ?
Are religious leaders infallible ?
What are you supposed to eat or not to ?
Is there reincarnation ?
A tempting alternative might be to look only for non-contentious topics which are not at all related to theology , for example to discuss common environmental concerns .
But these topics may be difficult to find and could be quite boring and , ultimately , such an approach would defeat the purpose of a real intercultural and interreligious dialogue .
I do not think that it would help to add a layer of ' religious correctness ' to the existing approach of political correctness .
You sometimes hear from diplomats that we must not engage in criticising religions other than our own .
However , I would like to ask : Does dialogue exclude the possibility of criticising the tenets of other religions ?
In my opinion , in a true dialogue one of the options should also be that the interlocutors ultimately may agree to disagree , obviously while still respecting each other 's views and approaches .
( Applause )
If somebody wants to criticise their counterpart 's religion , it is , of course , advisable do so in an informed manner and to weigh one 's words carefully .
Furthermore , it may also help if mutual trust has already been established between the various groups .
I firmly believe , however , that it would be wrong to follow the approach of protecting religions per se rather than individuals or groups of believers , as affirmed by international human rights standards .
( Applause )
On many occasions I have voiced concerns that criminalising so-called defamation of religions can be counterproductive , since it may create an atmosphere of intolerance and fear and may even increase the chances of a backlash .
Accusations of defamation of religion might stifle legitimate criticism or even research on practices and laws appearing to be in violation of human rights that are - or at least are perceived to be - sanctioned by religion .
Finally , I believe that the rule of law and the functioning of democratic institutions are prerequisites for the establishment of a favourable climate which would be conducive to real dialogue and understanding .
People need to have trust in the system , and thus diversity within institutions may contribute to creating such an environment .
Intercultural dialogue should not be imposed or be designed in a condescending way .
The policies of states in this regard should give room and space for the variety of religions and beliefs , thus creating natural opportunities for interaction and understanding .
These are my ideas on the what , why , who and how of intercultural dialogue .
I am afraid that , rather than providing comprehensive answers , I may have raised a number of new issues .
In my observations I have already alluded to the potential - but also to possible pitfalls - of intercultural dialogue .
It seems crucial to institutionalise an intercultural dialogue at various levels in the right format and with a wide selection of participants , while still allowing for a real exchange of views .
I think that joint declarations and statements by religious leaders are important ; however , I would like to take this opportunity to emphasise the vital role of grass-root initiatives , concrete meetings and joint actions .
I also believe that it is better to have a war of words than to have tensions that are long-lasting .
When average , theistic , atheistic and non-theistic believers get together , some of them perhaps for the first time ever , they - hopefully - learn a lot from each other , even if they finally disagree on substantive issues .
Universal values should serve as a bridge between different religions and beliefs , and I do not accept the fact that universal values of human rights can be and should be subservient to either social or religious norms .
( Applause )
This may , ultimately , also lead to the reinforcement of universal human rights , both in terms of promoting and protecting human rights and freedoms .
In conclusion I would like to cite Boutros Boutros-Ghali , the former UN Secretary-General , who said : ' Human rights , when viewed from a universal perspective , force us to face the most demanding of all dialectics : the dialectics of identity and otherness , of " self ” and " the other ” .
They teach us , in the most direct way , that we are , at one and the same time , the same and different . '
( The House accorded the speaker a standing ovation . )
Dr Jahangir , thank you very much for your address .
We have listened very carefully to what you have said , which was based on your respect for human rights , your wealth of experience , and what the important work you do is all about .
I hope your visit to the European Parliament will give us the opportunity for wider cooperation in our common mission for democracy , peace and development .
1 .
Internal market in electricity (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , this report is the first in a package of measures dealing with the energy markets in the EU .
There has been a great deal of cooperation between all the rapporteurs and the shadows on this package and we would like to send a message to the Council that we intend to negotiate this as a package , not as a series of individual reports .
There is one aspect of the Electricity Directive which has caused a great deal of division within the Parliament .
This is , unusually , broken down on a national basis , not on a party political basis .
I would urge colleagues , however , to consider the report as a whole . It includes tackling energy poverty , better rights for consumers and measures to make the market work better .
- Before the vote on Amendment 169 :

( EL ) Mr President , let me request , under Rule 150 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , that the amendment be kept on the voting list , since it has been supported by 40 Members .
You would be perfectly right if the amendment had not lapsed as a result of the previous vote .
You could have moved it yourself but as it lapsed because of the previous vote , unfortunately you cannot table it yourself .
2 .
Conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity (
- Before the vote on Article 2e :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wish to add the following to Article 2e .
I will read it out in English :
' The European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity shall collect all relevant information regarding the implementation of the network codes and submit it to the Agency for evaluation ; ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
3 .
Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (
- Before the vote :
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to ask for a separate vote on Amendment 18 because it deals with the Agency 's seat .
I am thus calling for a separate vote .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I object to this request .
This report is a package which has been agreed amongst the groups .
I do not think it is appropriate to make a request after the deadline and to open up the package in this way , so I ask my colleagues to join me in objecting to this .
( Parliament rejected the request )
4 .
Protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users (
5 .
Adaptation of a number of instruments to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , " omnibus " Regulation , Part One (
- Before the vote :
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Permit me this opportunity to convey my satisfaction on behalf of the Council at the good results of the long-term and extensive work on this technical dossier .
It was possible to conclude this dossier primarily thanks to the creative cooperation of all three institutions , and I would like to take this opportunity to thank especially the rapporteur , József Szájer , for his cooperation and the work done .
Now that this part of the adjustment has been concluded , both legislative branches , and especially the European Parliament , will be able to exercise control over the executive powers of the Commission in connection with numerous legislative acts in important fields .
In conclusion I would also like to see this kind of creative cooperation continue during the coming French Presidency .
rapporteur . - Mr President , as a result of the vote just cast , for the first time Parliament acquires the real right of control and veto over the normative executive acts of the European Commission on an equal footing with the Council .
By adopting the two omnibus packages we take a very big step in eliminating the democratic deficit of the Union .
I also want to remind colleagues that our new power of control over the EU executive requires from us more work than before .
Parliament has to prepare itself for the new task of the comitology procedure .
I thank the Council , and especially the Slovenian presidency , and the Commission , particularly because they both are giving up important and so far exclusive rights and conceding them to Parliament , and they are both losing exclusive powers .
I would also like to thank our colleagues in the respective committees who understand the importance of the new empowerment of the European Parliament .
They acted very quickly and flexibly on this dossier .
Our vote today will contribute greatly to a better , more democratic and a much more transparent European Union .
Thank you for your support .
( Applause )
6 .
Adaptation of a number of instruments to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , " omnibus " Regulation , Part Three (
7 .
Autonomous Community tariff quotas on imports of certain fishery products into the Canary Islands (
8 .
Statute of the European Ombudsman (
- Before the vote on Amendment 8 :
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) The Presidency wishes on behalf of the Council to confirm its approval of the amendment of the Statute for the European Ombudsman , which has been the subject of voting in this esteemed assembly .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the European Parliament and the European Commission for their creative cooperation .
On the basis of this creative cooperation , we reached agreement on the modification of the Statute in a relatively short time .
Special thanks on behalf of the Council are owed to the rapporteur Mrs Jäätteenmäki , the chairman of the AFCO committee Mr Leinen , and Mr Méndez de Vigo MEP .
The Council welcomes this important achievement .
Indeed we believe that the amendment of the Statute will increase the confidence of citizens in the proper functioning of European institutions and the European Union as a whole .
Voting time ( continued )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Mr President , I supported Commissioner Barrot 's candidacy in today 's vote .
The Commissioner has undertaken to adopt a strong stance in negotiations with the United States on the issue of visa-free tourist travel for citizens of all European Union countries .
In addition , the Commissioner 's proposal on tackling the problems of asylum seekers in the spirit of solidarity , and notably providing assistance to countries such as Poland who are responsible for securing the external borders of the Schengen area , has convinced me that Commissioner Barrot has a sound grasp of the problems within the remit of the Directorate-General for Justice , Freedom and Security .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , first of all I would like to apologise for my absence during this crucial vote .
As the train from Paris to Strasbourg was one and a quarter hours late several of my colleagues and I were unable to vote on this Directive and resolution .
Like my group I would have voted completely against the resolution and the directive .
I wish here and now to express my deepest disgust .
The dignity of this Parliament and of the wider European Union is not in keeping with the detention centres in which we house tens , hundreds or even thousands of our fellow citizens who are immigrants or are from an immigrant background .
All this seems to smack of self-protection on the part of the European Union , which is something that I and my group find unacceptable .
Of course measures need to be taken today to control migratory flows , but the defensive actions that have just been voted on are not a proper response to economic migration or to climate migration , which will not be long in coming .
If the European Union , the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council were to provide the development aid that is so essentially needed then perhaps we would be entitled to react in this way , but we are not there yet .
Where we are at , in fact , is 0.38 % of the budget instead of 0.42 % , after having planned for 0.7 % .
Let me say this in all seriousness : I am ashamed for our Parliament and I am ashamed for the European Union that we are seeking to build , which should be a Union that is open and hospitable and that is able to welcome into its fold all citizens of the world .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the compromise reached between the European Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Weber , and the Home Affairs Ministers on the so-called Returns Directive is a bad compromise which casts doubt on the European Union 's credibility in the field of human rights .
My group therefore resoundingly rejects the Directive .
As a co-legislator , Parliament had a legal and moral duty to work to achieve rules which are acceptable but above all , are compatible with human dignity .
It should have exercised this responsibility in full and fought for such rules .
Instead , a majority in Parliament has allowed the Council to impose its own rules , purely and simply so that the Directive can be pushed through at first reading .
Even though the Directive might improve the legal position in some individual Member States , perhaps because national law does not set an upper limit on the period of detention , it is the overall context which is crucial .
The Directive legitimises up to 18 months ' detention for people whose only ' crime ' is to seek a better life for themselves and their family in Europe .
In our view , current deportation practice in the Member States does not justify or excuse treating the needy as criminals now or in future .
Instead of giving their blessing to the current practice - which violates the human rights of ' illegally staying third-country nationals ' - at European level as well , the Member States should be looking for a lasting solution to the problem of migration .
For our Group , this means , above all , finally establishing a common legal immigration policy which safeguards the human rights of migrants and offers prospects to people in great need who enter Europe , often risking their lives to do so .
The European Parliament has missed the opportunity to act on its responsibility here and stand fast against the Council .
The urgent appeals of numerous human rights organisations and the churches have unfortunately been ignored .
( HU ) I too would like to add an explanation of my vote on the Weber report .
As a Member of this Parliament I believe it is important to adopt this report , which represents a first step towards a European Union policy on immigration .
At the same time , as a human rights and minority rights lawyer I believe that my yes vote is justified .
The Weber report is the result of a difficult compromise , in the course of which Parliament has been able to ensure that a good number of humanitarian and human rights viewpoints have been incorporated in the text .
In areas where there is no regulation , this represents progress .
In areas where there is already broad-based regulation , it cannot pull down higher standards .
As is the case with all compromises , there are weak points , vulnerable points in the text .
I therefore understand the reservations expressed by religious organisations and lay persons , and I agree with them that we cannot allow the high-flown language of the legislation to be used to circumvent humanitarian or human rights considerations .
We cannot allow this text to be the source of new tragedies or for splitting families up ; there has already been enough suffering in the lives of immigrants who come to us seeking a more humane existence .
Thank you .
- ( NL ) Mr President , I voted for the Weber report , but I have to say to you that it was with some reservations .
People on the left and the extreme left have raised a hue and cry against the Directive .
They have presented it as if the human rights of the illegal migrants are being blatantly denied by the Directive , whereas in fact the opposite is the case .
In the first place , for instance , the regularisation of illegal migrants by a European Directive will be pushed forward as an acceptable policy option .
The Member States will also be obliged to provide free legal assistance to illegal migrants who request it .
It is not acceptable to let people gain rights from a situation of illegality .
Apart from that many elements in the Directive are entirely without obligation .
Having said that , the Directive offers some Member States the opportunity to detain illegal migrants for longer with a view to their deportation .
Another positive provision is the five-year re-entry ban following a deportation to prevent them from coming into the rest of Europe .
The immigration problem requires much more radical measures that those supported in this report , but it is a step in the right direction .
- ( NL ) Mr President , let us take a moment to look at the figures .
In about 100 years the world population will have multiplied about sevenfold , from 1 billion to 7 billion people .
This population explosion cannot continue without consequences for a prosperous European continent that also has to contend with a huge demographic deficit .
The immigration problems that we have today are very serious indeed , but they are still manageable compared with what will descend on us in decades to come .
When we look at it from this perspective , the measures provided for in this supposed Returns Directive are actually futile and are certainly insufficient .
We will need to do a great deal more than these half-hearted measures taking two steps forward and one step back to stem the illegal flow .
However , because a small signal for a policy to return illegal migrants is better than nothing at all , I voted for the Weber report but without enthusiasm .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , by voting in favour of the Weber report , we may have taken a crucial step towards drawing up a comprehensive framework of measures against illegal immigration : measures that will respond to the security demands of a huge number of European citizens , many of them victims of crime perpetrated by third-country nationals .
I am pleased to ascertain , to note , that the European Parliament , guarantor of universal freedom and rights , has at last come out in favour of a common policy to meet the needs of Member States in the fight against illegal immigration .
We have made clear that the aim is not just to detect those who are staying illegally , but also to put in place clear , transparent and rapid return procedures .
It is therefore not only a matter of clamping down on the phenomenon , as some would have it , for instance with the re-entry ban ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) I voted in favour of some amendments - four , to be precise - that sought to improve this directive .
However , I also voted in favour of the final directive , even though these amendments were not approved .
I believe that this directive substantially improves the rights of irregularly-staying immigrants in many European Union countries . That is something that cannot be denied : we only have to compare the laws that currently exist throughout the Union .
Obviously it is not the directive that some of us would have drawn up if we had had the chance to do so , if each of us had been left to prepare it individually .
However , there has to be balance in the codecision procedure between the legitimacy of the European Parliament and the legitimacy of the all of the national parliaments and governments .
It is the national parliaments that now bear a great responsibility in terms of applying this directive , just as the European Commission and the Court of Justice have to monitor its application .
From now on , restrictions on rights in the Member States are subject to European law ; they are no longer national decisions .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to see that I am still admired by many colleagues , whom I should of course like to thank for having waited to hear why I voted in favour of the Weber report .
Mr President , I believe that we are facing something not very different from the Barbarian invasions of the Roman Empire 2 000 and more years ago .
At that time the Roman Empire was invaded by armed troops , and the Romans took up arms to defend themselves but succumbed , as we all know , in tragic circumstances .
Now that Europe is the destination of inhabitants of all the other countries in the world - they are quite right , of course , because they are hungry , just as the Barbarians were hungry and wanted to nourish themselves at the fountains of Rome - Europe is entitled to defend itself and to establish that those wishing to invade our territories must be escorted back to the border .
( FR ) Mr President , with 10 million illegal immigrants in Europe and with a Boeing holding 300 passengers we would need to fill more than 30 000 Boeings in order to meet the provisions of the Directive on the return process .
That means more than 1 000 Boeings taking off from each of the 27 European capitals over a period of three years .
In terms of numbers this would clearly be a mad and surreal proposal .
However , there is something even more insane .
As immigration is in fact nothing more than the social reflection of economic globalisation , where world capitalism makes workers compete with each other , what we are doing is producing a Directive to deal with the reflection of a problem .
I do not know if this is a case of hypocrisy or someone 's idea of a joke , but in any case it is certainly short-sighted .
The nomads of the planet keep on the move because they want to eat and drink , look after themselves and educate themselves .
Food and the shortage of it , water and the distribution of it , pandemics and the manner in which they spread are all now part of what the nations of the world have in common .
The sooner we act together to tackle and manage politically our common problems the sooner we will be able to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( FR ) Mr President , the emigrationists have waged a disinformation campaign against this Directive on the return of illegal immigrants , which they call the ' Directive of shame ' .
This is no more than well-organised political play-acting between left and right .
The left protests in order to obtain additional rights for immigrants and when it gets them it pretends that the whole process is firm and rigid .
In reality the document as amended protects the rights of returnable immigrants and their continued stay in Europe much more than it ensures their repatriation .
Holding people in detention centres is an extremely restricted measure of last resort and the 18-month detention period is the absolute upper limit to be used in very exceptional cases only .
Those countries that have legal limits below this will retain them .
The deadline for voluntary return saves those concerned from being banned from the territory of the European Union and Member States are called on to regularise this on the slightest pretext .
In other words , France , which has the most lenient legislation in all Europe , will not be forced to change it , even less to take a harder line .
Mr Sarkozy may want people to think the opposite , helped out by the posturing of the left .
It is only because of some of the positive aspects of this document that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , there was a wonderful symbolism this morning .
One after another the speakers stood up and said that they would respect the Irish people .
Then immediately afterwards in the vote we pushed through this report , which is the first step towards creating a common policy on immigration and asylum , which would have been a large part of the Lisbon Treaty .
If we were serious about respecting the vote of the Irish people , far from proceeding with this stealthy implementation of the provisions of that text , we would start reversing those parts that were brought in in anticipation of a ' yes ' vote , including the European External Action Service and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Mrs Wallström said this morning that it was important to find out why people had voted no .
What had they been voting against ? she asked .
Let me help her with that : I suggest that they were voting against the Lisbon Treaty .
The give-away was the ballot paper which asked whether they wanted to approve the Lisbon Treaty .
Mr Cohn-Bendit said that it would be quite wrong to have one million people deciding the fate of half a billion Europeans .
Well , I am happy to agree with that .
Give the half billion their referendums too .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I rejected this report because it misses the target on three important points .
Firstly , it was not possible to secure the adoption of Amendments 170 and 171 , which were particularly important in terms of regional networks and would have created exemptions which are justified on grounds of size .
Secondly , the third way was also not accepted .
It is important to have planning predictability in the energy sector , but unfortunately , the Commission prevailed with its legal unbundling and total unbundling .
In my view , this is unlikely to move us in the right direction .
Thirdly , we failed to establish liability for the nuclear industry in the event of accidents .
For all these reasons , the Austrian People 's Party ( ÖVP ) opposed the report and was unable to vote in favour of the package .
( CS ) I voted for the report by my fellow Member Mrs Morgan because I agree that it is necessary to ensure a secure supply of gas and electricity , a sustainable , low-carbon energy market and global competitiveness .
How to reach this goal was one of the issues debated here in plenary yesterday .
There is no clear-cut evidence to prove that full ownership unbundling automatically leads to increased investment and improved network performance .
In this regard , I can still see some room for manoeuvre in the search for a solution that is beneficial both to consumers and other parties who might wish to enter the market .
In order to create a pan-European electricity market , we need more intensive regional cooperation in the area of cross-border transmission and coordination of investment and operational activities .
Consequently , I support the principle of strengthening the mechanisms coordinating regional cooperation .
( PL ) Mr President , the common market implies greater competition and consequently higher standards .
Participants in the market are therefore obliged to make the appropriate investments and improve the capacity of their distribution networks .
This results in safer supplies and fewer problems with energy supply .
The creation of an internal market in energy is very important , as we can observe that the demand for energy is constantly increasing .
The internal market in energy represents an important step in the right direction , but it is still not enough to ensure Europe 's energy security .
We need to create a common energy policy in the spirit of solidarity .
Suitable mechanisms should be devised , allowing Member States to support each other if energy crises arise .
It is even more important , however , for Europe to at last begin to speak with one voice on external energy policy .
Energy security can only be achieved through a cohesive , effective and above all common policy .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the Morgan report .
I thought there were some very important elements there .
We obviously need a far more competitive energy industry in Europe to ensure that everyone across Europe benefits from better competition , lower prices and better-value quality services .
I particularly welcomed the passage on decentralised generation , especially where it said , ' We must ensure that power is returned to the people through support for local and micro generation ' .
Those of us who support direct democracy in a localism agenda would say , ' Why stop at energy ? '
Why not devolve more power in a whole series of areas , not only back to national governments , but also to local communities - those people closest to the issue that is being legislated on ?
Here I sit with my colleagues , Daniel Hannan and Chris Heaton-Harris , who are also members of a great organisation called the Direct Democracy Movement .
If you truly believe in power to the people , we should devolve power back to them and ask them what they want .
If you truly ask them about the Lisbon Treaty - as we did in Ireland - they would say ' no ' .
Mr President , I too supported the Morgan report because I am convinced that we should be unbundling ownership fully in this particular sector , and the experience of Member States indicates that full ownership unbundling leads to increased investment and improved network performance .
However , I want to talk about local generation as well , because I believe this is a good step forward , as long as local projects are supported by local people and benefit the local area .
In the region I represent , in the constituency of Daventry , we have a number of unwanted wind-farm proposals .
Some have been defeated , some are coming forward , but none will service the local area .
They are all based on some sort of new ' subsidy farming ' created by a British Government directive stating that we need to head down this particular route of renewables and nothing else .
It is a very short-sighted focus on what we should be doing .
So surely , if we are going to go down to the most local of areas to produce our energy , we should trust the people locally to take on the solutions that they need .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report .
I think it is sensible to have a European internal market in the energy sector , so we need a network of transmission system operators .
However , we must ensure that when it comes to implementation , we genuinely create a level playing field but provide leeway for regional exemptions at the same time .
It must be possible to provide cross-subsidies between various energy sectors in order to secure the energy supply in Europe 's most remote regions and valleys and on its islands .
We can assume that supplying energy here is far more expensive and therefore less financially attractive to companies , so we need to be able to strike a proper balance here .
I have one brief comment for my British colleagues : as I understand it , there has only ever been one referendum held in Great Britain , namely on accession to the Community .
Perhaps you should change your national constitution to allow the introduction of this instrument of direct democracy .
That is something which I would greatly welcome .
Mr President , I apologise for my tardiness in getting up to speak .
I was applauding the previous speaker who made a very valuable conclusion to his speech .
My comments are also relevant to the Chichester report , so I think I will take the comments together rather than asking for two separate speaking times .
In some ways this report may highlight one of the potential flaws in the thinking of the Eurocrats and people who quite often sit in this House , namely that , whatever the problem , Europe has to be the solution .
Of course I welcome an agency of European regulators where national regulators are working together , but let us not forget that quite often the regulators who are best placed to understand local circumstances are national regulators .
Let us not allow this body to become a European super-regulator .
Let us make sure that the regulator understands local nuances and is truly accountable to local people .
If we were accountable to local people , then they would have the opportunity to vote against the Constitution .
Mr President , I am already thinking of my press release and I think I shall start by speaking ' to a packed House ' - although maybe I should just say speaking ' to a packed interpretation booth ' .
I appreciate the interpreters for staying on , missing their lunch and listening to these things .
I am an English soccer referee and I therefore fear every Polish politician in this House who wants to kill such a person .
However , I was thinking , after watching the football last night - especially the France-Italy game - that maybe the French team should do what their political masters do and completely ignore the result and turn up at the quarter finals anyway , because that is what we are going to do with the Lisbon Treaty in this place .
The reason - and , Mr President , you might wonder how I am going to get to the report , and so do I sometimes - we do not need the Lisbon Treaty is proved within this report .
The EU will not grind to a halt without this Treaty .
Today we successfully voted on a massive change in institutional organisation in this place - and we did not need an extra treaty to do it .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( RO ) I appreciate very much the firmness and lack of doubt with which Mr. Barrot undertook to support the rights related to the European citizenship and , in particular , the freedom of movement , on the occasion of his hearing on Monday .
The rights and freedoms of the European citizens are the most important gains from the European integration and should not be jeopardized under any circumstance and no matter the reasons that might be invoked .
The citizens of the country I represent in this forum , Romania , watch carefully and with concern the discussions regarding the freedom of movement from certain Member States .
The Romanian citizens from abroad , who are , most of them , correct and hard-working workers , bring incontestable benefits to the economies of the countries where they work .
They - and I am convinced that they are not the only ones - are expecting the European Commission to play an active and firm role in defending the full freedom of movement .
I hope with all my heart that Mr. Barrot 's entire mandate will stay under the sign of this commitment to defend the rights of the European citizens .
in writing . - ( PT ) We are confronted by a humanitarian drama in which families are not only suffering the pain of their relatives being missing , but have also had to live for decades with the agony of not knowing their fate .
For this reason , I consider it vital that all parties concerned continue to cooperate constructively so that the investigations being carried out into the fate of all missing persons in Cyprus can be speedily completed .
The role played by the CMP ( Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus ) is also vital in terms of identifying any human remains found .
As the EU 's financial contribution to the CMP project only covers the period to the end of 2008 , I therefore support the allocation of further financial assistance to the CMP so that it can continue its activities in 2009 .
This contribution should also enable it to increase its capacity , particularly in the field , to hire more scientists and to fund more equipment as necessary .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have nothing against the Cypriot committee getting further help and financial contributions for its continued work , but we think that the money should be allocated to the Red Cross , which has experience and expertise in the field .
We therefore choose to vote against the proposal .
in writing . - ( DE ) As the rapporteur , I welcome the European Parliament 's overwhelming endorsement of the resolution on missing persons in Cyprus .
It is the right of every relative of the missing persons to know their fate through the exhumation and identification of the remains .
Locating the remains of their relatives , who have been missing for decades , and giving them a decent burial is the only way for Greek and Turkish Cypriots to close this painful chapter in their lives , for it finally gives them certain knowledge of the fate of their loved ones .
I am convinced that this can make an important contribution to the positive moves towards the reunification of Cyprus .
Through the provision of funding , the EU is already actively supporting the work of the Committee on Missing Persons ( CMP ) at the exhumation sites , in the anthropological laboratories and with the families concerned .
It is important , in this context , that the Committee on Missing Persons should carry out all the necessary investigations and analyses while there are still eyewitnesses available who can provide information about this humanitarian problem of missing persons .
I therefore consider it essential to provide for an additional amount of EUR 2 million in the general budget of the European Union for 2009 , and would urge the Council and the European Commission to reach agreement on this extra financial support .
in writing . - I voted against this report because it makes it harder for nation states to return illegal immigrants .
And once given residence in EU Member States , those illegal immigrants would find it easier to enter Britain , thereby adding to the burden of illegal immigration in the UK .
Immigration and asylum policy should in any case be decided by democratic nation states not the European Union .
in writing . - ( IT ) Thank you , Mr President .
I voted against the Weber report following the rejection of the PSE amendments .
There is undoubtedly a need for legislation in this highly sensitive area , not least in view of the arbitrary interpretations often applied by Member States .
Nevertheless , the current proposal contains unwarranted shortcomings .
For example , the treatment envisaged for unaccompanied minors is unacceptable , as is the failure to include guarantees for persons in difficulty , such as victims of trafficking , pregnant women , the elderly and the disabled .
Another absurdity is the provision whereby the period of detention may be increased in the absence of ' administrative ' cooperation from the country of origin .
The situation of Sudanese refugees , for instance , will be dependent on the efficiency of municipal registry offices .
We needed firm rules to guarantee the safety of our citizens , not harassment which is an affront to human dignity .
Europe has written an ugly page of its history today .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party ( EPLP ) has abstained on the legislative proposal , due to the fact the UK is not obliged to follow this Directive , as it has an opt-out / opt in on JHA measures concerning immigration and asylum .
However it was very important to consider our responsibility carefully as it would have had a direct effect on those countries legally bound by this Directive .
The Weber report required a series of amendments that would have improved on the rapporteur 's draft .
It was important that the report should have included the particular amendments as recommended by the PSE Group .
As these amendments were not adopted we have abstained on this report .
These were :
Amendment 98 ensuring the protecting of unaccompanied minors ;
Amendment 103 concerning the length of detention and conditions ;
Amendment 95 on the definition of the risk of absconding .
Overall the EPLP feels that this report did not enhance the capabilities of EU States to deal effectively yet humanely with the returning of third country nationals residing illegally in the EU but has instead added extra burdens to an already complicated and highly emotionally charged issue .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Directive on illegal immigration poses an impossible dilemma .
On the one hand , the lack of rules opens the door to many cases of inhumane practices involving immigrants .
On the other hand , there is little positive consensus on this Directive , which is built around many vague concepts and references to the discretion of Member States .
In other words , this Directive is weak .
The compromise agreement does not achieve the ambition of a European Europe .
Parliament now has the impossible task of choosing between chaos leading to barbarism and poor or incomplete rules , without having made any of the noise that a true parliament should make .
Due to sheer bad luck , nothing more can be expected from the Council , and the Commission is dragging its feet in setting up a European solidarity fund with the countries of origin of illegal immigration and with the Member States in southern Europe which are directly suffering the misery .
It is ironic that a sincere vote today means voting with your eyes closed .
in writing . - We voted to reject the report because we don 't want any kind of European Common Immigration Policy .
We feel that it should be up to individual states to decide who is expelled from their territory and under what circumstances .
Whilst we almost never vote for any legislation , we would like to point out that we did vote in favour of Amendment 75 , which rejected the Commission 's proposal for a common expulsion policy , but not for the reasons / justification given by the group which tabled the amendment .
We had our own reasons for rejection .
This is regardless of the fact this directive does not apply in the UK . It is the principle behind this that drove our voting decision .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am pleased that the Weber report on the Returns Directive has been adopted by a large majority .
This vote is the very illustration of the fact that the European Parliament has not given in to the populist and electioneering campaign that was waged against this proposal for a directive , but has instead preferred to take the path of responsibility and pragmatism .
Parliament has demonstrated maturity and a sense of conscience in adopting a document that will unquestionably increase the level of protection afforded to third-country nationals living in those Member States where such protection is at the lowest level , or even nonexistent .
This vote has the double merit of not undermining those current national provisions that already provide sufficient guarantees - as in the case of France , for example - while at the same time taking those Member States whose systems are the most restrictive and the least protective to a more humane level .
This text , which does not concern asylum seekers , is only the first move towards the framing and basic harmonisation of rules on immigration .
It should not be taken in isolation but is to be seen as part of the EU 's global policy for the promotion of legal migration , which is something Europe needs .
I voted against the Returns Directive .
I was prepared to support a Directive that , far from being perfect , would provide useful guidelines for those European Member States having no immigration laws of their own , or indeed for those whose legislation is too harsh .
As a majority of the right and Liberals rejected the 10 Socialist amendments , including those relating to better protection for minors , I voted ' no ' in the end along with most of my political group .
I am still convinced that , even if it cannot take care of all the woes of the world , Europe should remain open to immigration that is positively framed and supervised .
Illegal immigration , with its trail of human tragedy and misery and with the criminality that is linked to illegal networks of this kind , needs to be combated .
Third-country nationals who have entered illegally should be repatriated , but this has to be done by way of a process that is worthy of a legally constituted state .
I was ready to support a Directive that , far from being perfect , would provide useful guidelines for those nine European Member States that have no immigration laws of their own , or indeed for those whose legislation is too harsh .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List takes a very critical view of this report and the compromise which is being supported by certain political parties .
A country 's refugee policy is a strictly national matter and it must be decided within the context of the country 's legal culture .
Through this report the EU takes a major step towards imposing a European migration policy which comes down hard on illegal immigrants .
What is in prospect is the arbitrary and systematic detention of persons who have not committed any crime , but have merely crossed an international border .
The report proposes that people should be totally excluded from European territory for a period of five years , irrespective of their situation , which in effect means Fortress Europe .
The EU is supposed to be a Union of values which holds human rights and human values sacred , but this proposal flies in the face of that .
Organisations such as the United Nations Refugee Agency ( UNHCR ) and the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees already exist to uphold the human rights of vulnerable people and to stipulate acceptable rules and standards for humane treatment .
The June List rejects this report and hopes that other Members will do the same .
in writing . - ( PT ) Regrettably , the proposal that we made to reject this ignoble Directive was itself rejected by a majority of this House , due to the Social Democrats and the right banding together .
Through our vote , we tried to prevent the Council agreement from going forward as this aims to create a Community immigration policy that is restrictive , selective and criminalising and that does not respect the human rights of immigrants .
The numerous unacceptable aspects of this Directive include : the possibility of detaining immigrants for a maximum period of 18 months ; the detention of families , even with minors ; the expulsion of minors without them having to be delivered to a member of their family or a legally appointed guardian , and the limitation on entry into EU countries , for a period of up to five years , for an immigrant who has been expelled .
If the EU institutions want to adopt measures on immigrants , they should suggest that the Member States ratify the UN Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families .
The dignity of human beings cannot be called into question .
Their rights must be protected and recognised , regardless of their documentation situation .
We must not introduce policies that violate human rights and criminalise men and women who only aspire to a job and , in many cases , to the basic right to life .
in writing - ( FR ) Human rights are not negotiable .
Deprivation of liberty , as provided for in this document , is a serious act , even when it is for a restricted period .
Why are we not talking about welcoming those who arrive on the territory of Europe and about the reception facilities instead of the detention centres ?
We have known for decades that smugglers have a criminal interest in human trafficking and that often there are accomplices involved in catering for these illegal workers , who are poorly paid and badly housed .
I feel that legal measures are urgently needed to counter the activities of these people smugglers and traffickers .
As far as voluntary return policies are concerned , supporting these with a policy of targeted cooperation would send a better signal than imprisoning those who are not guilty of anything .
We do not own the earth , we do not have the right to consider ourselves masters of the continent and even legally constituted states like ours are not entitled to contravene the right to the integrity of the person .
in writing . - I voted against the Weber report and deplore the terms of the proposed Returns Directive .
The Directive will allow Member States to detain migrants for up to 18 months , even for reasons outside their control .
This is not the mark of a civilised immigration policy and falls short of the standards we should expect of the EU .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted against this report : it is a very delicate topic as it affects more and more people , and the fact that it is being treated as a logistical rather than a human problem is intolerable .
Many of the provisions are simply unacceptable : the introduction of a ban on re-entry to European territory for up to five years , the possibility of detaining families and unaccompanied minors , the possibility of sending people back via transit zones , the low level of protection afforded to people vulnerable to separation , the fact that it does not prevent the detention of asylum-seekers , and the lack of significant guarantees in terms of return and custody decisions .
Furthermore , immigration is closely linked to the development policy .
The EU must establish the measures and aid needed to ensure genuine development in third countries .
Immigrants and irregularly-staying immigrants have not chosen to be in that position : they cannot stay in their homeland because in many cases their basic needs are not covered .
In the 21st century , that is a fact that should put us to shame .
in writing . - ( CS ) Returning illegal immigrants to their country of origin is a highly controversial subject .
A broader interpretation of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , the 1951 United Nations Convention related to the Status of Refugees , as amended by the 1967 Protocol , and the 1989 United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child mostly prohibits such actions .
When I take into account the criticisms of the committees ( for example the LIBE Committee ) , in addition to the above-mentioned texts , I must say that a Directive that makes it possible to detain people for 18 months , as well as the conditions experienced by visiting Members in detention centres , only make the controversy more obvious .
Any person who commits a criminal act should be punished , including those who employ the third-country nationals , illegally and under poor conditions .
There is no way that the GUE / NGL Group could possibly support this Directive .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , by voting in favour of the Weber report , we may have taken a crucial step towards drawing up a comprehensive framework of measures against illegal immigration : measures that will respond to the security demands of a huge number of European citizens , many of them victims of crime perpetrated by third-country nationals .
I am pleased to note that the European Parliament , guarantor of universal freedom and rights , has at last come out in favour of a common policy to meet the needs of Member States in the fight against illegal immigration .
We have made clear that the aim is not just to detect those who are staying illegally , but also to put in place clear , transparent and rapid return procedures .
It is not only a matter of clamping down on the phenomenon , for instance with the re-entry ban , but also of providing help for minors .
These measures are geared to scrupulous respect for human rights in reception centres .
Illegal immigration must be combated above all by seeking agreements with the countries of origin , which cannot stand by and watch the unfolding of a tragedy that is no longer just national but also European , and by sending out a strong signal to those preparing to enter Europe illegally .
Our continent is not a land of conquest for anyone and everyone , and there are duties as well as rights to be respected .
in writing . - ( FR ) There has been a lot of noise from the left and far left aimed at stigmatising the Weber report , Parliament 's interpretation of the Returns Directive , which does not quite measure up to what is needed as far as immigration policy is concerned .
We hardly dare state the obvious that to cross a frontier illegally without a visa or residence permit is an illicit act and should be treated as such .
In deliberately losing their papers or refusing to say where they come from , so as not to be returned to their country of origin , illegal immigrants and they alone are responsible for the period they spend in detention , which some believe , wrongly , is too long .
To talk about human rights only masks the reality of the situation : Europe is being swamped by illegal immigration , which in essence cannot be controlled , and this is coming on top of the legal migration that is being encouraged by national and European authorities alike .
The Weber report , while inadequate for the purpose , is a step in the right direction .
I hope that this is merely the first stage .
Are national governments and the European Parliament at last waking up to the scale of the problem ?
It is already quite late in the day ...
in writing . - ( FR ) The document that has been adopted today constitutes a total rethink of the work that was done in the LIBE Committee , which had paved the way for a significant improvement on the Commission 's original proposal .
This so-called compromise will in effect not bring about any changes likely to improve the degree of protection afforded to persons living in those Member States that have the least acceptable immigration policies .
The first reason for this is the restricted scope of the document : asylum seekers and persons who have been detained at border controls are excluded from it , even though they represent a significant proportion of all illegal immigrants .
Another more relevant reason is because it gives Member States far too much latitude when it comes to key questions such as the rights of minors and the length of the detention period .
The latter has now been extended to 18 months , as compared with the six months proposed by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
I am ashamed that a majority in this House has supported the idea of locking up for such a long period people whose only crime is to have come here in search of better living conditions and who are often in an extremely vulnerable state .
I have voted in all conscience against the document .
If some basic common rules are indeed necessary then these should be drawn up as part of a responsible and humane approach to illegal immigration and on no account should they be introduced at the cost of sacrificing the fundamental rights and values that we hold dear .
in writing . - ( FR ) The highly publicised ' Returns Directive ' , as proposed by the Commission in Brussels and quite wrongly stigmatised by the left and far left as the ' Directive of shame ' , the violator of human rights , has just been adopted by the European Parliament , to their great displeasure .
However , this Directive , which is supposed to provide for the return of illegal immigrants , is not repressive at all .
It does not criminalise immigrants who have entered Europe illegally .
Better than that , it gives them the choice between legalisation and voluntary return , all this backed up by privileges and guarantees that protect essential human rights .
What about the right of people to protect themselves and not to be submerged by global immigration ?
Nothing .
Fortress Europe as decried by all the media in France and elsewhere does not exist .
It is a fantasy created to ease the way for legislation that is favourably inclined towards immigration and immigrants under the guise of a semblance of repression .
This is not a good Directive .
It is all a front .
However it does have the sole merit of representing the first step towards a less immigrationist policy .
It should not obscure the fact that other provisions are being drawn up , such as the European Blue Card system guaranteeing legal immigration for employment purposes , and that the stated aim of these measures is solely to encourage more immigration into Europe .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the Weber report because I believe that the European Union can only combat and prevent illegal immigration with common rules which are tough but fair .
This Returns Directive is a successful start to a common European immigration policy .
Europe can only open up to legal immigration if illegal immigration is clearly defined and can be tackled effectively on the basis of common rules .
In my view , the Directive takes due account of humanitarian concerns about the deportation process , notably through the introduction of a maximum detention period of six months .
Given that nine Member States , including Luxembourg , previously had no maximum limit on detention , this is a major step forward .
Persons affected by a deportation procedure will now also have the right to judicial remedy before a court or tribunal in order to appeal against the process , ultimately including the European Court of Justice as the last resort .
It also ensures that free legal aid is available for persons who lack sufficient resources .
This will put an end to the arbitrary deportation policy pursued by some Member States and strengthens the rule of law .
I also wish to make it clear that a maximum detention period of 18 months , which can be imposed by extending the six-month period for a further 12 months , may only be applied in extreme and exceptional cases .
This is envisaged only if the person poses a threat to public security or in order to prevent the imminent risk of absconding .
in writing . - ( RO ) The proposal for a directive , which we discussed yesterday and voted on today , approaches for the first time and directly the European immigration policy , by establishing the standards and procedures for the expulsion of immigrants illegally staying on the territory of Member States .
In addition to the objective of legal harmonization of the situation of immigrants , the true challenge of this directive was to find the compromise that would comply with the human rights and the free movement of persons and , at the same time , take into consideration the need for individual and , especially , collective security .
Most Member States have experienced the phenomenon of immigration and the actions taken by their governments have varied according to the flow of immigrants .
For this reason , I think Mr. Weber 's report regulates these differences between the immigration policies of the Member States , by taking into consideration the principles of every legal system and imposing common standards and procedures for implementation .
Thus , I can say that I voted for this report exactly due to the integrated approach of immigration .
Measures such as the voluntary return to the country of origin , temporary detention and special attention given to the protection of unaccompanied minors , as well as access to the healthcare and education services , represent not an infringement of the European Convention on Human Rights , but , on the contrary , the proof that the European Union has taken one more step toward creating a common policy in the field of illegal immigration .
I would also like to congratulate the Council and Mr. Weber for the negotiated compromise .
War , dictatorships , discrimination , natural disasters and poverty drive people from Africa and Asia to flee to Europe .
For many refugees it is not a matter of choosing to improve their circumstances but purely a matter of survival .
The Tampere summit in 1999 attempted to reduce the flow of refugees into a number of EU Member States .
That was not done by appealing for mutual solidarity to distribute the refugees better over the territory of the EU states , but only by restricting entry to Europe at the external borders even more severely .
More and more harrowing situations have occurred in recent years .
Many people drown at sea , and if they reach land they are locked up for a while , forced into illegality or forcibly sent back to a country where they cannot survive .
The Weber report and the attempt to reach agreement with the Council at first reading have made the situation even worse .
It is with good reason that more and more opposition to this is emerging from many quarters .
If this is adopted , despite the opposition , it will be possible for people to be locked up without legal process for six months , it will be easier to deport children , and those who have been deported will be banned from travelling to the EU for 5 years , regardless of whether the situation in their country of residence has deteriorated in that time .
in writing . - ( DE ) Most of the estimated 42 million refugees in 2007 were economic migrants who fell into the trap set by immigration racketeers and risked their lives to reach El Dorado .
This leads not only to countless human tragedies but also places a strain on the destination countries ' social systems and clogs up the courts with hopeless asylum cases , making life even more difficult for those who might genuinely have a claim to asylum .
In the past , some Member States have attracted further millions of illegals with mass legalisations or mini-detention followed by automatic granting of leave to remain .
Although the measures proposed under the Returns Directive are far too lax , they are at least a step in the right direction , especially if the proposed minimum detention period is more stringent than is currently provided for by some Member States , which is why I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( IT ) I wish to compliment my LIBE Committee colleagues on the compromise struck with the Council .
This is the first time that the Union has managed to equip itself with common rules for the return of illegally staying third-country nationals .
It is laudable that the aim of the directive , in laying down common , transparent return procedures , is to ensure humane treatment for those concerned and to improve cooperation both with the migrants ' national authorities and between Member States , including through the establishment of a re-entry ban , valid throughout the Union and not exceeding five years .
Voluntary return , the duration of temporary custody , with alternatives provided for certain cases , the organisation of custody facilities , the ban on collective returns , the particular treatment to be given to minors and vulnerable persons when adopting a return decision and the preservation of family unity : all of these are positive features of the proposal for a directive , as is the free legal aid , if requested , to pursue an appeal against the removal order .
I am voting in favour of this measure , in the knowledge that illegal immigration will be combated more effectively with common , transparent rules .
These rules will enhance the safety of our citizens , confirming once again that when it comes to common problems , such as those related to immigration , Europe must speak with one voice and confirm that the concepts of welcome and lawful conduct are indissociable from one another .
A majority of the European Parliament has today adopted the proposal for the Returns Directive .
This proposal for a directive , which is aimed at establishing minimum common standards for the treatment of illegal immigrants , was originally intended as a response to the often tragic situation encountered in the 224 or so detention camps scattered around Europe .
It is a sensible initiative , since we know that some countries have no rules or limits whatsoever for the detention of illegal aliens .
During the vote in committee the Socialist members made significant progress in laying down essential guarantees on human rights , which were absent from the initial proposal .
These have now been removed by the Council and the PPE rapporteur , as it appears that they prefer a more repressive package in the hope that it will discourage those who are already in a state of despair .
The result is a Directive that ratifies a process for criminalising migrants , cramming them together under appalling conditions for prolonged periods on end and separating minors from their families , while the so-called guarantees of the right to legal aid and appeal will in fact be left to the discretion of the Member States .
This is quite simply unacceptable and contrary to the values that Europe claims to represent .
This is why I decided to vote against the text .
The conservative majority in the European Parliament has once again ignored the voice of the citizens and common sense .
Adopting the ' Directive of Shame ' in a bid to create a Fortress Europe deprives immigrants of their basic human rights and condemns them to a life of illegality .
The Council 's scandalous and inhuman conciliation agreement is contrary to the existing international legal framework .
The assurances of greater protection for immigrants in Europe are in complete contrast with the grim pictures of the ' reception ' centres .
Europe cannot shield itself behind this unacceptable legislation and close the door to immigrants .
The New Democracy ( ND ) government and its MEPs who have actively supported today 's decision are largely responsible .
What Mr Karamanlis said in front of the television cameras when he visited the immigrant reception centre on the island of Samos a few days ago is belied by the actions of New Democracy .
in writing . - ( DE ) My reasons for voting against the Returns Directive are as follows :
The Directive negotiated by the EU 's Home Affairs Ministers not only establishes a possible 18-month period of detention prior to deportation for so-called ' illegally staying third-country nationals ' ; it also provides for a five-year re-entry ban for refugees who have been deported .
As a result of the Directive , around 8 million non-EU citizens who do not have a valid residence permit are threatened with detention and deportation to their ' home countries ' .
Furthermore , the Directive allows the detention and removal of unaccompanied minors , in clear violation of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child .
There are plans to deport migrants to transit countries which are not their home countries .
Many procedural guarantees and legal rights for migrants to appeal against deportation have vanished from the final text , which could also put at risk the rights of those migrants who are able to apply for asylum .
In short , the Directive creates a basis for the stigmatisation and criminalisation of migrants who , without having committed any crime , will be deprived of their liberty and held in detention facilities in conditions unworthy of human dignity .
The Directive erodes European and international human rights standards by further worsening living conditions for migrants .
This new measure is in line with the logic of the EU Member States ' immigration and asylum policy as practised since 1990 , which is notable for its permanent dismantling of migrants ' rights .
Opposition to the implementation of the Directive is now required .
in writing . - ( FR ) The proposal for a directive on returning illegally staying third-country nationals is aimed at providing the European Union with a common immigration policy by laying down criteria for the maximum period of temporary custody , by favouring a voluntary return procedure and by providing for a ban on re-entry to the European Union for those who have been expelled .
The text as proposed is a compromise and like all compromises it can be improved .
Thus the maximum detention period of six months , which may be extended to 12 months , is well above the maximum period of custody provided for in my country , Luxembourg ( 3 months ) .
On the other hand the document does lay down certain guarantees for families and infants , as well as specifying the conditions governing non-refoulement to the country of origin .
As this matter comes under the codecision procedure Parliament is on an equal footing with the Council of Ministers and a negative vote would lead to delays prejudicial to this highly sensitive issue .
For this reason , and in spite of certain reservations , I voted in favour of the proposal for a directive .
in writing . - ( PT ) An area with shared external borders and no internal borders must harmonise certain rules on the entry , movement , residence and departure of third-country nationals .
A prosperous economy and a welfare state with high levels of protection - in comparison to neighbouring countries - must lay down rules and conditions for the entry of third-country nationals .
It is therefore essential to regulate and achieve a certain coherence between the rules of the various areas with a common border .
This must be done bearing in mind that immigration is an asset and a benefit for the countries of destination and a potential benefit for the countries of origin , provided that it is regulated and legal .
It must also be borne in mind that , when we show humanity by welcoming people who are struggling , this is a sign of civilisation on which we cannot turn our backs .
I support the essence of this report because it does not force us to reduce our guarantees , but in fact imposes them , albeit inadequately , where they are absent .
Finally , in the debate on this subject , I believe that one point has been missed .
The destination of immigration , at least intra-European immigration , is changing .
Given that migratory flows are one of the most revealing economic indicators , this point deserved more attention .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is not that I do not find the text insufficient on certain points , especially those relating to the detention of minors and health issues , but here at last , after three years of negotiations with the Council , this compromise that has been extracted from certain Member States now imposes rules on those countries that have never had any and , a crucial point , does not prohibit others from retaining their own legislation or from going further by introducing even more flexible laws .
I do not support the witch-hunt that is again today being led by some against those who are attempting to set boundaries for immigration in Europe .
No , Europe is not a fortress .
Nearly two million immigrants come here legally every year .
No , the Directive does not impose 18 months ' detention : the general rule is six months maximum , with very strictly applied exceptions , it has to be recalled , in those nine countries that have an unlimited detention period .
In Belgium , for example , the average period of detention is 22 days .
Voting ' no ' today is the easy , headline-grabbing way out , and in this case I am convinced that it will not serve those primarily concerned , namely the migrants themselves , who have to be helped and in some cases reasoned with .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting in favour of Mr Weber 's report .
Europe is at last beginning to address the problem of illegal immigration in a responsible , effective manner .
The Returns Directive is an initial step towards a proper policy to combat the phenomenon .
Illegal immigrants must be obliged to leave Europe , with all due respect for minimum standards ensuring that those concerned receive humane treatment .
As we have always maintained , illegal immigration is an extremely serious problem and responsibility for handling it should be left to the individual countries .
Nevertheless , the problem is often a European one , which is why all the responsibilities and costs cannot be offloaded onto certain countries , first and foremost Italy .
The excessive detention period is one of the most important reasons for my vote .
The possibility of locking up adults and even children for no less than 18 months is going too far , particularly as they are also to be taken into detention if their country of origin does not cooperate by providing the right papers .
Through no fault of their own they often cannot go back .
The fact that people staying in the territory illegally can be sent back to the country they travelled through is no solution either .
A re-entry ban up to a maximum of five years is incompatible with the idea that people should be given protection in Europe if they need it .
This measure will also lead to illegal people trafficking and smuggling .
The Union urgently needs agreements on who may come in but is now directing most of its efforts to deportation .
As a result , the proposal is one-sided and very unbalanced .
Agreements like this are only meaningful if they offer legal protection to people without valid documents .
Unfortunately , this compromise does not offer this to a sufficient extent .
I would not be doing European migration policy a service by voting for this .
in writing . - The loss of Amendment 98 concerning the treatment of unaccompanied minors , i.e. children , and Amendment 103 on the conditions , duration and lawfulness of migrants in detention , is deeply depressing for those of us who believe in human dignity .
in writing . - ( CS ) In my opinion , the motion for a resolution concerning common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals is not a good text .
It attempts to ' solve ' , by means of administrative and repressive methods , a serious problem that really calls for a political solution , aimed at eliminating the causes of illegal migration .
The draft report presented by Mr Manfred Weber to the European Parliament in plenary contains nothing more than ( more or less ) cosmetic changes that do not go to the heart of the matter .
Introducing repressive measures towards so-called illegal immigrants , such as so-called temporary custody , and keeping them under the horrendous conditions that exist in some detention centres ( according to the LIBE Committee ) violate internationally recognised conventions for the protection of human rights .
Moreover , one fundamental problem appears in the explanatory statement , which affects the overall concept of the document .
Although it offers an alternative - the possibility of granting so-called illegal immigrants legal residence permits - both the Commission 's proposal and the report to be adopted by the European Parliament are based on a single premise : that illegal immigrants must leave Europe .
Taking the above facts into account , my recommendation is that the report be rejected .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Union is built on common values and protects human rights .
I voted for the amendments of the European socialists because they requested Member States to provide seriously sick persons with an autonomous residence permit or another authorization providing them with the right of residence .
This is for the purpose of benefiting from adequate access to medical care , except for the cases in which it can be proved that the given persons can benefit from adequate treatment and medical care in their own country of origin .
I also consider it essential that the national of the third country in question be released immediately if the public custody is not legal .
Minors under public custody should be able to participate in amusement activities , including play and recreation activities adequate for their age and have access to education .
Unaccompanied children should be provided with accommodation in institutions having the personnel and equipment adequate for the needs of people in their age category .
The child 's best interest represents an essential ground in the context of taking minors under public custody while waiting for expulsion .
I am sorry that these amendments were not adopted .
I consider that , without these amendments , the Weber report does not comply with the European values and , for this reason , I voted against this report .
in writing . - We voted to reject the report because we don 't want any kind of European Common Immigration Policy .
We feel that it should be up to individual states to decide who is expelled from their territory and under what circumstances .
Whilst we almost never vote for any legislation , we would like to point out that we did vote in favour of Amendment 75 , which rejected the Commission 's proposal for a common expulsion policy , but not for the reasons / justification given by the group which tabled the amendment .
We had our own reasons for rejection .
This is regardless of the fact this directive does not apply in the UK . It is the principle behind this that drove our voting decision .
To complete the dominance of the EU electricity and natural gas markets by large-scale capital interests , the package of five proposals for the third legislative bundle is now being prepared by the Commission .
The aim is to turn a social good into a market commodity and to promote the capitalist restructuring of the energy sector through the mass privatisation of energy production and distribution .
The proposal sets up fierce competition , especially in the wholesale energy market .
It makes for a complete separation of the networks ( transmission systems or transmission management systems ) from supply and production .
Thus in principle there will be no discrimination between the public and private sectors , with the result that public corporations will lose their comparative advantages and competitors entering the market will be safeguarded .
At a time of rapidly rising international oil prices , workers are feeling the pinch ; the EU is favouring the interests of capital , and safeguarding and increasing its profits .
The victims of this policy are the energy sector workers , and more generally the working classes .
They will face increased prices and a decline in services , as happens wherever the energy market is privatised .
The mass mobilisation of workers and the resounding ' no ' votes in referendums reveal growing popular outrage at this policy and open the way to its repeal .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is interesting to note how , in this third package for the liberalisation of the electricity sector , the same arguments are still being used , despite the fact that we have less and less control over the actions of the economic and financial groups that are operating on the market , imposing their own rules , increasing prices , dismissing workers , increasing the precariousness of employment and increasingly failing to fulfil their public service duties .
While it is true that , without an effective electricity and gas market , the European Union will have increasing difficulty in guaranteeing security of supply , sustainability of an energy market with few coal resources and global competitiveness , it is also true that this market will only be possible if there is a strong public sector .
However , what is being proposed is exactly the opposite .
The call is for more liberalisation and the destruction of what remains of this public sector in some countries .
Then , in a fruitless attempt to cover this up , the suggestion is made of a charter to protect consumers .
We will wait to see how this is applied .
In any event , the basic issue is the liberalisation of the sector , which is why we could only vote against this report in the end .
in writing . - President , I spoke on the Morgan report during the debate but I did not have the opportunity to speak on amendment 159 .
This amendment would prohibit Member States from authorising the construction of new power stations that emit more than 350g of carbon dioxide per kilowatt hour produced .
I would like to clarify the position on behalf of the EPLP who have all received a number of letters on this amendment .
Whilst we appreciate that climate change is real and present and we have an obligation to address this , we have voted against amendment 159 because it would knock out the development of all new gas- , oil- and coal-fired power stations .
This would be detrimental to Europe 's security of supply and to keeping the lights on in Europe .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against the Morgan report and the energy package because I believe that we are going down the wrong road .
The proposed Agency will be yet another bureaucratic body .
A network of national regulators with extended powers would be a more effective way of ensuring that small producers have access to the networks .
Unbundling has become a kind of magic potion , whereas the experience of those countries that have been practising it certainly does not put the case for liberal measures of this kind .
The energy market is a global market .
Competition for Gazprom and the oil-producing states will come not from the biogas cooperatives but from the big European companies .
in writing . - ( PL ) When it voted for compulsory unbundling of ownership of energy concerns in the European Union , the European Parliament took a decisive step towards creating a common market in electrical energy .
Dividing these concerns into companies responsible for energy production and companies responsible for its transmission is the only way to create an open and competitive market where there is no conflict of interest .
The consumer should be the main beneficiary of the proposed changes .
The proposal adopted significantly strengthens consumers ' rights .
Inter alia , it gives consumers the right to withdraw from a contract with an electricity supplier without additional charges .
Consumers are also given the right to change their energy supplier in a very short time .
It should be borne in mind that the electricity market is currently dominated by monopolies that abuse their position on uncompetitive markets .
I believe that price caps will protect energy users from exploitation by energy concerns , without deterring new entities from entering the market .
Clearly , the solutions proposed will not resolve all the problems related to energy currently confronting us , such as the rise in oil prices .
Nonetheless , these solutions represent appropriate steps towards the development of a more competitive market .
The debate is to continue in the Council .
Unfortunately , however , it is unlikely that all of the European Parliament 's proposals will be accepted .
As the rapporteur rightly pointed out , many Member States protect want to protect their own national interests .
in writing . - ( FR ) This third energy package dogmatically persists in following the course of total separation between the energy production side and the distribution networks .
It is aimed at subjecting the entire energy sector solely to the laws of the free market and to everyone competing with everyone else .
As the same causes produce the same effects this will lead the European Union to an even bigger disaster than that experienced by California in the year 2000 .
This policy is bad for consumers , bad for the industry 's employees , bad for SMEs and SMIs , bad for jobs , bad for security and bad for the environment .
The market and the private sector are incapable of meeting the energy needs of Europeans and of responding to the challenges of global warming and the post fossil fuel era .
Their prime objective is to pay out as much as possible to their shareholders , not to act in the general interests of the nation .
We need a proper internal market for energy in Europe and this will only be achieved on the basis of cooperation .
The energy sector needs to be guided by coordinated public action from the Member States , not by the activities of the financial markets .
The EU has to take steps to ensure that energy is recognised as a global public resource and not as just another commodity to be bought and sold .
in writing . - I was disappointed that my own group 's amendment on nuclear accident liability was not adopted .
Nevertheless , the final Morgan report does contain much to commend it , and I welcome the addition of references to the proposed charter on energy consumers ' rights .
On balance , therefore , I was able to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( ET ) I strongly support these amendments , as these strengthen free competition in the European Union , help keep prices at reasonable levels and at the same time allow consumers to exercise their freedom to change their electricity supplier any time wished .
Furthermore this boosts cross-border electricity sharing and , with that , also protects states and consumers from sudden electricity shortages .
I call for fast action in this field in eliminating unnecessary bureaucracy and burdens to enable EU electricity companies to act freely throughout the Union to strengthen free competition and to empower consumers to make conscious choices .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against this report , which in purporting to lay down common rules for the internal market in electricity is in fact proposing to dismantle the heritage of Europe 's traditional operating networks .
Separating electricity production and electricity distribution will in my view provide no additional guarantees as to the efficiency , security or accessibility of the network , particularly in the present situation of a sustained growth in global electricity demand and major uncertainty over resources .
This latter factor calls for even greater structural investment in order to safeguard our supplies and promote research and innovation , a prospect that seems to be largely incompatible with the philosophy of strong competition and short-term profitability that underlies the decision to move towards the total deregulation of this sector .
The ' third way ' , which is supported by the French Socialists but regrettably was not adopted , appears to be a much more sensible solution since it allows us to preserve the patrimonial integrity of Europe 's large energy groups while at the same time placing the organisation of electricity distribution in the hands of independent regulators .
Nevertheless , I welcome the progress that this report represents as far as consumer protection is concerned , particularly the introduction of rules for combating energy poverty and for ensuring transparency and accessibility to information for the end user .
Supplying electricity is not a trade but a mains service .
The service must be provided to all stakeholders without interruption and with the lowest possible impact on the environment .
This requirement is inconsistent with the risks involved in international trade by competing companies .
Electricity will continue to be a scarce and vulnerable product in the future too , certainly now that fossil fuels are running out and as global warming continues .
That is why it is good that in many EU Member States it is the State or local authorities that have developed the power stations and electricity grids .
Privatisation of these mains services is undesirable and risky .
Their sale creates new owners and a monopoly on the transmission system .
That system is a non-profit-making resource between production and sale , but ownership of it can be misused to impose a high toll on consumers and any competitors .
Fixing electricity prices through the stock market leads to consumer prices that are much higher than production costs .
The EU Member States are right to look at how these risks should be combated .
The situation varies greatly from one Member State to another .
It is best that these issues are weighed up there .
I am in favour of giving the Member States the greatest possible freedom , the third way referred to in the Glante amendment , but I am against this European directive as a whole .
in writing . - ( FR ) Obviously the real aim of this third energy package is not security of supply , the quality of the services being provided , price affordability or the ability of consumers freely to choose their supplier but rather the permanent dismantling of what is left of the old public electricity monopolies .
The determination being displayed by the Commission and by many Members of this House in wanting to impose ' patrimonial separation ' , in other words forcing ' historical ' operators like EDF to give up ownership of their network , is quite unacceptable .
The activities these companies are being accused of , namely restricting competitors ' access to the network and deliberately limiting investment in infrastructure projects , have never in fact been proven .
Neither is it clear how entrusting control of the network to a single operator that is not the electricity supplier can guarantee an appropriate and adequate level of investment , non-abuse of a key position or better congestion management .
This is why , though we have always defended the exclusive primacy of Member States over energy affairs , which is a strategic area of too great importance to be left to the Eurocrats , we will be supporting as the lesser of two evils the ' effective separation ' solution being proposed by , among others , France and Germany .
We shall also vote against those texts whose viewpoints we fundamentally reject .
in writing . - ( PT ) I could only vote in favour of this report .
To say yes to all the forces for liberalisation of the electricity market is to say yes to a fairer , more competitive and more transparent market .
However , it is not only the correctness of this report , which places the consumer at the heart of the issue , that attracts me .
With increasing energy prices and a lack of competition in national markets , there is a danger of increasing the number of citizens excluded from accessing energy .
I therefore agree with the social concerns expressed as , for the first time , the concept of ' fuel poverty ' has been defined , drawing attention to the importance of the Member States developing national plans which cover all citizens .
Given the current situation in the national energy markets within the EU , it is unacceptable for one company to both own the electricity network and also be responsible for the transmission of electricity , thus holding a de facto monopoly , as it can then block access to the market for new operators who , in many cases , are more competitive .
This document therefore courageously identifies the need to increase the level of transparency and competition within the energy sector , while effectively protecting the consumer from the consequences of a closed and inflexible market .
in writing . - ( PT ) I could only vote in favour of this report .
To say yes to all the forces for liberalisation of the electricity market is to say yes to a fairer , more competitive and more transparent market .
However , it is not only the correctness of this report , which places the consumer at the heart of the issue , that attracts me .
With increasing energy prices and a lack of competition in national markets , there is a danger of increasing the number of citizens excluded from accessing energy .
I therefore agree with the social concerns expressed as , for the first time , the concept of ' fuel poverty ' has been defined , drawing attention to the importance of the Member States developing national plans which cover all citizens .
Given the current situation in the national energy markets within the EU , it is unacceptable for one company to both own the electricity network and also be responsible for the distribution of electricity , thus holding a de facto monopoly , as it can then block access to the market for new operators who , in many cases , are more competitive .
This document therefore courageously identifies the need to increase the level of transparency and competition within the energy sector , while effectively protecting the consumer from the consequences of a closed market .
in writing . - ( PT ) This is another part of the third package of measures to liberalise the energy markets in the European Union , following on from the recommendations adopted by the European Parliament in June 2007 .
The rapporteur agrees with : the inclusion of stronger and more independent powers for the regulators ; increased requirements for transparency in the market ; an improved framework for cooperation at European level between national regulators as well as between transmission system operators ; more emphasis given to the further development of interconnection capacity between Member States , and the proposal of ownership unbundling as the most effective , but not the only , means to encourage investments and avoid discrimination towards new entrants .
In other words , the European Union forced the privatisation of a sector that is strategic to economic development and is now trying to take steps to deal with the serious problems created by the economic groups that have taken over the sector .
That is why the rapporteur himself raises some questions about the voluntary implementation of the codes and rules , arguing that they should be compulsory .
However , no one is admitting that the real solution would have been to retain a strong public sector in the area of energy , which is why we voted against this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) It was not only because of pressure from the Commission that E.ON and RWE sold off their transmission systems ; due to the unbundling which has taken place , the strategic function of network access , namely to shut out new competitors , has largely been lost .
Across Europe , there is a massive need for investment in old power plant and system infrastructure , some of which is decades old .
As experience with the United Kingdom 's radical rail privatisation has shown , investors have very little interest in upgrading infrastructure .
It is quite possible that the new network access provisions aimed for will have the same effect .
For that reason , I voted against the Vidal-Quadras report .
in writing . - ( PL ) The rapporteur has prepared a very good and thorough report .
I believe that in its present form , the European Parliament 's proposal will enable work on integrating the Union 's market in energy to continue .
I trust it will prove possible to reach agreement on all cross-border issues .
in writing . - ( PT ) This is yet another part of this energy package . It concerns the establishment of the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators , which fits within a global strategy , defined by the European Commission and by the Council , to liberalise and regulate the energy sector , which they have termed the ' Energy Package ' .
The strategy is always the same .
First they privatise the public sector .
Then problems arise and they create regulators , new bureaucracies and greater control for the major powers over what happens in each Member State .
According to the rapporteur ( from the PPE-DE Group ) , we must go beyond the Commission 's proposals and give this Agency more independence and more decision-making powers .
The imposition of standards , codes , market rules and even decisions by higher authorities , serving the interests of economic groups , is a recurrent argument .
The Agency will be a supranational institution with powers in a strategic area - namely energy - which has an effect across all sectors of society .
The consequences of interference in the political strategy and economy of each Member State could be serious .
In this context we reject the report .
in writing . - Energy markets are increasingly taking on a pan-European nature and the proposed Agency for the Co-operation of Energy Regulators will play an important role as the markets develop .
The Agency should have adequate powers to achieve its tasks and I was able to support the report which ensures these powers whilst guaranteeing the independence of national regulators .
in writing . - ( PL ) The rapporteur has prepared a very good and thorough report .
I believe that in its present form , the European Parliament 's proposal will allow work on integrating the Union 's market in energy to continue .
It will also enable the Agency 's competences regarding all cross-border issues to be strengthened . This should result in effective cooperation between the Member States .
in writing . - ( PL ) The number of accidents involving pedestrians rose by 5.7 % in Poland last year , and the number of accidents involving cyclists rose by a considerable 16.8 % .
I support the report by Mr Ferrari , and believe it is essential to increase safety requirements .
Nonetheless , we should also bear in mind that the cost of doing so must not be borne primarily by vehicle owners .
I represent the Lesser Poland Voivodship , which has the lowest accident rate in the country , at 7 / 100 .
Nonetheless , there are many accident black spots as a result of excessive traffic density and inappropriate road infrastructure .
in writing . - I consider this report another positive step forward in assisting pedestrians in the EU from the many injuries and fatalities caused by motor vehicle accidents .
Indeed , 40 000 citizens die each year .
Improvements to vehicle design and improved car systems , including the pedestrian ' crumple zone ' at the front of a car , are positive moves which need to be encouraged .
Removal of bull-bars from vehicles for which they are not necessary or not intended - non-farm-working vehicles , for example , - is another instance of how the EU can be consistent as regards pedestrian-friendly enhancements .
I will support these issues in this vote and I consider it vital for pedestrians across the EU that more is done to improve the safety of pedestrians .
in writing . - I voted for this report because I support the development of passive and active safety systems that would reduce the impact of road accidents involving pedestrians and other vulnerable road users .
Although a variety of factors may be responsible for accidents ( speed , human error ) , the vehicle itself should be adapted to minimise impact during an accident .
I support the report 's obligations to lay down minimum requirements for the construction and functioning of vehicles and frontal protection systems .
However , I believe what is missing from this report is the massive opportunity to cooperate with developing and emerging countries .
This is because the majority of road deaths , approximately 70 % , occur in developing countries .
Pedestrians account for 65 % of deaths and 35 % of pedestrian deaths are children .
A country like India alone accounts for a massive 10 % of total global road accident fatalities .
The EU must exchange and share with developing countries its expertise in road accident data collection and analysis , as well as the development of active and passive safety systems .
There is a strong case for technology transfer from the EU to developing countries which could reduce road accidents and their impact on road users .
in writing . - ( PL ) I should like to highlight the importance of this report and congratulate the rapporteur on the outcome .
It is a fact that 8 000 road users die every year in the European Union .
The victims are mainly pedestrians and cyclists .
A further 300 000 people are injured .
This state of affairs involves personal tragedies and also has significant social and economic consequences .
Accordingly , the Union 's measures aimed at ensuring better protection for pedestrians and other vulnerable road users against injuries sustained in collisions with motor vehicles should be especially welcome .
As of October 2005 and pursuant to the provisions currently in force , certain vehicles have to pass a series of performance tests based on the recommendations of the Joint Research Centre .
In addition , the Union is proposing to impose significantly stricter test requirements for motor vehicles placed on the European market after 2010 .
The report before us provides for linking active and passive safety measures , and anticipates the future introduction of anti-collision systems .
To date , there is no effective system on the market providing for the protection of pedestrians in the case of collision , which is why the Commission is rightly encouraging industry to develop such a system .
I also agree with the rapporteur that the technical possibilities of ensuring higher passive safety standards should be constantly monitored , as should possibilities relating to increased safety requirements .
in writing . - Every year thousands of pedestrians and cyclists across Europe are killed or injured in road accidents .
European legislation has played an important part in reducing fatalities and injuries but it is important that standards are up to date .
The proposals in this field are to be welcomed and I accordingly voted in favour of the Ferrari report .
in writing . - ( SK ) The statistics for EU road traffic accidents are alarming .
It is estimated that every year as many as 8 000 vulnerable road users , pedestrians and cyclists , are killed , and 300 000 are injured .
Up to 80 % of road accidents happen in towns and villages where the speed limit is between 40 and 60 km / h .
This indicates that not only speeding , but the quality of road infrastructure and , in particular , vehicle safety can be responsible for road accidents as well .
Calls for the use of public transport , walking and cycling as alternatives to the use of cars must be offset by measures aimed at lowering the number of injuries sustained .
At the moment there are no collision avoidance systems on the market that are effectively able to identify pedestrians or other vulnerable road users in time .
I welcome , and I voted for , the report by the rapporteur , Mr Francesco Ferrari , on the proposal for a regulation on the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users .
The European car industry 's ambition must be to sell cars that are not just technically very advanced and ecologically clean but also extremely safe .
In order to ensure a high level of safety in all circumstances , the compulsory installation of active brake assistance systems for all new vehicles as of 2009 , envisaged in the Commission proposal , should not replace high-level passive safety systems , but should instead complement them .
I believe that this regulation will help to improve safety for all road users .
in writing . - ( PT ) Road safety is a priority of European transport policy , a real concern for political decision-makers and a mainstay for all citizens in the fight against the tragedies which , unfortunately , keep occurring all too frequently on Europe 's roads .
The Ferrari report aims to strengthen Community requirements in the area of safety and therefore to improve the safety of pedestrians .
We cannot , as a result , hesitate in demanding maximum attention and the best instruments available to guarantee safety on our roads .
In particular , it is vital that the legislative work continues to be as rigorous as possible and that the measures adopted are duly monitored and assessed in order to ensure that the necessary improvements are made in good time to prevent further tragedies .
We welcome , in this report , the attempt to identify ways of making up for lost time and ensuring that the prevention systems proposed are the most correct and appropriate for victims of collisions with motor vehicles .
Finally , and because sometimes the devil is in the detail , our task is to ensure , even in the more technical areas , that the legislation we produce always offers the best means of protection for our citizens .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am voting in favour of the report by Mr Ferrari .
I agree with the aim of this proposal to strengthen Community requirements aimed at improving the safety of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users in case of injuries resulting from a collision with a motor vehicle .
I believe that it is possible from both a time and a technical point of view to make rapid headway towards designing and implementing suitable means of adapting vehicles .
I applaud in particular the introduction of an obligation to equip vehicles with a Brake Assist System ( BAS ) , which will help to reduce the number of collisions between vehicles and pedestrians .
in writing . - I welcome this report because it strengthens existing legislation and yet again attempts to improve road safety , especially in the area of cyclists ' and pedestrians ' safety .
Each year 8 000 people - pedestrians and cyclists - are killed and 300 000 injured on the roads of the EU .
A great number of these casualties can be avoided either by better driver training or by improved motor vehicle design .
The introduction of brake assistance systems , the introduction of higher performance tests and a quicker implementation period should all help to reduce the carnage that happens every year on our roads .
I am particularly happy to see that those killers we know as bull bars will now have to pass the same performance tests on the vehicles on which they are intended to be installed , although for me the campaign to ban bull bars outright still goes on .
I congratulate the rapporter on his report and I look forward to a speedy conclusion with the Council on this issue .
in writing . - I wish to explain my vote in relation to the report by Francesco Ferrari on the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users .
Although I support the worthy objectives of this report , for all of us want to reduce the shocking loss of life and injuries sustained on our roads , I believe the report requires a very quick timetable for implementation and I do not consider that this can be achieved .
Some quite radical requirements are being proposed and therefore the burden on industry will be too high if the proposals are introduced too quickly .
At a time of recession , we must all remember that our constituents need to protect their jobs and too hasty legislation can often damage this objective .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users ( 2007 / 0201 ) .
At present , there are no anti-collision systems on the market capable of effectively identifying pedestrians and other vulnerable road users whilst complying with all the necessary conditions .
I share the rapporteur 's view that priority should be given to the introduction of measures to reduce the number of injuries , and above all , the number of fatalities amongst pedestrians and other vulnerable road users .
It should be emphasised that the amendments tabled are aimed at tightening up the provisions of the regulation wherever possible .
I voted in favour of the report , because I believe that it is important to monitor not only the development of technology to ensure active safety , but also to consider the possibility of introducing stricter provisions in the area of passive safety , relating to vehicle construction .
in writing . - ( PL ) Pedestrians and cyclists are often involved in road accidents .
Protecting their lives represents a major challenge for the motor vehicle industry .
The Electronic Pedestrian Protection system ( EPP ) is an excellent solution .
It reduces the severity of the consequences of colliding with a vehicle .
Thanks to this system , the front portion of the vehicle absorbs the force of the impact , thus reducing the extent of the injuries suffered by the victim .
Another successful method of ensuring the safety of pedestrians is through an active vehicle bonnet , which has been installed in the C6 .
At the moment the pedestrian is hit , the engine cover automatically rises .
Thanks to an impact detection sensor and a detonating mechanism , the bonnet rises by 65 millimetres in 0.40 seconds .
A separate mechanism keeps the bonnet in a raised position despite the force of the impact , thus absorbing the energy created .
In the case of a slight impact , protection is also provided by a part fitted with a shock absorber .
All vehicles should undergo as many tests as necessary in the interests of improving safety on the European Union 's roads .
This report concerns some positive changes to the usual procedure between the European Commission and the European Parliament .
Article 5a of amended Decision 1999 / 468 / EC introduced the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny for measures of a general scope which seek to amend non-essential elements of a basic instrument adopted in accordance with Article 251 of the Treaty , inter alia by deleting some of those elements or by supplementing the instrument by the addition of new non-essential elements .
Following the screening of the existing legislation and on-going procedures , the European Commission presented this proposal covering 59 legislative acts to be adapted to the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny .
In its decision of 12 December 2007 , the Conference of Presidents designated the Committee on Legal Affairs as the lead committee to deal with this comitology alignment and the specialised committees as opinion-giving committees .
The Conference of Committee Chairs agreed on 15 January 2008 on the modalities of cooperation between the Committee on Legal Affairs and the other committees involved .
This report therefore contains a limited number of amendments that were suggested by other committees in their opinions , received in the form of letters .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Galeote Quecedo on a proposal for a Council regulation opening and providing for the administration of autonomous Community tariff quotas on imports of certain fisheries products into the Canary Islands .
The report advocates lifting the common customs tariff on the import of certain fisheries products to the Canary Islands for the years 2007-2013 .
It should be noted that the provisions affected by the proposal expired on 31 December 2006 .
The proposal concerning the establishment of tariff-free quotas and the provisions for managing the latter complies with Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union , which provides for specific measures to assist the outermost regions .
I therefore voted in favour of this report , as I consider that the exceptional geographical situation of the Canary Islands in relation to the sources of supply of certain fishery products , which are essential for domestic consumption , entails additional costs for this sector .
One way of remedying natural difficulties of this type , due to geographical location , is to temporarily suspend duties on imports of the products in question from third countries .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of the Jäätteenmäki report on the statute of the European Ombudsman .
As a member of the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , I have seen for myself that an enormous , and growing , number of citizens are turning to the Community institutions to appeal against the failure of Member States to comply with EU rules .
Very often the petitions submitted to Parliament , and examined by the committee responsible , cannot be deemed admissible .
Here I would take up one key point : the office of the European Ombudsman must work harder and better on its external communications with citizens .
Very often the ordinary person is unaware even of the existence of the Ombudsman , potentially a means of creating a more functional and efficient link with the EU institutions .
The statute on which we are voting today sets out new mechanisms to bolster the effectiveness of the Ombudsman 's work .
It will be up to us MEPs to monitor the outcomes .
in writing . - ( FR ) I support the own-initiative report by Mrs Jäätteenmäki on the European Ombudsman 's access to information , and the need for a clearer set of regulations , as it seeks to lay down more precise rules in this area .
According to the text the various bodies and institutions of the European Union must supply the Ombudsman with all the information asked for , whereas until now a document could be refused on the pretext of confidentiality .
Similarly , the obligation on officials to provide testimony ' pursuant to instructions from their administrations ' is to be removed , while the official in question is to be required to tell the truth in all honesty .
Mrs Jäätteenmäki 's proposals are aimed at strengthening the public 's confidence in the activities of the European Ombudsman and as such they are worthy of implementation .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.30 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Measures to combat the rise in oil prices ( debate )
The next item is the debate on statements by the Council and the Commission on measures to control the increase in oil prices .
The Council is aware of the impact of rising prices on European citizens , and their negative effect on the entire European economy .
For this reason , the Council has addressed this matter in its recent meetings .
In the context of high food prices , the issue will be discussed also by Heads of State and Government during their meeting beginning tomorrow .
Analyses of the reasons for high oil prices indicate complex structural shifts in oil supply and demand in the global economy .
Oil production in the short term is unlikely to keep pace with the sustained strong demand of developing economies .
As the reasons for high oil prices were well presented by the European Commission in its report last week , I will not discuss them in detail .
The European Union experiences the impacts of such change in oil prices through higher inflation , higher household bills , problems in the agricultural and fisheries sectors , in the field of transport and in various industries .
Based on the assumption that the reasons for the rise in oil prices are of a structural nature and that such trend are likely to continue into the future , the Union needs to find long term solutions .
In tandem with encouraging competitiveness in energy markets and better transparency of oil markets , measures need to focus particularly on further support for energy efficiency and diversification of energy supply .
As regards energy efficiency , allow me to recall that the March 2007 European Council called for an increase in energy efficiency so as to achieve the objective of 20 % savings by 2020 .
The Energy End-use Efficiency and Energy Services Directive adopted in 2006 has contributed to achieving this aim .
But we cannot achieve everything through legislation .
Households and businesses could make a significant contribution by behaving more rationally , which the Council and the Parliament could encourage with ongoing awareness-raising .
The other crucial measure refers to the efforts for diversification of energy supply .
May I recall that in this connection the spring European Council last year adopted the Energy Policy for Europe action plan .
This sets a binding target of a 20 % share of renewable energies in overall EU energy consumption by 2020 .
I mention all this because I wish to underline that the Union has already adopted some measures which could reduce the sensitivity of the European economy to a surge in oil prices .
Current policies will have to be upgraded in future .
When discussing the rise in oil prices at its recent meeting , the ECOFIN Council , inter alia , reiterated the Manchester agreement adopted in September 2005 .
According to this agreement , fiscal and other policy interventions should be avoided when responding to high oil prices , as they distort competition and prevent the necessary adjustment by economic agents .
Measures that can be considered to alleviate the impact of high oil prices on poorer sections of the population should remain short-term and targeted , and should avoid distortionary effects .
Rising fuel prices were also discussed last week by the G8 finance ministers representing the most developed countries .
They stressed , inter alia , that increased prices of oil and food are a global problem , and that solutions should therefore be sought at the international level .
I would also like to mention that at the meeting of the General Affairs and External Relations Council this week , this Monday , we approved the 18-month programme of the three upcoming Presidencies .
Their work in the Council will include many tasks focused on tackling the issue of high food and oil prices efficiently .
Allow me to conclude by saying that in order to tackle the above-mentioned challenges we need coordinated policies , within the EU and at the international level .
We need to be careful not to create new imbalances and problems with these policies .
In further tackling these burning issues , we also look forward to the constructive collaboration of the European Parliament , in particular when discussing the necessary legislative proposals .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , for me each day starts with a routine check of oil prices , and in recent times the news has been more or less in one direction : oil prices are getting higher and higher .
Over the last three years , prices for oil in US dollars have more than tripled .
For the EU , with a 37 % share in energy consumption coming from oil , it is easy to understand the actual and potential impact of the high oil prices on our economies and citizens .
We have a constant decrease in our own production - and it is still substantial - but we have this decrease since the late 1990s .
A continuing increase in imports consequently makes our oil dependency high and the amount that we are paying for buying energy resources is increasing all the time .
This has a direct effect on our citizens and businesses .
Increased oil prices create inflation and that impact can be noticed already .
The contribution of energy to the increase in the price index in the fourth quarter of 2007 averaged 0.8 % in the euro area .
This means direct , tangible impacts on households and on a lot of economic sectors , not least those who cannot pass on the price of energy to the final consumer .
The increase in prices of motor and heating fuels for households between April 2007 and April 2008 exceeded by far the overall growth of consumer prices .
As an example , the prices of transport fuels rose on average by 12.7 % as opposed to the inflation average of 3.6 % .
Our most vulnerable citizens are again amongst those most affected .
Back in September 2005 , I was already talking to you about rising oil prices and I presented a five-point plan .
Since then we have been working out a whole series of new proposals to begin to reply to the challenge of high and growing oil prices : on energy efficiency , on cars , on fuel quality , on renewable energy .
As a result of these policies , we can expect a gradual decrease in oil consumption in the EU over the coming years .
We now have roughly more or less stable consumption in the last three years and the beginning of the switch to cleaner , more efficient transport that uses renewable energy sources .
Whilst more needs to be done , and certainly we should not underestimate the problems resulting from high energy prices for our citizens , particularly the most vulnerable households as well as many businesses , this already provides a good basis on which to further develop the best possible policy response to the challenge .
Indeed , the fact that oil prices have continued to rise does not mean that our policies have failed .
I am convinced that without our ambitious climate and energy goals the situation would be even more difficult .
But it is clear from the latest trends that we need to further step up our efforts .
So let me now consider the long-term factors affecting the oil market .
Put simply , we are leaving the era of cheap oil , and cheap energy in general .
Global energy demand is growing and the International Energy Agency estimates that it could increase by more than 50 % by 2030 .
In particular , emerging economies are consuming more and more energy .
On the other hand , it is far from clear whether there will be sufficient oil production to satisfy global demand .
Experts say that geologically there are still enough resources underground for the next 40-50 years .
As the International Energy Agency has stated , it is far from certain whether the producing countries have the ability or willingness to step up production to meet seemingly inevitable and long-term continued increases in global oil demand .
The era of cheap energy is over , at a time when in any event we have an absolute obligation to future generations to move to clean , carbon-free energy sources for heat , power and transport due to climate change .
This is the challenge facing us .
This requires a clear response .
But , before coming to the long-term and medium-term measures , I would like to mention some short-term steps alleviating the impact on consumers .
The effects on the most vulnerable groups must be mitigated in the shorter term , where necessary through social measures .
Support to the poorest households can be justified and needed , but needs to be targeted .
At the same time we should be very cautious as regards changes in the taxation regime .
Experience has shown that such measures , whilst in many ways politically very attractive , in fact only make the longer-term transition to dealing with high energy prices and saving carbon more difficult .
It is far better to target help where it is really most needed .
In terms of further developing the EU 's long-term approach to meeting the challenge , our existing energy policies are viewed by many as a ' world leader ' .
The Commission has always insisted that its recent climate and energy package had the combined objectives of sustainability , security of supply and competitiveness , a fact becoming clearer by the day .


Let me recall in more detail the most important elements of these policies , already in place or under examination in this House : the draft directive guaranteeing 20 % renewables in our final energy consumption by 2020 ; the new rules to expand and strengthen the EU 's Emissions Trading System ( ETS ) , ensuring that we meet our target of a 20 % greenhouse gas reduction by 2020 and establishing the ETS as driver for change ; the proposal for reducing CO2 emissions from cars and the Fuel Quality Directive that will oblige oil suppliers to progressively reduce their CO2 and energy consumption in the products they sell ; and , most importantly , the Energy Efficiency Action Plan , covering all sectors , at all levels , from the International Partnership for Energy Efficiency Cooperation to the Covenant of Mayors at the local level , to specific measures such as labelling of consumer goods or requirements for the energy efficiency of buildings .
Practically all the measures mentioned in the Energy Efficiency Action Plan are cost effective at USD 60 per barrel of oil .
This represents a start , but we need to do more .
The Commission will therefore continue the work at international level , notably constructive dialogue between the main oil-producing and consuming countries , such as the Jeddah meeting which will be convened this week in Saudi Arabia , or the EU-OPEC dialogue next week .
It will scrutinise the functioning of the oil and petroleum markets in the European Union and make suggestions for possible further policy action in the second Strategic Energy Review later this year .
It will assist oil-importing developing countries to mitigate short-term impacts of high fuel and food prices and to bring about structural improvements in their energy efficiency performance and the use of alternatives fuels .
It will lead efforts in an increased drive for energy efficiency .
This will remain my highest priority .
This means better legislation internally in the EU .
It also means pushing for a more effective international energy efficiency partnership , which was adopted last week at the G8 Energy Ministerial in Japan on the initiative of the European Union .
The existing legislation on energy efficiency and the improvements that I will table over the coming months on buildings , labelling and minimum product standards are truly important , but have to be seen as only one of many measures needed .
The real challenge is the effective implementation of energy efficiency policies at national , regional and local level throughout the European Union .
The Commission will play a greater role in assisting Member States in meeting this challenge .
I shall mention biofuels , because this issue is often discussed .
In the Draft Renewables Directive we translate the commitment of the European Council to ensure that 10 % of EU transport is powered by renewable fuel by 2020 into practice .
It should be noted that this 10 % can be covered by biofuels or electricity from renewable sources , or by increasing energy efficiency in the transport fleet .
I am convinced that the EU can and must generate the biofuels that it uses in a sustainable and responsible manner and not affect global food-production levels .
This can be done in a sustainable way by using previous set-aside land in the EU , improving land yields in a sustainable way , investing in technology for second generation biofuels , and working together with developing countries to ensure that biofuels complement food production and not replace it .
With such an approach , the development of alternative clean transport fuels must be part of the EU 's response to the challenges of oil prices and climate change .
The European Union will need to continue its international efforts and its dialogue with its main partners .
The G8 last week and the Jeddah meeting on oil prices this weekend show that the issue tops the political agenda .
We should use the credibility we are building and lead international action to exploit energy efficiency potentials and clean energy production around the globe , and enable the functioning of global efficient and trustworthy commodity markets .
However , action starts at home , and a renewed push for renewable energy and energy efficiency is beneficial not only for the climate but also for our economy .
There is an energy future for all of us .
This future will most likely be organised around different patterns of production , consumption and behaviour .
As with climate change , action is needed now and the Commission is fully involved in this .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Piebalgs , ladies and gentlemen , let us show some imagination .
All the ideas that seek to limit the maximum rate of VAT , including that proposed by President Sarkozy of France , are worthy enough and should be investigated , and I would like to put forward one of my own .
Oil is a fossil fuel with a limited life-span and high oil prices are an irreversible and long-term trend .
However , what is causing all the problems , apart from the price hike itself , is the sudden and dramatic way in which huge fluctuations in the global price per barrel of crude oil are affecting our economies .
I therefore wonder whether the European Union , without concealing the realities associated with the actual price increase , could not ensure price stability according to an annual cycle so that public budget departments , and especially those run by Member States for their tax systems and those established at local government level , along with companies and businesses that are engaged in contractual relationships tied to the price of oil and , more generally , the ordinary citizens who have to draw up their family budgets could all be better prepared for the major changes taking place in the energy sector without suffering the daily pressures that come from the sudden fluctuations in oil prices that stem from global exchange rates , speculation and the euro / dollar parity .
It is against this backdrop , Commissioner , that I propose examining the possibility of creating a Community instrument whose aim would be to guarantee the price of crude oil per barrel in accordance with the generally accepted budget cycle of one year .
Such an instrument could use the financial technique of buying and selling options on the world market and would prove useful as a way to combat speculation .
In 2005 , when the price was 50 dollars a barrel , I asked you for your opinion on the subject , Commissioner Piebalgs , and you replied that this idea was interesting , considering that the Commission did not have the power to control crude oil prices , particularly since the oil market is a global one .
I must however be insistent on this point , because such a Community instrument , which would operate as a zero sum game in the long term and require practically no financing whatsoever , would at the very least warrant investigation , not - I repeat - as a means for opposing the laws of the free market to which we are subjected but as a way to control the suddenness with which they are imposed on us and to reduce the impact that increased oil prices have all along the price chain in the sectors concerned .
The situation in the fisheries industry , which we will be debating in a moment , is a significant case in point .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I have great respect on a personal level for the two speakers from the Council and the Commission .
However , I think that the proposals which we have heard today and over recent days are too little , too late .
For example , the Commission 's paper makes no mention at all of the word ' speculation ' .
It is not that this is the main cause of the price increases , but to publish a paper today which makes no mention of speculation at all : even the G8 is more progressive than the Commission here !
As regards the substantial profits which , naturally , are also not mentioned , I have appealed to the Commissioner several times and , given that there is apparently no way of introducing control mechanisms , I have asked him at least to ensure , by means of voluntary agreements , that some of these profits are invested in energy-saving measures , the development of alternative energies , and research .
This is currently being discussed in France , for example . However , the Commissioner has made no comment about that today , and nothing is being done .
On the issue of energy saving and consumer protection , we support this in principle , but the Commission 's proposals were very weak .
It took this Parliament and the decision today , in the context of the Morgan report , to bring about a substantial expansion of consumer rights here , especially in relation to energy saving with smart meters etc .
As to the social measures which the Commissioner has proposed : all I can say is that it has been apparent for some time that social measures are required .
We have been discussing Ireland today .
Let me be frank : what makes citizens very nervous is when they get no feedback from Brussels about their specific and real concerns .
Whether the citizens concerned are fishermen in the SME sector or socially disadvantaged consumers , they want to get some kind of message from Brussels which helps them cope with their difficult situation .
We are expecting some clear signals from the Commission and the Council here , especially in the next few days .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not believe that we should go down the road proposed by Mr Audy .
I do not believe that it is our job to lay down price control measures .
The Commissioner has set out an approach to which the European Union should devote itself , namely that of our model of development , consisting of renewable energy and , at most , the urgent need to review the targets set - 20 % on energy ; 10 % on transport - to make them even more ambitious and to tackle them within an even shorter timeframe .
Unfortunately , as is evident for example from the gas policies on which we have voted today , it is the national governments which are opposed to a genuine European policy of competition and a mix of energy sources .
This is the problem .
The question of speculation obviously needs to be addressed .
In truth , here as elsewhere , the national governments are refusing to relinquish any real regulatory power over financial markets to the European Union , but at this stage let us not ask Europe to find shortcuts to sort out the damage done by national policies .
Renewable energy and long-term strategic planning : that is what we call for , and more rapidly than previously intended .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I wish to propose three measures .
First of all , put a tax on speculation .
It is unbelievable .
We are weighed down by costs while the profits being made by Total , Eon , Exxon and the speculators have never been bigger .
I personally would like to see Mr Juncker , President of the Ecofin Eurogroup , turning words into deeds .
We can very easily tax these profits at national level and then coordinate this Europe-wide , and it is this revenue , which will amount to millions of euros , which is the focus of my second point .
Secondly , each country will use this revenue to create a fund that will provide compensation for those in dire straits , such as fishermen , truck drivers and a large number of households that are now finding it difficult to pay the bills ; not by subsidising energy directly but by helping those concerned to find the money to pay for it , and more especially by linking this to energy efficiency .
It is the less well-off in our society who do not have the money to buy refrigerators that are more energy efficient .
This is where we need to intervene .
Thirdly , as political movers and shakers we have to be frank with the people we represent .
The current emergency is not a minor political difficulty over oil .
It is a structural crisis .
We have an economic model that has been developed for 1 billion people in the middle classes of the United States , Japan and Europe .
This economic model is now being extended to millions of people from the middle classes in China , India , Nigeria , South Africa , Mexico and Brazil .
The inherent problem with this model is that it does not incorporate resources and environmental pollution .
I therefore say to you , Commissioner , that we have to be more ambitious where energy efficiency is concerned and the question that I wish to address to you is as follows : should the Council not ask the Commission to propose an entire package of measures in September aimed at a major European initiative for investment in energy efficiency ?
EU policy on the taxation of energy products was introduced in 1993 .
At that time the price of a barrel of oil was USD 16 .
Today , when the price of oil has reached USD 140 , the question arises whether the current EU policy on the taxation of energy products can be justified .
Citizens and businesses in the EU are paying much more for fuel than those in other parts of the world .
This is because , on top of VAT , they are paying excise duty , in which the EU is actually calling for a further increase ; we are facing a truly paradoxical situation - the more expensive fuel becomes , the more money governments take from their citizens .
The wave of strikes that has swept across Europe is a clear demonstration of the growing dissatisfaction of its people with the situation , in which no measures are being taken at EU level .
This is a very clear signal indeed .
Can we possibly fail to notice it or ignore it ?
Do the Commission and the Council not think it is high time for EU policy on the taxation of energy products to be reviewed , especially with regard to excise duty , VAT and import duty ?
How can the Commission justify the strict message it is sending out to people , to the extent that they should learn to live with continuously increasing fuel prices ?
Has the Commission considered the possibility that the continuously growing fuel prices could undermine citizens ' trust in the EU , as the latter seems to be interfering with their countries ' governments ' attempts to take drastic measures ?
The facts underlying the excuses for failing or being unwilling to do anything as far as taxation is concerned are beneath any criticism .
The opinion that , with reduced taxes , the situation would not improve or would even decline is not a valid argument .
Globally , oil and petroleum products are being purchased not only by European countries .
There is no such thing as oil that is for Europe or not for Europe .
We have global oil prices ; it is simply that Europe imposes higher taxes on petroleum products , which is weighing heavily on the shoulders of its citizens .
Import duties are limiting competition .
Perhaps changes in taxation policy would not solve all the problems , but they would enable us to react more quickly to market developments and would make it easier to survive hard times .
Is that not important enough ?
No doubt we need other long-term measures ; I welcome the introduction of these measures , only we need decisive action .
EU citizens do not need fine words .
What they need is the right decisions that allow a quick response to any problems that might arise .
The taxation policy , especially VAT policy , was not God-given ; it needs to be changed when it is no longer in line with the current situation .
Forgive me , Madam President , but the positions taken by the Council and the Commission were disappointing .
There was nothing but words and not a hint of concrete measures .
Do not be surprised , then , at the ' no ' vote in the referendums in Ireland , France and the Netherlands .
Do not be surprised that in countries like Belgium , where demonstrations rarely happen , thousands of people are up in arms .
Neither the President-in-Office of the Council nor the Commissioner has mentioned profiteering .
What shall we do about profiteering ?
Why do you not impose taxes ?
Why not propose EU-coordinated national taxation with part of the revenue going towards supporting renewable sources of energy , clean energy , and energy-saving programmes ?
Furthermore , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission and the Council , the rise in oil prices benefits state funds because the taxes collected by the Member States rise correspondingly .
Thus the poorest social strata are worst hit by inflation and high prices .
Inflation for the poor is 40-50 % higher than the general inflation index .
Part of the increased tax revenue of the Member States should therefore be given as direct aid to the most vulnerable strata of society .
We must take action , not merely indulge in rhetoric .
In your concluding speeches , I expect you to explain to us why you have been quick to reject proposals submitted by right-wing governments , such as that of Mr Sarkozy , and not by left-wing governments .
Do you think Mr Sarkozy is too much of a Communist ?
If anything is to come of this crisis of speculation in food and oil prices , it is that blinkered neoliberalism has had its day .
We are waiting for you to grasp this too .

- ( FR ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , we are opening today 's debate on the basis of a communication that is in fact a contingency note from the Commission that has been converted into a communication as a result of the turmoil in public opinion created by the reality of situation that Europeans have to live through day after day .
The G8 raised the question of speculation in the oil markets .
We know only too well the true situation that we are currently faced with , if we really want to get to the bottom of it , and Claude Turmes touched on this .
The oil crisis that we are debating and that is causing such distress to our citizens is one of the elements , one of the signs of the second age of globalisation that we have now entered , an age in which the global imbalances that are now upon us , and have left us powerless , have upset the system , and the first manifestation of this was the financial crisis in the United States , which spread at remarkable speed to our own markets and went on to disrupt the speculative bubble , thereby ravaging the property markets and then moving on to the commodities market , impacting in particular on oil prices and on food prices too .
The existing balance between supply and demand in this specific market then did the rest .
Faced with this situation the European Union quite correctly anticipated events last year by drawing up a strategy that I would describe as the four-20 strategy for 2020 : 20 % less energy consumption , 20 % more energy efficiency and 20 % more renewables .
However , as always we find the same shortcomings just beneath the surface .
In setting up the single market we forget that if such an internal market is to be acceptable it also has to have a social dimension .
In wanting to create a single European market for goods and services we forget that perhaps we should take account of the social realities in the Member States , and when we seek to provide the European Union with a proper long-term strategy for energy we forget that this will come at a transition cost , to use the language of the economists , and that when asked what category of consumer will be most affected we can reply that it will be those from the less well-off sections of the community , those who are hit hardest by the increase in fuel prices .
There are several categories that are frequently mentioned today , those professions that are the most exposed in terms of their everyday working life , such as the fishermen and the road hauliers , but behind them there are also all those low-income households who are the first to suffer as far as their daily budget is concerned because for these families housing costs and transport costs are immediately affected by the increase in fuel charges , and when seen in proportion this affects them far more than it does the pockets of the speculators who are raking in the income from the increased oil prices .
( SL ) The rapidly rising fuel costs are halting transport around Europe and across the world .
Hauliers are demonstrating angrily , fishermen are demanding compensation , and transport is getting increasingly expensive .
The costs are literally halting the transport of goods .
The most horrifying thing is that alongside these prices , oil production costs are actually minimal .
Production costs are literally negligible .
Personal transport is the essence of the free movement of people and is a precondition for the free movement of goods .
The fuel costs pose a drastic threat primarily to air transport , which is most vulnerable to costs .
This applies especially to budget carriers , which have enabled new groups of citizens to discover Europe and the world .
The crisis for the budget carriers , which could hit us this autumn , will not just affect tourism , it will affect the aviation industry , the financial industry and consequently the entire economy .
In such circumstances the European Union must show that it understands the challenges and that it is responding to them on the operational level .
In these circumstances , through adequately coordinated action we can enhance the standing of European Union institutions and calm the situation in the markets .
A time of financial and economic crisis is an opportunity for the European Union to prove itself as a useful , necessary and effective framework for our economies , and in particular that European institutions are the right and effective tool for our economies .
Madam President , high oil and gas prices are here to stay and I doubt very much whether we will see the price much below USD 80 per barrel ever again .
The West was caught on the hop and underestimated the rise in Chinese and Indian consumption , the under-investment in exploration and extraction technologies , the inability - or unwillingness , perhaps - of Saudi Arabia to turn on its taps as a swing producer , and the geopolitical risks of countries like Venezuela , Nigeria or Iraq .
What is the answer , in my view ?
We must , of course , consume less , invest in renewables and new technologies like hydrogen-fuel-cell cars and look at whether biofuels , in terms of their overall effect , are good or bad in terms of global emissions and in food inflation for the developing world .
Those in this House , particularly on the Left , who believe it is all down to speculation are wrong , as you cannot hoard physical oil in large quantities as a speculator and take delivery .
Only the United States of America has the facility to do that .
Lastly , I welcome Italy 's decision to build a nuclear reactor , which I hope other EU Member States will follow .
( HU ) We will have to come to terms with oil prices remaining high in the long term .
The European Union and the Member States must prepare for all eventualities .
As Commissioner Piebalgs said , we must invest a great deal more in developing low-consumption , environmentally friendly technologies , in renewable energies and in establishing biogas plants , as stated in the report I produced as rapporteur .
Focused efforts to save energy are also important , including improving domestic insulation , for example .
We have no magic solutions , and we cannot hold energy back at our borders ; at the same time , however , we must also look for solutions in the short term .
I would like to ask the European Commission to permit Member States , including Hungary , to reduce excise duty on diesel temporarily , because the United States has an enormous competitive advantage in this regard . Thank you for your attention .
( LT ) A genuine solution to the problem can undoubtedly be achieved only by long-term measures .
However , some might not be able to survive long enough to see the results of these measures .
As for short-term measures , the only proposal has been aid for poor families .
However , if trade , the transport system , fisheries , small- and medium-sized enterprises and agriculture go bankrupt , short-term measures would be necessary for a great many people .
Excise duty was introduced for fuel , mineral oil , in 1992 .
In 2004 tax was applied to the entire energy system .
Does this mean that taxation has no influence at all ?
Taxation has a huge impact and in my opinion it is very important to allow a reduction in excise duty until long-term measures have been implemented .
One more thing - there was no mention of hydrogen as a new ( or renewable ) resource .
China and Canada are known for using it to power cars and Japan uses hydrogen to heat buildings .
( PT ) Given the rocketing fuel prices and bearing in mind their devastating effects on people and business , transport , fisheries , agriculture and industry , it cannot be forgotten that the big oil companies have seen a massive increase in their profits , basically as a result of the practice of price speculation which is based on the speculative valuation of cheaply acquired oil stocks .
Given these events , measures are needed to combat this scandalous speculation , in particular the proposal that we have tabled to introduce a tax in each Member State which will solely apply to the speculative gains made from the stock effect and which will turn these into state revenue .
This revenue must then be distributed among the economic sectors most affected in each Member State .
( PL ) Madam President , Europe and the entire world now find themselves in a situation where oil prices can determine not only economic growth , but also the depth of the crisis that is beginning to be felt in the market in food and in the fisheries sector .
Problems in the transport sector are likely to arise very soon .
What action is called for ?
In the long term , a stable widely understood energy policy should be developed .
There has been much debate on the subject in the Union and in this House .
In the short term , aid should be directed at specific sectors .
By way of example I could mention targeted aid for farmers , fishermen and hauliers .
The aid should be made available as early as the second half of this year .
I must emphasise that I am referring to targeted specific aid at a specific time of year .
Action to limit speculation and monopolistic practices should be taken too .
Finally , we should recognise that a review of taxation policy is needed , both at Union level and at the level of individual Member States .
( PT ) I want to congratulate the Commissioner on his statements stressing the importance of nuclear energy and its absolute transparency .

The numbers are not deceiving : oil and gas prices will continue to rise ; the pressure created by the world 's consumption of energy will continue to build ; our own energy needs will continue to develop , and yet , at the same time , we cannot fail to meet our responsibilities , in particular the urgent need to combat CO2 emissions .
As a result , nuclear energy must be on the agenda and we cannot avoid this .
We cannot rule out any significant source of energy from the energy mix , particularly where this is clean and safe .
Obviously we need renewables , but that is not enough .
Yes , we need energy efficiency , but that is not enough .
Yes , we need good biofuels , but that is not enough .
We must therefore make a choice : either nuclear energy is bad and must be banned or , if it is not banned because it is safe and because the technology and science have advanced , everyone must benefit from its production .
What we must have is vision for the future or we will end up going from bad to worse and from worse to total disaster .
( RO ) The effects of the oil and natural gas price increases are already felt in all the economic activities , as well as in social programmes and will reach their maximum levels next winter .
With good reason , the European Commission discusses about structural solutions aiming at saving and diversifying energy .
Nevertheless , we need fundamental changes in the European economy ; in fact , we are discussing a new technological structure of the European structure , which has to be obtained in the medium and long term .
For this reason , I think that the European Commission needs to review and re-examine the financial prediction for 2007-2013 in order to increase the efforts for new technologies and investments in the field of energy .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I mentioned in my opening speech the findings of the competent bodies that the reasons for the higher oil prices are structural in nature .
This is an important finding .
In this debate the influence of speculation has been mentioned several times .
I do not wish either to deny this or minimise it , but I would stress that speculation in itself does not lead to higher energy prices , unless structural reasons are provided for this .
And they have been provided .
This demands longer-term measures .
The time of cheap energy , at least that from fossil sources , is probably over for some time , probably for a long time .
This in turn demands long-term action from the European Union , which I have already mentioned and which would pursue two directions .
Firstly , increasing energy efficiency and in this way reducing our consumption , among other things .
In turn this reduces the dependence of Europe and the European economy on imported energy from fossil sources .
Secondly , diversification , and especially a move towards renewable energy sources .
Here I agree with Mr Papadimoulis , that more needs to be invested in renewable energy sources , but greater investment is being encouraged precisely by higher fossil fuel prices of .
If those prices become cheap again , if we make them cheap through some sleight of hand , we will reduce the motivation to finance and invest in renewable sources .
Irrespective of the fact there is broad consensus on the need for long-term measures , we cannot of course forget the short-term problems we are facing .
They have been mentioned , and I would reiterate them once here .
High energy prices are a particular problem for the poorer strata in our Union , they are a particular problem for fishermen - and a debate on this will be held in the next item on the agenda - and they are a particular problem for hauliers .
Here of course it makes sense to study , consider and adopt appropriate measures .
Among these measures we would of course not rule out revising taxation in the European Union .
I can say that the Council will express the expectation here that it will receive presently from the European Commission proposals on this issue , the taxation of energy products .
Permit me to conclude with the following thought .
I think that this debate is being held at a highly appropriate time , the day before the start of the European Council meeting , at which one of the main points of discussion will be high oil prices .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it has been a fascinating debate and I am very sorry that the time has passed so quickly .
As my job requires , I have been to the places where oil is being produced : the Caspian Sea , the Barents Sea , Saudi Arabia .
I think one mistake we make is thinking that it is easy to produce .
It costs billions , and in very difficult environments .
Costs overrun , there is local damage to the environment and people are unhappy about a lot of projects .
So it is very clear that , if we speak about oil issues , we should not be looking for those responsible but should try to find the appropriate responses in the European Union .
If we believe that this same approach would help everybody , we should follow it .
There are no magical measures .
Energy efficiency is the number one measure .
Without this , the world will have much higher prices .
It is very clear .
( Interjections from the floor )
Well , we are doing quite a lot .
Renewable energy and also alternative energy sources like nuclear are important also to alleviate the problem .
New technology investment is needed , and for the sectors it is important to address structural measures , not just subsidies : subsidy is taking from one pocket to put into another pocket .
For example , regarding tonight 's fisheries debate , I would ask why fishermen cannot pass increased fuel prices on to the price of fish , because that is the basic question : what happens , what prevents it ?
This means that we should address sectoral measures .
On a global level I believe that it is very clear what we are trying to do , to try to remove the OPEC policy of capping supplies to the market , of not allowing , in many cases , Western companies to come with technology and knowledge to produce oil and thus create better supply .
For developed nations we should lead the way in energy efficiency , and my proposal for international partnership has been adopted by the G8 .
But , as everybody expected oil prices to come down to USD 9 per barrel , the world was late , and now we know that we should follow this policy .
Concerning consumer protection , I believe that the Commission has always been very consistent on this .
I have a lot of infringement cases where countries have not even informed the Commission , as is their duty , about public service obligations , meaning that legal documents adopted after the Commission proposal have all the necessary elements in them , and they should be implemented .
I believe that the Commission 's response and the Council 's response is measured and right .
Each place in the market has its role .
I know that nobody likes to defend speculators , but what is the future market 's role ?
It indicates where the price could go and allows investments to be made .
Well , I could say , ' Let 's tax everybody higher ' - we can increase tax to 100 % for everybody , but it will mean that we lose the incentive to invest .
Let us instead make the incentive to invest , let us allow positive ways to investment to be made .
So that is what we need .
( Interjections from the floor )
Whether it is the companies of Saudi Arabia , Saudi Aramco , that we should tax , or Gazprom , we cannot tax them because they have national legislation on taxation .
Concerning European companies , we do not have any company nowadays that has a huge windfall profit because of oil and gas .
( Interjections from the floor )
They also needed to invest in other projects as well , and if you know these companies , you should indicate them .
If you know these companies that have such a beautiful life ...
( Interjections from the floor )
E.ON does not work in oil .
Eni works in oil but invests billions in projects , for example for South Stream , for the projects in Kashagan - they invest billions - and Libya .
Each company has a role in the market .
Madam President , this is a fantastic debate .
I am glad that we will have the possibility to come back to this debate , because there are no simple answers .
But I believe our proposal is measured and it is the right one .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
The high price of oil is making us all suffer , but the most vulnerable population groups on low incomes are certainly being badly hit .
The European summit must send out a strong signal tomorrow that measures for the weakest in society really are justified and necessary .
A reduction in VAT or excise duty is not an immediately obvious solution , which is understandable , as it might encourage the oil producers to charge even higher prices .
Perhaps , however , we could do it differently .
Perhaps we should go for a shift in duties , so that air tickets specifically are made a bit more expensive ( from the autumn for instance ) , by means of a levy , and the proceeds of that are used to reduce heating bills for people on low and middle incomes .
Any surplus revenue could be used to provide grants for insulating homes .
That is the cheapest and most efficient solution , all things considered .
Investing in renewable energy and energy-saving is what we have to do , certainly over the medium term .
Meanwhile , however , we have to find solutions for those who are struggling .
Europe cannot turn a deaf ear to them .
, in writing . - The recent exponential rise in oil prices and subsequent crippling fuel prices are having a hugely negative impact on business and industries across the EU .
Of course , this situation also has serious consequences for the average consumer .
Citizens are feeling the pinch with rising food and fuel prices and reduced purchasing power .
I agree with the Commission that we must aim to reduce our consumption and dependency on oil and focus our efforts on promoting energy efficiency and developing renewable energy sources .
However , this is a long-term solution .
For the moment , practical and tangible steps must be taken to ease the pressure on groups such as farmers , fishermen and members of society who are most vulnerable to these price increases .
Even if short-term measures such as tax reductions are outside the scope of EU competence , the Union must be seen to take the lead and encourage national governments to implement solutions .
The current situation is unsustainable and efforts must be made to tackle it .
The crisis in the fisheries sector caused by rising fuel oil prices ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council by Philippe Morillon , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the crisis in the fisheries sector caused by the rising fuel oil prices - B6-0162 / 2008 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission by Philippe Morillon , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the crisis in the fisheries sector caused by the rising fuel oil prices - B6-0163 / 2008 ) .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , I will allow Commissioner Borg some time to settle into his seat .
This oral question was initiated at the unanimous request of those groups sitting on the committee that I have the honour of chairing , and I am pleased that it comes after this most excellent debate , which dealt with a number of general issues .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , my father was born more than a century ago in a village near Saint-Malo , which in my youth I knew as a place full of life that was dependent essentially on agriculture and fishing .
Today this village is dying from a cancer caused by the proliferation of dead cells that are the holiday homes and the gradual disappearance of all those activities that used to enable it to live for more than just the six summer weeks .
This is not an isolated phenomenon but is something that can be seen happening along practically the entire coastline of Europe and as a result of this situation Commissioner Borg , to whom I pay tribute , has been moved to propose the Integrated Maritime Policy , which should enable us to restore , preserve and resurrect the communities that live around the coasts of Europe .
If this decision has meant transforming DG FISH into DG MARE it does not necessarily mean that the European Union is determined to see an end to those resources that our fishermen have to continue to exploit in the seas and oceans .
Why does the European Union only have two common policies , namely the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy ?
When you think about it the answer is simple : it is to enable our continent to continue to obtain sufficient quantities of food by working the soil and fishing the seas .
It is therefore in these sectors where the impact of the massive increase in oil prices could well have catastrophic consequences , and of course this applies particularly to the fisheries industry .
Already badly shaken by the reduction in resources this profession is today essentially threatened with extinction and this explains - though does not excuse - the violent manifestations of despair that some of its representatives have resorted to and continue to carry on in certain places .
This is why I am delighted , Commissioner , that your Executive Committee has now proposed a number of measures designed to come to the immediate rescue of those industries that are most threatened , including authorising Member States to grant special temporary exemption from the rules that have been imposed for the implementation of the European Fisheries Fund in accordance with procedures that are to be discussed , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in Luxembourg on 24 June at the next Council of Ministers on agriculture and fisheries .
Let us not lose sight of the fact that the European Union - and the planet in general - has to be able to continue using the seas and oceans to obtain the food resources it needs .
There is no point in preserving and protecting the fish if there are no longer fishermen to catch them .
In my opinion this obvious fact justifies the detailed proposals that will cover not just the short term but the medium and long term too , proposals that we are working on together , Commissioner , in the Committee on Fisheries , proposals that will be further elaborated to you by the rest of my colleagues and in the draft resolution that will be put to the vote tomorrow .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) First I would like to thank the Honourable Member of the European Parliament , Mr Morillon , for his question on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries .
May I stress from the outset that the Slovenian presidency is aware of the magnitude of the problem concerning rising fuel prices and their negative impact on fisheries in the EU .
I can inform you that yesterday the President of the Agriculture and Fisheries Council , Minister Iztok Jarc , met with some fellow ministers in Venice , in order to discuss this issue .
Together they debated and prepared some proposals for improving current difficulties in the EU fisheries sector , which will be discussed in the coming days .
However , I would like to recall that this situation is not confined to the fisheries industry .
High fuel prices are detrimental to all industries across the board , including agriculture , transport and manufacturing .
The crisis has triggered a serious situation in all sectors .
It is therefore an issue of a horizontal nature , which comprises elements touching on competition policy , state aid and fiscal measures .
It is the gravity of this issue and its negative impact on the EU fisheries sector that provoked the Slovenian Presidency to include it on the agenda of the Agriculture and Fisheries Council to be held early next week , as Mr Morillon has already mentioned .
This will serve as an opportunity for Ministers to present their views on the current situation and exchange views on most the appropriate solutions with Commissioner Borg .
Furthermore , the Presidency decided to change the theme of the informal meeting of fisheries directors to be held in Slovenia at the end of this month , so that fisheries directors will also be able to discuss this burning issue .
All this comes after the Council recently in its numerous meetings in various formations addressed the issue of rising energy prices , and about which we spoke under the previous item on the agenda .
Allow me to explain in greater detail the conclusions of the Ecofin Council .
In relation to oil prices , the Council expressed concern at the continued surge in oil prices and discussed ways of addressing the attendant social and economic consequences .
It underscored the need to foster energy efficiency and alternative energy sources , increase the transparency of oil markets , promote competition in energy markets and enhance dialogue with oil-producing countries .
In the same meeting , the Council also encouraged the Commission to further review commodity-related markets and to consider policy responses aimed at limiting price volatility .
As the Presidency has already stressed in the morning debate , this issue will be discussed also at the meeting of the European Council , beginning tomorrow .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , Mr Morillon , for his question , which gives me the opportunity to address the fuel crisis .
I would like to say at the outset that I am pleased to see the existing very good relations between the Commission and the Fisheries Committee of the European Parliament moving from strength to strength .
Turning to the specific question , I am aware of the difficulties the fishing sector is going through as a result of the steep increase in the price of fuel .
This increase constitutes a crisis which is structural and long-lasting and which takes on a very particular - I would be tempted to say even unique - dimension with regard to fisheries .
Let me say why .
For many years , the EU fleet has suffered from a vicious circle of overcapacity , over-fishing , and declining profitability .
At the same time , fishermen have been unable to benefit from reduced supply and rising retail prices for fish products .
As a result , margins in many segments are wafer-thin , making the sector more vulnerable than others to a drastic rise in costs , such as we have seen with the price of oil .
The Commission understands the need for coordinated action at EU level to avert a serious crisis for the industry , and to ensure that the problem is not simply displaced but really tackled head-on .
This means not only providing the possibility of emergency relief , but also committing to finally addressing the underlying issue of overcapacity , which is undermining all our attempts to get the industry back on a sustainable and profitable footing .
For these reasons , as Mr Morillon pointed out , the College yesterday approved in principle the contents of an emergency package of measures to tackle the immediate social and economic hardship triggered by the dramatic rise in the price of oil while also tackling the underlying structural problems of the European fleet .
I believe that it is vital to focus aid on the fleets which are most dependent on fuel and thus most affected by the current overcapacity .
We therefore propose that Member States can set up Fleet Adjustment Schemes ( FAS ) , under which limitations on access to permanent cessation - i.e. scrapping - premiums will be lifted .
Additional aid for temporary cessation would be available for vessels involved in these Fleet Adjustment Schemes and partial decommissioning aid would be granted to operators who replace larger old vessels with smaller , more energy-efficient ones .
There would also be provisions to allow for temporary reductions in employees ' contributions to social security payments .
More specifically , temporary cessation aid would be available for all vessels for up to three months throughout the remainder of 2008 , on condition that the vessels in question be included in a restructuring plan .
Such aid will be tailored to ensure that it supports stock recovery and / or marketing conditions , whenever possible .
Based on further economic analyses , possible modifications to the de minimis regime for fisheries will also be considered , so that the ceiling of EUR 30 000 per three years would be applied per vessel , rather than per firm - though with an overall cap of EUR 100 000 per firm .
A number of specific initiatives to promote the value of fish at the first point of sale are also envisaged , and the Commission is planning to set aside an additional EUR 20-25 million from the CFP budget to fund ad hoc projects in this area , in addition to the funds available under the EFF .
Further measures are planned to encourage the shift to energy-saving technologies , cushion the socioeconomic impact of the crisis , and facilitate the reprogramming and the disbursement of EFF funds .
The above measures will consist of temporary derogations from the rules of the European Fisheries Fund so as to support faster adaptation of the EU fleet to the present situation and provide temporary relief during the transitional phase .
I will be presenting this package to the Council of Fisheries Ministers in Luxembourg on 24 June with the intention of adopting a formal proposal on this subject as early as July .
Given the exceptional situation being faced by the fisheries sector I trust I can count on the support of both the Council and the Parliament to adopt the said measures as speedily as possible .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party propelled this debate in the belief that our institution could not continue to show indifference in the light of the gravity of the crisis .
I think that we were right , given that only yesterday , and for the first time , the Commission announced a series of measures that this Parliament had been requesting for years , some of which are identical to those contained in the joint motion for a resolution .
As indicated in the resolution , the price of fuel for fishermen has risen by more than 300 % in the last five years and more than 38 % since January , while prices have remained the same for 20 years , with decreases in some cases of up to 25 % as a result of the massive entry of imports , which are often products of illegal fishing .
My Group has emphasised that there is no sector that can survive these conditions and that is why it wanted to bring everyone together today , including the Council and the Commission , to find out more about this issue and debate the package of measures .
We are particularly pleased that the measures at last include an increase in de minimis aid to EUR 100 000 , although we would have preferred it to be allocated per vessel instead of per undertaking , as this Parliament has requested and as stipulated in the joint resolution .
We fully support the reductions in social costs and the announcement of greater flexibility of the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) so that all those who so desire can opt to restructure their undertakings , replace their engines with more efficient engines or receive additional aid , as you indicated , for temporary cessation .
We nevertheless believe , Commissioner , that there is another set of measures that warranted the same emphasis and should have been developed in as much detail as those aimed at the restructuring of the sector : I am referring to market-based measures , such as the reform of the COM , which enable fishermen to play a greater role in the setting of prices , more specific measures concerning labelling and , above all , measures that demonstrate the clear will of the Council and the Commission to combat illegal fishing .
We thus welcome some of the measures that are a step in the right direction , but we have to wonder whether we might have prevented the sector from reaching this critical situation by reacting much sooner .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I am also pleased with , and welcome , the measures announced by the Commission . It appears that in some cases they go even further than those requested by Parliament in its motion for a resolution .
The fact that we have managed to make space for a debate on this issue during this very busy part-session gives some idea of the importance this House places on the matter .
I believe that in these somewhat unsettled times Europeans should tackle this crisis together using an effective and unbiased mechanism : that could take the form of the much-demanded increase in flexibility of the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) , which would enable us to adopt urgent measures at Community level .
National solutions like those proposed by some Member States would only lead to imbalances .
We hope , Commissioner , that at the meeting of the Council of Ministers next Monday the Commission will be able to clarify matters even further and reach agreement with the Council of Ministers on how the EFF can be used to help the segments of the fleet that have been most affected .
It also appears to be urgent to examine once and for all the price-setting mechanism .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , we need to stress the fact that a very high proportion of our fishermen are engaged in running small businesses .
They have a limited right to fish .
To exercise this right , they have to invest in boats , fishing gear and safety equipment .
This can involve the repayment of substantial loans .
They also need to pay for licences and , in certain cases , may do so for quota too .
They then incur considerable running costs , such as for labour , repairs and , of course , fuel .
The rules on quota and days at sea may require them to travel long distances to acquire a saleable catch .
Particularly in the case of bad weather , they may fail to do so .
When they are successful , they still do not have control over the price of fish caught .
In most cases they are dependent on what can be raised at auction .
So they simply do not have the means of compensating for rising costs .
The resolution sets out various practical means of assistance .
That can be through the de minimis rule and its upward revision .
I would urge all Member States to make use of the opportunities to which the rule gives rise , so as to maintain a level playing field .
Urgent , too , are steps to curb IUU fishing , not just to help maintain the price of legally caught fish , but for stock conservation .
This is true , too , of improving labelling requirements .
Other measures suggested , including restructuring but going beyond that to energy efficiency and alternative energy sources , also serve environmental purposes .
In adopting them , we can bring benefits for our beleaguered fishermen and our endangered planet alike .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , as you have recalled , this structural crisis is both deep and enduring .
It therefore calls for solutions that will also endure , not just for the fisheries industry but for all the sectors concerned .
It also has to be said that the current crisis is precisely the result of years of blindness to the reliance of the fisheries sector on fuel - and cheap fuel at that - and to the headlong rush to a kind of arms race , with ever more powerful vessels that can go out further and further and bring back ever greater quantities of fish .
These are also some of the issues that we have to tackle .
The problem of expensive fuel oil is inseparable from all the other questions that affect the fisheries sector - management of fish stocks , pricing policies , world trade , the control of illegal fishing - and it is difficult to deal with this issue in isolation from the rest .
The subsidies and aid that the Commission is proposing to provide , and which appear to me to be going in the right direction , will only be acceptable - especially as far as the public is concerned - if they are dependent on an in-depth reorientation of fishery policies and fishery practices .
For our part , we regret that the joint compromise resolution does not in fact lay down conditions for the aid and subsidies that can be granted for this reorientation and for the obligation to put an end to fleet overcapacity and to move towards a better management of the fishery stocks and better protection of the marine ecosystems .
What is more , this is the very condition on which the economic and social viability of the fisheries depends .
Finally , we would like to see the Member States assuming full responsibility of their own and ending the demagogic practice of promising money they do not have without putting forward any sustainable policies for the fisheries industry .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) We are having this debate because fishermen , including Portuguese fishermen , have mobilised to demand measures , proposed some time ago , in response to the rising price of fuel , both petrol and diesel , and to the socioeconomic crisis in the sector , given the attitude of indifference , particularly of the European Union .
Our Group has tabled its own motion for a resolution in which we set out our proposals , some previously adopted by the European Parliament , and put forward new measures to respond to the sector 's needs .
These measures would provide support for vessels running on petrol , similar to what is happening with diesel , establish a maximum price level or an additional discount for fuel , specifically of 40 cents per litre , improve prices at the initial point of sale without any repercussions on prices for the end consumer , ensure that production costs are one of the variables taken into account when setting guidance prices and ensure a fair income for crews .
Decisions are required in response to the rising price of fuel and the price formation process for fish at the initial point of sale .
These are the two main factors at the heart of the worsening crisis in the sector .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the massive fuel oil price increases we are talking about today may well be the straw that breaks the camel 's back for many British fishermen .
They are already worn down by the endless regulations and quota cuts spewing out from this institution and bringing their industry to its knees .
Now they are in the invidious position of being unable to put to sea in order to catch the meagre amounts of fish they are still allowed to land , because the cost of fuel makes it unprofitable before they start .
The British Government has for many years abandoned them and has done so again in respect of fuel subsidies to help them through their present crisis .
Some of the fishermen in my area have been forced to seek a legal review of their situation because under the CFP they are supposed to be guaranteed a living from fishing .
The UK Independence Party believes the CFP is an unmitigated disaster that Britain should pull out of , to regain control of its own waters while it still has some fishermen left .
Mr President , I am very glad that the Commissioner has today addressed the much wider crisis in this sector , which has been compounded by the steep rise in diesel cost .
As Mr Titford just said - and I rarely agree with him , but I do in this case - in some fishing nations the huge cost of fuel has followed in the wake of dwindling quotas and falling prices for fish .
The situation is so bad that some crew in the UK now are earning less than GBP 100 a week , and that is driving hundreds of them to leave the industry at exactly the time that we need more young recruits joining the industry .
Many vessels , as everyone in this Chamber knows , can no longer afford to put to sea .
They lose money on every trip they make .
Angry fishermen are blockading ports ; striking lorry drivers are refusing to carry freight : and that means the markets for fish are being completely disrupted at the most productive time of the year .
But I am greatly encouraged by the provisions and the proposals that Commissioner Borg has unveiled to us this afternoon .
Those Member States who submit proposals for fleet adjustment schemes or for the complete restructuring of their fisheries sector can receive aid from the European Fisheries Fund , and this will go a long way to alleviating the acute crisis affecting the sector at the present time .
I am deeply ashamed that the British Government is refusing to accept this aid , refusing to apply for this co-financed aid .
It is atrocious that our fishermen should end up fishing in the same water for the same species as fishermen from other neighbouring nations who will be receiving this aid .
That further distorts the market .
So we need to support the creation of a smaller , more fuel-efficient fleet that is better matched to fishing possibilities .
I think what the Commission is proposing will achieve that .
( PT ) I believe that , in this crisis , we have to understand that the rise in fuel prices is the catalyst for a situation that was already far from healthy and that was already raising some major concerns .
This is also - and I feel that this must be stressed - a crisis of European dimensions , so it is not right to try and respond to this at national level .
Thirdly , I want to congratulate the Commissioner and the Commission on the plan that has just been presented .
In my opinion , these are appropriate measures , even though they may not go far enough , but they will help to solve the problem at its roots and in the structural factors causing this problem .
I hope we can continue along this road which I feel is the right one .
- ( FR ) Mr President , every fishing port in the European Union is urgently calling for two things : fuel oil at a standard price Europe-wide of 40 cents a litre and concerted management of quotas .
These legitimate demands are vital to the fisheries industry and to the jobs it provides .
The huge hike in oil prices and the preservation of fish stocks are real problems .
The free market is proving incapable of controlling the impact of the rising fuel prices .
Swelled-up with profits the oil companies respond by speculating on the increased demand for their products in the emerging nations , hoping thereby to burst the bank .
By reducing the tax on fuel , which is forever increasing , and taxing the colossal profits of the oil companies we could easily meet the demands of the fishermen without the need for subsidies , especially those paid out haphazardly .
What is more , the fishermen will no longer accept being treated like delinquents of the sea by a Commission that is covering up for the real rogues that are the flags of convenience and the fishing industry cartels .
No one is more committed than the fishermen to the conservation of marine stocks .
The system needs to be completely reformed and the Commission should be working democratically with the professionals of the fishing industry rather than imposing a dictatorship based on the rule of its pseudo experts .
( EL ) Mr President , I welcome the Commissioner and the President-in-Office .
In the last five years , fishing has suffered the consequences of rising fuel prices .
Since 2004 , the price of fuel has risen by 240 % .
The Commission and the European Parliament are taking measures to overcome the problem , but the situation has not improved so far .
On the contrary , it has worsened .
Since the beginning of 2008 , we have seen an increase of 40 % in the region .
Many fishermen - French , Italian , Portuguese , Greek and Spanish - have started tying up their ships .
Why is this ?
Because the cost of fishing is higher than the price they get for their fish .
I am very deeply concerned because I fear that a very fine social group will go to rack and ruin .
It upholds traditions , and I am referring to our fishermen .
We must save them from impending disaster .
I endorse the offer to step up all the measures proposed by my fellow Members to combat illegal fishing and related problems .
However , I also want to add a very important point .
The European Fisheries Fund must be activated to secure resources , and with this money we will help our fishermen to survive .
If not , we shall be facing something of a crisis .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the wake of uncontrolled fuel price rises there are increasing numbers of vociferous protests and signs of despair on the part of the fishermen of many Member States .
We can no longer remain passive observers of these vigorous protests .
It is essential that the EU should take immediate measures to provide relief to those plying this trade .
They are suffering hardship without having any other options or means of overcoming the situation .
If the EU does not provide immediate solutions , we will be faced with a political problem regarding the Union 's effectiveness in dealing with emergencies such as the one we are experiencing now .
This shifting of responsibility from the Commission to the Member States and back again must stop once and for all .
In any case , someone has to take the responsibility and initiative , and according to our European vision , that is the job of the EU .
European policies , Commissioner !
I think your proposals are a move in the right direction .
- ( NL ) Mr President , the fishing industry finds itself in heavy weather due to the high fuel costs .
In 2008 alone the price of diesel has risen by more than 38 % .
There are no signs for the time being that the price increase will come to an end .
In my country , the Netherlands , about 15 boats from the trawler fleet have already been laid up , because every fishing trip is making a loss .
However , it is not only the sharp increase in prices that is responsible for the dramatic situation .
The import of large quantities of fish from outside the European Union at low prices is partly responsible for this situation .
Large quantities of yellowtail flounder and Pacific sole are imported into the Netherlands and sometimes sold as sole and plaice .
This brings them into unfair competition with the sole and plaice caught by Dutch fishermen .
More checks should be done on the use of the names of these fish species .
The Dutch fleet also needs to go through a transition .
The existing boats are too big and too dependent on fossil fuels .
In fact , all the boats should be replaced by smaller multi-purpose boats using sustainable fishing methods .
Unfortunately , the Commission has only issued temporary permits for five boats using the electric stimulus method of fishing for sole .
We would like to see more .
The industry needs financial resources in order to survive and work must be done on this in the short term .
I am pleased with the Commissioner 's proposals .
There may also be options through the CO2 savings in the fishing industry .
It would be good to take another look at that .
The Dutch fishing fleet is responsible for about 1 % of the total CO2 emissions .
We want to reduce that by 20 % .
If you look at the price of CO2 at EUR 25 per tonne , there are opportunities there .
Certainly when you remember that with restructuring , that fleet disappears , and so there is a complete reduction in CO2 emissions .
We could calculate on the basis of a write-down of seven years .
I hope that the Commission will take these proposals further .
Parliament will certainly support them but perhaps you can also get something out of this .
Mr President , the common fisheries policy has failed miserably and has contributed to the sharp decline in Europe 's fish stocks .
It is not fit for purpose .
The recent rise in marine fuel prices - an increase of over 240 % on 2004 levels , according to the Commission , over 30 % in recent months - has only exacerbated the already well-documented devastation of our fisheries and fishing industry in Europe .
While we all agree that certain urgent short-term measures need to be taken at EU and Member State level to alleviate the plight of fishermen , skippers and their crews - such as appropriate levels of state aid , perhaps reduction in tax on fuel over a certain price , financial support for tying-up and greater control of imports garnered from illegal fishing , to name but a few options - we as policymakers must also look to the future .
It is time for us to consider new options in any medium- to long-term restructuring plan , as well as the necessary decommissioning grants to match fleet capacity to available resources .
What about a market-based approach with a tradable quota system , rather than continuing the practice of overbearing regulation , which has simultaneously decimated the fishing industry and precipitated the serious decline in fish stocks ?
The present CFP perversely incentivises the immoral and unsustainable practice of discarding accidental by-catch and juveniles , as it is illegal to land them .
We discussed this recently in the Schlyter report .
This problem is compounded by illegal imports , unreported and unregulated fishing , as discussed at the last part-session .
According to some experts , such as Thorvaldur Gylfason , Professor of Economics at the University of Iceland , a fee-based trading policy , determined by an independent authority , could make every kilo of sustainable fish valuable so that there would be no inducement to discard fish or land it illegally .
Would the Commission and the Council not agree that a tradable quota system , informed by economic and environmental rationale with an ecosystem-based management , could , on the one hand , preserve valuable marine resources for present and future generations while , on the other hand , offering some solace to the productive and efficient fishermen who are crying out for reform ?
Yes , we need short-term emergency measures for the present marine fuel crisis , together with medium- and long-term restructuring , informed by environmental and economic rationale , instead of making criminals of our most productive and efficient fishermen who lie awake wondering , as one Irish fishermen 's spokesman said : ' Will it be the boat or the house that will go first ? '
( ES ) Mr President , on the initiative of my Group , and with everyone 's support , we are debating the serious crisis in the fisheries sector and we are doing so separately from the general fuel crisis because even though the price of fuel has aggravated the crisis , it is only the straw that broke the camel 's back .
The crisis is much deeper and needs to be dealt with urgently .
To save the sector the Commission , the Council and the Member States must in agreement adopt a programme that fulfils the following 10 requirements that I have garnered from this debate .
One : more checks on illegal imports .
Two : more checks on legal imports .
Three : reform of the COM with greater emphasis on prices to fishermen at initial sale .
Four : reorientation of the aid under the European Fisheries Fund .
Five : reprogramming of national operational programmes . Six : payment and increase in the amount of de minimis aid per vessel ; fortunately , the Commission seems to have understood this but the proposal has to be improved because it is not exactly what we want .
Seven : adoption of fiscal aid .
Eight : adoption of social aid .
Nine : improved transparency and consumer guarantees , labelling and traceability .
Ten : consumer advertising campaigns and sectoral support .
These 10 requirements can be summarised in just two : greater payments and aid for our fishermen , and sanctions for offenders .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , either we do this now or we will literally have to carry the European Union 's fisheries sector .
I know that Commissioner Borg is aware of these issues and is doing what he can , but I believe that we must help to improve this proposal .
I hope that the Council will also do the same next week and that we can take advantage of the French Presidency , which is propelling this reform , to implement it in full .
We must use the opportunities available because time is of the essence .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the future of fishing is facing two threats : firstly , the sustainability of resources and , secondly , the survival of fishermen .
We therefore have to guarantee the future in two ways : firstly , by limiting fishing and , secondly , by helping fishermen to survive and fish better .
It seems that the Commission is finally aware of these problems and some governments , such as the Portuguese Government which had completely ignored this issue , are starting to wake up to the disaster .
It should also be noted that in some countries , such as Portugal , 85 % of the fleet is small scale and , of these vessels , nearly half run on petrol .
As a result , this issue must also be taken into account and measures defined which can be applied equally to everyone so that governments do not have any excuse .
We should also consider extending to this area some of the support that exists for the merchant navy , such as in relation to the integrated social security contribution .
This is because the structural measures will serve no purpose and have no future if we do not ensure that fishermen will be around tomorrow .
That is what is at stake .
Mr President , the rise in oil prices affects everyone .
So why is the fishing sector being singled out for special treatment ?
Why do we not just subsidise everyone ?
Local inshore fishermen will suffer least from this increase in prices while the deep-sea operators will suffer the most .
These are the people operating huge vessels , travelling great distances , employing relatively few people but hovering up the fish in vast quantities , bringing about the mass extinction of the fish in the seas .
Our response to the rise in fuel prices should be to free up the market and let the laws of supply and demand take effect .
The very last thing we should do is provide subsidies that will help make fish extinct - it is the policy of madness .
When all the fish have gone we should remember that we did our best to make it happen .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to welcome the package proposed by the Commission .
However , I would like to say - coming from Ireland - that Ireland never received its proper share from the Common Fisheries Policy , and that was reflected in the vote last week .
It is high time for the European Union to demonstrate that it can provide assistance to the fishing industry in its time of need , as that industry is indeed in difficulty .
It is the small fishers who are worst off in this regard .
Ireland has 11 % of the European seas but less than 4 % of the quotas .
The policy is not working .
However , it is important now for the European Union to unite and to show that it can come to the assistance of fishers in their time of need .
I ask that everything possible be done to promote this package and that it can be seen to work .
Mr President , there is much about the Commissioner 's package to welcome , but for me the key issue is delivery .
How do you get common standards of delivery across the EU amongst the Member States , with some , like mine , the United Kingdom , ever-reluctant to take any financial assistance steps , even when they are permitted ?
Could I ask the Commissioner today not to be neutral on that , but to expressly call upon all Member States to do what they are now permitted to do under his package and no longer to sit on their hands in this regard ?
Otherwise we will continue to have an even less common fisheries policy , compounding inequality and delivering more disaster for the sector .
Related to that point - because some love to pass the parcel between national governments and the Commission - could the Commissioner identify within the new package exactly those measures which are wholly dependent on Member State contributions and any , if there are any , which are free of that ?
( PL ) Mr President , fisheries are a very specific sector of our economy .
The economic entities within it are fragmented and widely scattered .
They are often local family enterprises .
Their fishing capacity is restricted , and they are therefore unable to increase production so as to obtain an acceptable income despite higher costs .
One could argue that if costs have increased then the price of fish should go up , but there is a limit to that process .
How much is the consumer willing to pay ?
Who is right in all this ?
I propose that specific fuel payments be made to fishermen , to help them cope with the difficult situation they are currently experiencing .
These payments would be linked to the price of fuel oil .
Fishermen and their families do not have opportunities to earn additional income from other activities .
To summarise , a new approach to fisheries policy is needed .
Mr President , in July 2007 I went to Castletownbere in West Cork , which is in the south-western part of Ireland , and met with the fishing community there .
At that time they were in deep trouble .
Since that time oil prices have increased dramatically .
In fact , over the last five years oil has increased in Ireland by over 300 % .
At the same time the cost of fish or the price they are getting has not increased .
It is not just about people working on trawlers and people owning trawlers , it is about coastal communities .
They are the people that are affected , and this is extremely important .
I welcome the proposals from the Commission , but I also think there should be further proposals in relation to dealing with the whole issue of discarded bycatches , and I think that has not been dealt with and needs to be dealt with immediately .
We need to make it more efficient and make it more cost-effective , but we also need to make sure that people are able to make a living from it : not only the people involved in the industry , but also people living in coastal communities .
( PT ) I should like to request that there also be good news on 24 June for small-scale fishing and coastal fishing in Portugal .
As my colleague Duarte Freitas has already mentioned , we have heard a lot of talk about diesel , about support for diesel , but 85 % of the vessels in Portugal operate in the small-scale fishing sector and over half run on petrol .
These are small vessels with outboard engines .
They are not receiving any help with regard to petrol and have been completely forgotten .
It is essential that a similar and equivalent scheme to that for diesel is set up for petrol used in fishing .
Last Friday I went fishing with fishermen from Esposende and I can testify to the enormous sacrifice that they are making .
The Commission will not reach these fishermen unless it also adopts measures for small-scale fishing on 24 June .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) In my concluding statement I would also like to emphasise that the Council is aware of the difficult position of the fisheries sector in the European Union , but two aspects need to be distinguished : one is the specific features of the fisheries sector , and the other is the high prices of fuel , which as already stated are affecting numerous , practically all sectors , including of course fisheries .
The Council has been very active in seeking solutions : intensive consultations are in progress , and they will culminate next week at the meeting of the Agriculture and Fisheries Council , whilst short-term , medium-term and long-term measures are being sought where the aim is to preserve European fisheries , to bridge the current difficult phase and to preserve both coastal as well as pelagic fisheries .
I can assure you that I have followed this debate closely and that the Chairman of the Agriculture and Fisheries Council will be familiarised in detail with the views expressed in this debate , including your first responses to the proposals and plans presented by the Commissioner .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would firstly like to thank everyone for their comments , for the various points that they have raised and also for the general expression of support for the package that the Commission intends to propose .
I would like to say that this is not the end of the whole process but just the beginning .
We still need to steer these proposals through Council and Parliament and I would repeat that we need your full support in order to get these proposals through as rapidly as possible , especially in those parts which would require legislative amendment .
What I have presented represents , in my view , the limits of flexibility in addressing the short-term crisis , with a view to putting in place a medium- and longer-term perspective of restructuring , in order to regain sustainability of resources and the profitability of the sector .
I agree that these measures should not be seen in isolation but also within the context of the ongoing discussions concerning IUU , discards , eco-labelling and various other measures which we are in the process of having adopted .
With regard to IUU for example , I hope that on Tuesday of next week a decision will be taken in Council on the proposed regulation to effectively combat IUU fishing , on which the European Parliament has given overwhelming support .
I would like to say to Mr Davies that we are not proposing to throw money at the problem , but to provide assistance with a view to restructuring - as I said , to regain sustainable fishing and profitable fishing .
I would invite Mr Davies to examine what we would be proposing and , if he has any specific comments to make , I would certainly welcome them .
Yes , we will work to enable the proper market mechanisms to operate rather than continuing to allow a few huge operators to dominate the market when setting fish prices .
In response to what Mr Allister said , the package makes it more attractive for Member States to take up what is available under the European Fisheries Fund , and therefore we hope that Member States will fully engage .
We will be discussing this in next week 's Council in order to implement effectively these measures that we are proposing .
I will just go very briefly through the measures that are envisaged .
First of all , we are looking at the emergency measures , where we are proposing assistance for temporary cessation for fishing vessels ( and this also goes in the direction of sustainability ) for a maximum period of three months in addition to what is already in the European Fisheries Fund , and not linked exclusively to biological reasons .
Such a measure may finance cruise costs and fixed costs of vessels .
This measure will only apply in cases where there is an explicit commitment that the enterprises benefiting from it will be included in a restructuring plan within a period of six months .
A second provision relates to the increase in the EFF aid intensity for fuel-saving equipment .
We are proposing that the mandatory private financial participation will be at a lower rate and will therefore be at 40 % of its present level .
We are also proposing to extend further a number of socioeconomic measures which are eligible under EFF .
On de minimis aid we are looking at making provisions so that if , on an economic analysis , it proves to be feasible , then our proposal would be to extend the de minimis aid from EUR 30 000 per enterprise to EUR 30 000 per vessel but with a maximum cap of EUR 100 000 per enterprise .
The longer-term measures would relate to EFF premiums for permanent cessation of fleets in restructuring , so that we would lift any limitations on access to permanent cessation premiums ; and additional aid for temporary cessation , so that beyond the first three months that I mentioned , we will be proposing that there will be an additional three months to be taken during the period of restructuring , where vessels will be necessarily laid up because of the restructuring process .
This would be up to the period of 1 January 2010 , and for an additional three months if the restructuring needs to go beyond 1 January 2010 .
So it would be a maximum of six months beyond the three months given as an emergency aid .
We are also providing for increasing the aid intensity for modernisation schemes .
Today the private financial participation is 60 % and 80 % for gear and engine replacement respectively .
We are proposing to reduce the private financial participation to 40 % .
We are doing this because we realise that the private sector - the private entrepreneurs , the fishermen - are not in a position to be able to significantly part-finance any restructuring out of their own pockets .
We are trying to make it as easy as possible for fishermen to undertake restructuring by providing the lion 's share of the expense that will be incurred .
We are also allowing for the granting of partial decommissioning .
In other words , if there is a group of vessels and that group of vessels represents , say , 100 000 tonnes , and they undertake to decommission 50 000 or 60 000 tonnes , leaving 40 000 tonnes by virtue of which they want to construct new vessels , then for the amount partially decommissioned - for the 50 000 or 60 000 tonnes - they would be given decommissioning aid .
Obviously that would mean that the size of the fleet would be reduced .
You would have a newer fleet but this would mean that the compensation would have been paid for the amount by which it had been reduced .
We are also proposing social aid in the form of decreased social security contributions .
In other words , what we are proposing is that there will be the possibility for the contributions payable by fishermen , and not the contributions payable by the enterprises employing them , to be exempted on condition that the remuneration of the fishermen is not reduced and on condition that the fishermen remain in receipt of the same social benefits under any existing schemes .
With regard to market measures - a point mentioned by Mrs Fraga - I would like to state that there are various measures which we are proposing : increasing fishermen 's bargaining position vis-à-vis the processing industry and distributors by joining forces with larger POs or local marketing associations ; establishing a price monitoring system to better understand the factors determining market prices ; improving predictability of sourcing for EU-origin products for the industry ; promoting quality initiatives like labelling and better handling and processing ; promoting information to consumers ; health and nutrition ; responsible fishing ; market audit assessment ; developing tools to analyse the value chain and prices ; and verifying the correct implementation of the monitoring of labelling measures and IUU .
We are also making available from our own funds - from other fisheries funds - for the first year , EUR 20-25 million in order specifically to launch other projects in cooperation with the sector in the area of market monitoring , labelling etc .
We are prepared to reopen discussions with Member States - even though we have just concluded them - on the existing operational programmes in order to ensure that the European fisheries funds are focused more on these restructuring programmes .
We are facilitating the use of the European Fisheries Fund .
For example - just to mention one point in addition - it is proposed to double the EFF pre-financing amount paid by the Commission after the adoption of the operational programmes from the current 7 % to 14 % of the total EFF contribution .
I have two final points .
Mrs Fraga said that we could have done more before .
I would like just to introduce a nuance to this .
We could have acted differently before .
We could have avoided incentivising and encouraging over-capacity and not thrown precious public money at unwarranted huge increases of capacity way beyond what the stocks of our fish can reasonably sustain .
Concerning Mrs Doyle 's remarks - that the CFP has failed miserably - I simply do not agree .
It is because of the CFP that we can put forward proposed common solutions as we are doing now , instead of witnessing individual Member States joining in a race downhill in the direction of the total destruction of fishing .
I have received six motions for a resolution , pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) This debate is very important both for all coastal states and for consumers .
As previous speakers have pointed out , we had all lived under the delusion that the price of oil would never increase .
Clearly , this situation arose as a result of many years of neglect and lack of imagination on the part of the relevant institutions .
Nowadays , simply putting to sea in fishing vessels has become uneconomical .
The price of fish does not compensate for the investment .
A large number of fishermen may leave the profession , which would knock that entire economic sector off balance .
It seems to me that scant notice was taken of appeals by fishermen in the past .
It was only when this last crisis arose that the consciences of many were awakened , even though the sector first began to experience difficulties many years ago .
No wide-ranging factual and honest debate on the sector has yet taken place .
We must resolve this deep crisis immediately and work to ensure the future of the fisheries sector .
in writing . - ( IT ) Fuel oil prices in Italy have risen by 240 % in four years owing to strong speculation by the oil companies .
This is preventing the fishing fleet - especially small-scale operators - not only from plying its trade but even from offsetting its high management costs .
Europe 's marine industries are on the verge of collapse , and the high cost of fuel oil is eroding the narrow economic margins available to fishermen .
France and Italy have announced a joint initiative to apply for additional resources from the European Union .
The main idea is to double the national threshold for de minimis aid to the sector .
Such a measure would nonetheless be insufficient to obviate the serious difficulties besetting the fisheries sector , which has moreover already been facing a crisis .
The European Commissioner for Fisheries , Joe Borg , considers that rapid aid is a possibility but also maintains that , in the long term , the solution to the crisis in the sector lies in restructuring the fleet , making it smaller and less energy-intensive .
Although I can go along with the proposal to use vessels which guzzle less oil , it still remains urgently necessary to find fair ways of helping fishermen overcome this grave crisis and of rescuing numerous families from the threat of appalling poverty .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0161 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Passengers with reduced mobility
What action and monitoring has the Council been undertaking to ensure that the provisions set out in my report concerning the rights of persons with reduced mobility when travelling by air , which came into force last summer , are being properly implemented across all Member States ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) The rules regarding the protection and provision of assistance to persons with disability and those with reduced mobility in air transport are laid down by the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility when travelling by air .
This regulation was adopted in 2006 , some parts already started to apply in July 2007 , and the rest will be applied from July this year .
I should stress that monitoring the proper implementation of this regulation is the responsibility of the European Commission , which may adopt appropriate measures .
Such measures can include legal remedies to ensure that Community law in this area is correctly applied .
For this reason the Council is simply not competent to respond to this question .
Nevertheless I would emphasise that the European Union is aware of the importance of the area of protection and ensuring assistance to disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility .
As may be seen in practice , the regulation I mentioned is already being applied and represents an important facility for disabled persons and those with reduced mobility when travelling .
Thank you to the Presidency but obviously I am aware of all the legislation because I was the rapporteur who steered it through this House .
In fact it is the national agencies who are responsible .
I do not know the situation in all the countries but in the United Kingdom it is the Civil Aviation Authority .
So these are national agencies and it is the responsibility of the national governments , which is why I posed the question to the Council .
In a week when Europe is clearly struggling to convince all its half a billion citizens of the real value of the European Union , this is a worthwhile initiative .
This is very important legislation to support disabled people and passengers of reduced mobility so I urge the Minister to go back to the Council and say to all his 26 colleagues on the Transport Council and the members that they should enforce this legislation .
( PT ) Following on from the question by my colleague Robert Evans , I should like to ask the Council about its readiness to strengthen the rights of passengers with reduced mobility in the maritime sector .
I ask this because the Commission has previously defended this possibility , for example in the 2005 communication on passenger rights , and Parliament has been working towards this , in particular within the competences and discussions on the Erika III package .
( DE ) I have a question for the Minister .
I have heard that when it comes to the airlines ' treatment of passengers with restricted mobility , there are indeed discrepancies , and that the so-called ' low-cost ' airlines leave something to be desired here compared with other airlines .
I would be interested to know whether the Council has any hard facts available on this issue , or whether these are simply individual perceptions of the situation .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) With regard to the additional question from Mr Fernandes : of course I cannot rule out the possibility of something similar being introduced for disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility travelling by sea .
Of course this is a matter that must be studied primarily by the Commission , which should then come up with a proposal .
However , it is surely an idea worthy of consideration .
This is my off-the-cuff response .
Mr Leichtfried mentioned budget carriers .
I should stress that the regulation I mentioned and which relates to facilitating air travel by disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility relates to all carriers and there is no distinction here .
Infringements will of course be dealt with equally , irrespective of whether they involve budget or other types of carriers .
Subject : Common immigration policy and illegal working
What is the Presidency 's assessment of the progress made during its six-month term of office towards a common immigration policy with a view to a crackdown on illegal working ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Regarding immigration policy and illegal work during this term of office , that is during the Slovenian Presidency , the Presidency continued negotiations in the Council and with the European Parliament on a draft directive providing sanctions against employers of third country citizens residing illegally in the European Union .
This directive prohibits the employment of third country citizens who reside illegally in the Union , and this is of course one of the methods of combating illegal immigration .
To this end the directive lays down minimum common sanctions and measures that Member States must apply against employers that employ third-country citizens who are in the territory of Member States illegally .
During this time the competent bodies of the Council have been continuing to study the proposal , and close contacts have been established with the European Parliament with the aim of the two institutions reaching a common position .
Work is not yet finished , but I can say that the Presidency is satisfied with the progress made thus far .
( EL ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , I thank you for your answer .
We know , however , that third-country nationals entering European territory without supporting or legal documentation do in fact work for various employers after being released from detention .
They can then earn their fares and travel to European countries where their right of residence will be recognised .
How do we deal with illegal employment when it is partly justified and safeguarded ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) When the aforementioned directive is adopted , it will also no doubt be possible to act in these cases , and I hope that this will be as soon as possible .
In any event this involves action aimed at employing persons who are in the territory of European Union Member States illegally , and this will of course be contrary to the directive , if and when it is adopted .
I repeat , the Council expects this to be as soon as possible , and we also take the view that in these six months considerable progress has been achieved .
Subject : Patient safety
Given that the EU has for many decades taken an active role in ensuring the mobility of workers , does the Council agree that patient safety is an important issue that has not been adequately addressed by EU directives ?
In particular , does the Council agree that , in order to ensure patient safety throughout the EU , a system of information-sharing between Member States and their regulatory bodies for healthcare professionals needs to be put in place ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) May I thank Mrs Harkin very much for her question .
This is an important issue , as has been confirmed by the 18-month Presidency programme we prepared together with Germany and Portugal .
In the programme we emphasised that patient safety is an important area .
To this end the Working Group for Patient Safety at the High-Level Group for Health Services and Medical Care drew up a report on improving the safety of patients in the European Union .
Within the context of these recommendations , the education and training of health workers was highlighted as one of the main areas .
The recommendations also indicate the need to promote multidisciplinary education on patient safety at all levels of health worker education .
The Working Group also recommended that one way of achieving patient safety is to use a single united umbrella network , known as the EUNetPass , which will support Member States and will enable cooperation in the area of patient safety on the European Union level .
The Commission financed two projects at European level , and these should contribute to a better understanding of the situation and the formulation of guidelines for future work in the area of patient safety .
These are the projects MARQuIS - ' Methods of Assessing Response to Quality Improvement Strategies ' - and SIMPATIE - ' Safety Improvement for Patients in Europe ' .
Patient safety was also on the agenda of the June Council of Ministers .
This month , on 10 June , the Council adopted decisions in the area of antimicrobial resistance .
In these decisions it supports the development of strategies aimed at responsible use of antimicrobial agents .
The spread of bacteria resistant to antimicrobial medication is most commonly a consequence of inappropriate use across the entire healthcare system .
Activities related to preventing the further appearance of resistant pathogens are also important .
These activities include establishing an effective system of control among Member States , and in addition to this health workers need to be better informed about this .
At the last meeting of health ministers , at the aforementioned June session , the Commission provided information on the package in the area of patient safety .
This is the ' Patient Safety Package ' and in this relation the Commission reported that it intends by the end of 2008 to submit a special report on patient safety and a proposal for a recommendation on patient safety and the prevention and control of infection .
As soon as these documents are available , the Member State holding the Presidency will of course apprise the Council .
Finally I should also mention the directive of the European Parliament and the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications .
This regulates very precisely the area of professional qualifications of healthcare professionals in order to protect European Union citizens , and it defines the area of cooperation among Member States in this field .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I am pleased to hear of the progress that has been made in the last six months , in particular with the patient safety working group .
My particular concern here was that , while we have the mobility of health-care workers , we do not have in place at EU level a recognised structure that provides for formal collaboration between the regulators of health care professionals and health services .
Would the Minister not agree that we need to put in place , at EU level , a recognised structure that provides for formal collaboration between these regulators ?
Because without that coherence and without that structure , individual regulators cannot guarantee patient safety ; so I would like to hear his comments on that .
Just a supplementary to that : we also have the mobility of patients throughout the European Union , people who go on holidays and have operations done - with some dreadful consequences .
How is this to be tackled so that people , first of all , are aware of the problems and , then , that they are prevented by having properly qualified health-care professionals that are tracked throughout the system ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) With regard to organisation at EU level I mentioned the EUNetPass network , which is one of the recommendations provided by the aforementioned Working Group for Patient Safety , and specifically that the EUNetPass network would be one of possibly several ways , but one of the ways of achieving patient safety .
So what does this network involve ?
It is a network for information exchange , it offers support to recommendations on patient safety in various ways and it is primarily a platform for cooperation and networking among Member States and international organisations in the area of patient safety .
This network develops a positive culture of safety , it introduces education and training of health workers and introduces reporting mechanisms and learning by example .
It is , however , one of the ways , and of course others are possible including the kind mentioned by you .
Subject : Subsidiarity and EU membership
In a number of Member States , but above all in candidate countries , political parties and the media repeatedly claim that the introduction of ' same-sex marriages ' or civil partnerships or the liberalisation of laws on abortion and euthanasia are compulsory on the basis of EU law and / or the acquis communautaire .
Can the Council clearly state whether and to what extent these claims are accurate or whether all these issues are purely national matters and / or are covered by the subsidiarity principle ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I should point out that the Community - and I believe that Mr Posselt will be aware of this - is not competent to impose on the Member States a requirement that they must introduce ' same-sex marriages ' or ' civil partnerships ' into their national legislation .
The Community may merely adopt provisions governing cooperation between the judicial authorities of the Member States , for example provisions on court judgments which are recognised or enforced by one State but were adopted in another .
The Community may also adopt provisions on the resolution of conflict of laws in situations displaying cross-border elements .
The existing Community provision - namely the Brussels IIa Regulation - does not refer to regulations on same-sex partnerships .
As we know , the Member States have very different legislative solutions as regards the rights and obligations arising from same-sex partnerships .
Some have partnerships of this kind and some have none at all regulated by the law .
Since the introduction of same-sex marriages and civil partnerships is not required under Community law , it would be difficult for the Member States to reach a consensus on amending existing provisions to include same-sex partnerships .
I should also point out that the Community is not competent to regulate matters concerning abortion and euthanasia .
( DE ) I thank the Council for that important clarification as this matter also featured largely in Ireland .
I would just like to ask a brief , clear , additional question concerning Croatia .
Is it also true that the applicant countries do not have to amend their legislation on these matters but rather continue to be sovereign because this is not an area of EU competence in relation to the applicant countries as well ?
I thank the Council for its reply and I agree that all these matters - same-sex marriages , civil partnerships etc . - should be within the remit of Member States only .
However , one of the issues that arose during the Lisbon debate in Ireland was the issue of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I just want to ask the Minister whether he has a view as regards the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which was annexed to the Lisbon Treaty .
At that time it was claimed in Ireland that this Charter could facilitate the introduction of same-sex marriages , abortion , euthanasia etc .
I just want to ask the Minister if he has a view on that .
My question is along the same lines as Marian Harkin 's question .
One Member of this House circulated a leaflet saying that if the Lisbon Reform Treaty was passed in Ireland euthanasia and abortion would be introduced - a leaflet which contained a syringe , if you don 't mind !
The same Member had the audacity to stand up in this House today and talk about truth and honesty .
I want the Minister to tell this House clearly that , in the event of the Lisbon Treaty being passed , it is clear that it would not introduce abortion and euthanasia in any Member State .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Thank you very much for these additional questions .
First of all as regards Mr Posselt 's question as to whether all this means that the applicant countries - whether Croatia or any other - do not have to amend their legislation on same-sex marriages , abortion or euthanasia , the answer is YES .
They do not have to .
They do not have to because it is not a matter which falls within the competence of the Community .
Therefore , in these cases the legislation of the applicant countries is not examined since it is not a competence of the Community which the applicant wishes to join .
As regards the Charter of Fundamental Rights , my answer to the additional questions from Mrs Harkin and Mr Mitchell is as follows :
The Lisbon Treaty contains an article governing the legally binding nature of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is a separate document .
However , I can nevertheless confirm publicly , here and now , that implementation of the Lisbon Treaty would not impose on any Member State any requirements with regard to issues such as abortion , euthanasia and same-sex marriages .
These are matters which do not fall within the competence of the Community and implementation of the Lisbon Treaty would not change this .
These matters , issues and areas would remain within the competence of the individual Member States .
Subject : World food supply crisis
The soaring prices of staple foods such as wheat , rice , maize , etc. have caused a supply crisis and social unrest in many developing countries , whilst Europe too has seen a dramatic rise in food prices .
In the Council 's view , what are the reasons for the dramatic rise in international prices for staple foods ?
What measures will it take to encourage the production of staple foods or , possibly , discourage the production of other commodities ( e.g. biofuel ) ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) The Council is fully aware of the importance of the issue of agricultural product and food prices in world markets .
The Presidency believes that an integrated approach is needed to resolve this problem , an approach that will include all relevant sectors in order to ensure an effective and long-term political response from the European Union .
With regard to the various aspects of this issue , recently in the relevant formations of the Council we have organised numerous discussions aimed at contributing to such integrated solutions .
For instance , on 19 May the Council held a detailed discussion on factors influencing the capacity of the agriculture sector to ensure adequate food supply .
Here it pointed out the need to study long-term trends in supply and demand .
The discussion , aimed at contributing to a common and sustainably orientated political response from the European Union , touched upon all the main aspects that are important for the agriculture sector and for the common agricultural policy .
The Council has already adopted a decision on numerous measures to mitigate the pressure on food prices in the markets of the European Union .
These measures are also expected to have a favourable influence on international markets .
The Council also adopted certain rapid measures such as abolishing the requirement for compulsory set-aside for 2008 , increasing milk quotas and the temporary waiving of import duties for grain .
In the context of the health check on the common agricultural policy the Council will also consider further measures .
These include for instance the permanent abandoning of the requirement for compulsory set-aside , the gradual withdrawal of the system of milk quotas , elimination of the current premiums for energy plants and their substitution to promote the production of second-generation biofuels - in other words biofuels that are produced from by-products and are not competing with food production .
At the end of May the Council focused on the developmental dimensions of this issue and determined that such circumstances , the current circumstances , seriously burden developing countries , and especially the weakest social segments of those countries .
In its meeting on 3 June the Council also studied the financial consequences and possible solutions in the area of high food prices .
It drew attention to the short-term measures it has already adopted , especially in agriculture , and stressed the importance of strengthening the market orientation of agriculture , ensuring the sustainable production of biofuels and increasing the growth of medium-term and long-term productivity in agriculture both in Europe and in developing countries .
The European Council meeting starting tomorrow will also address the political consequences of high food prices .
In short , if I may conclude , the question posed by Mr Papadimoulis has in recent months and weeks been regularly on the Council 's agenda .
( EL ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , you have read out a diplomatic text couched in the usual generalisations and wooden language of diplomats .
I ask you : at the Summit Conference tomorrow , as well as utter fine words , will you adopt any specific measures , and what would these be regarding the rules and regulations to reduce speculation over fuel and foods ?
Will you support lower social income ?
Will you re-examine the continuing policy of shrinkage imposed on agriculture ?
Lastly , do you think the Irish ' no ' vote a few days ago is unconnected with high prices and everyday life ?
This is a global issue and what we do in the health check on agriculture in Europe is important but it is small .
What sort of dialogue have we with the US , where 25 % of their corn is eaten by cars rather than cattle ?
Surely that is a huge issue which needs to be addressed .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I would like to explain to Mr Papadimoulis that the European Council does not adopt specific measures .
The European Council provides guidelines for action .
Specific measures are adopted at Council level and here the Council is active and functional .
I mentioned and listed a range of measures that the Council has already adopted .
I also listed a range of measures that the Council is expected to address but has not yet done so .
So I cannot accept the accusation that these are just words , because I was speaking about specific measures already adopted and those that will be addressed at Council level , primarily the Agriculture Council and also the Economic and Financial Affairs Council .
The question of the United States of America and its method of obtaining biofuels .
This is of course a subject of dialogue between the European Union and the United States .
It is also one of the issues that are regularly addressed , the issue of biofuels .
Views differ , of course , and cover a broad spectrum .
The fact is that we need to take into account that fossil fuels are an alternative to biofuels .
So now from this aspect we need to judge which is more problematic and which is not .
The European Union is aware of the potential influence of the production of biofuels on food prices .
For this very reason the Council recently adopted measures to promote the use and production of second-generation biofuels , in other words those biofuels whose production does not compete with food production .
At the same time work is in progress to produce sustainable criteria for biofuel production , and when they are adopted they will apply both to biofuel production within the Union and also to imported biofuels .
Subject : Improvements in road safety
The current Council Presidency had as one of its primary goals the improvement of road safety .
As the current Presidency is nearing its end , could the Council indicate the areas in which most progress has been made and areas where less progress has been made and why ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) In the context of legislation on road safety the Slovenian Presidency continued the reading of the proposed directive of the Parliament and the Council on improving road infrastructure safety .
It also organised a range of technical meetings with the European Parliament rapporteur , in the desire to reach an agreement with the European Parliament at first reading next month .
Among the efforts of the Slovenian Presidency for greater road safety I would also like to mention the work done in connection with the proposed regulation on the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users .
This proposal brings improvements to the front sections of cars , which manufacturers must accommodate so that in a potential collision between a vehicle and pedestrian the injuries to the pedestrian are minimised .
The Slovenian Presidency began a reading of this proposal in the working bodies of the Council and held successful meetings with the European Parliament rapporteur .
We could place in the context of efforts for greater road safety the progress related to the adoption of the road transport package .
I should point out that on 13 June 2008 the Transport Council reached a political consensus on this package .
Within the context of this package I would like especially to highlight the proposed regulation on common rules for the occupation of transport operator .
It seems very important to us that this proposal sets out a list of the most serious road transport offences .
In the event of such an offence being committed by a transport operator , this can lead to the loss of licence to perform the business activity .
In this way special national registers , which will be introduced with this regulation , would ease the control of these transport operators and this would become more effective , something that would undoubtedly have a positive effect on road safety .
I should also mention the proposed regulation on rules for access to the market , which is also a part of this package .
This introduces a reduction in the number of journeys with empty goods vehicles , a higher level of professional training for drivers , rationalisation of the market , raising the quality of services and in this way also an indirect influence in increasing road safety .
This month the Presidency also started reading the proposed directive on facilitating cross-border enforcement in the field of road safety .
This is a proposal submitted by the Commission in April this year .
In view of the available time and in view of the number of proposals from the Commission in the area of road safety - the number of proposals currently being read by the Council - it is our view that considerable progress has been achieved in the area of road safety .
Of course a complete assessment of the results will only be possible after the period of our Presidency ends .
( GA ) Mr President , I commend the Slovenian Presidency for the emphasis it is placing on road safety .
It has heightened awareness among the authorities in the Member States on the need to take various steps in adopting a practical policy with a view to reducing road accidents , the amount of fatal accidents and also the number of people injured on our roads .
I welcome , for example , the Ferrari report adopted today in Parliament which offers greater protection to pedestrians and cyclists .
I would like to ask the Council , can we do anything else - and take further steps - to improve road safety ?
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , I would like to pick up on this question .
This week , a number of reports of relevance to road safety have featured on our agenda : the Ferrari report has been mentioned , and tomorrow we have Mrs Gurmai 's report as well as the Markov report tonight .
From the Presidency 's point of view , is the outcome of our work satisfactory , or would the Presidency have liked to see more being achieved ?
Mr President , I would like ask the Minister if he is happy that , whereas there is sufficient and advanced testing for driving with alcohol , the same advanced testing is not there for driving with illegal drugs .
Could he try to ensure that there is renewed interest in this particular issue , because it seems to be becoming a more common practice ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) The question from Mr Higgins : What else could we do ?
The main thing that both the Council and Parliament can do is to speed up the processes that are already under way and to adopt the decisions that are already prepared , of course still within this term of the European Parliament .
The first thing that will be on the agenda , hopefully in July , is the aforementioned directive on road infrastructure safety management .
Yet there are even more measures that I have listed and that are already in process , and I would like to see the good cooperation between the European Parliament and the Council lead to rapid adoption .
The question from Mr Rack , I believe , requires more a political answer .
We will not be satisfied while people are still dying on the roads in the European Union .
And while this is the case , we will have to seek new measures , additional measures to reduce the number of fatalities and injuries , where the ideal figure is zero .
Drugs are of course a similar problem to alcohol .
I think that they deserve equal treatment to alcohol .
What is at issue is the ability to operate a vehicle , and I think that Member States should not make any distinctions between one type of drug or another , which in essence is what alcohol is , by dint of one being a legal drug .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I must reiterate that I am here in this place as the representative of the Council and the Council has not addressed the question raised by Mr Leichtfried .
However , as I have already said , I think that at the earlier sitting of the European Parliament , when I received a similar question .
In view of the fact that I am rather well acquainted with the country in question , I can respond , but I would not wish to risk any accusation of exceeding the bounds of the competence in which I am here before you now .
So let us try , and permit me some additional clarifications .
The new system of road tolls in Slovenia , which will enter into force on 1 July , that is , the purchase of vignettes , relates only to vehicles with the maximum permitted mass under three thousand five hundred kilograms .
In other words this is a category of vehicle for which the valid Community legislation on road taxes does not provide any common rules , as is the case with vehicles whose maximum permitted mass exceeds three thousand five hundred kilograms .
So this system of road taxes being introduced by Slovenia does not fall within the area of application of the Community legislation I mentioned .
Perhaps an even more important point : the vignette method of collecting road tolls which is being introduced by Slovenia is temporary .
It will be applied only for the transitional period up until the introduction of electronic or satellite road tolls , expected to be introduced in 2009 , firstly for goods vehicles and then for private vehicles .
Please understand my response , Mr Leichtfried , as a gesture , a desire to offer you a clarification .
My response does not , however , change the fact that I am here in another capacity , and not as a representative of Slovenia .
( DE ) We obviously have different interpretations of the law .
In my view , this system discriminates against EU citizens from outside Slovenia .
I would ask the Minister whether there is any possibility of the European Commission initiating an infringement procedure against Slovenia .
The first steps , I think , have already been taken .
My question to you is this : as President-in-Office of the Council , would your advice to Slovenia be to introduce a ten-day vignette , perhaps , in order to restore peace and avert the possibility of an infringement procedure ?
( DE ) Minister , last time , you indicated , on this issue , that we are talking about a transitional set of rules .
Normally , they would apply for one , two or three months .
What is happening here extends over a period of some years and is clear discrimination against non-Slovenians and therefore other EU citizens .
Commissioner Tajani explicitly confirmed yesterday evening that there is already a letter from DG Transport which aims to clarify this issue of discrimination .
Would you not say that the time has come to adopt some swift measures so that tourists have the opportunity to drive through Slovenian at reasonable prices this summer ?
It is a country which we all enjoy visiting .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) At present it has not been established that this case involves discrimination .
If it does , then a new situation will arise and I do not wish to speculate on that .
Currently it does not appear , however , that the accusations of discrimination are justified , since the system of vignettes is identical both for citizens of Slovenia and for everyone else .
However , I would really like to be finished with this , and I would stress that I am here as a representative of the Council , and the Council has not deliberated over this .
Please take this as a gesture of goodwill that I have nevertheless entered into this discussion and I am trying to provide you with clarifications in good faith .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
I wish to say something before I suspend the sitting .
Minister Janez Lenarčič has appeared before us for the last time as President-in-Office of the Council . He will of course be present during the extraordinary part-session in Brussels , but will be accompanying the Prime Minister of his country and will not therefore be speaking as President-in-Office of the Council .
I wish to thank Minister Janez Lenarčič and the Slovenian Presidency for their cooperation with the European Parliament , particularly during Question Time to the Council over which I presided .
I am also aware that , in July , Minister Janez Lenarčič will take up a senior position within an international human rights organisation based in Warsaw .
I want to offer him my compliments and congratulations and wish him well .
I believe that , in that capacity , he may have the opportunity to work once again with the European Parliament on occasions , and particularly in terms of monitoring elections given that said organisation is linked to the OSCE .
I therefore wish Mr Lenarčič well for the future and once again thank him for his attendance here , for his readiness to respond and for the quality of his replies .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Inland transport of dangerous goods ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the inland transport of dangerous goods ( 06920 / 3 / 2008 - C6-0160 / 2008 - ( rapporteur : Bogusław Liberadzki ) .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to welcome Commissioner Tajani to the House in his new role .
I voted in your favour , Commissioner , and I am sure I was right to do so .
The directive on inland transport of dangerous goods updates four Commission decisions and combines them in a single legal act .
It includes in its scope the transport of dangerous goods by inland waterways , which has not been covered by EU legislation to date .
The proposal also incorporates international rules for the transport of dangerous goods into Community law and extends their application to national transport .
It is to be hoped that a high level of safety will be ensured as a result , whilst improving inter-modality in the transport of dangerous goods .
I should like to recall that at first reading Parliament adopted 42 amendments .
Essentially , these amendments provided that Member States that have no railway system are exempt from the obligation to transpose and implement this directive .
The amendments also introduced a transitional period of two years to prepare for effective implementation of these provisions .
In addition , the principle was introduced whereby the Member States may lay down specific requirements concerning the national and international transport of dangerous goods within their territory to take account of the specific nature of road vehicles , carriages and inland waterway vessels .
Member States may also prescribe certain routes or specific modes of transport and lay down special rules for the transport of dangerous goods on their territory in passenger trains .
The Council and the Commission accepted these amendments .
The Council deemed it necessary to introduce two further amendments .
Firstly , an additional paragraph is proposed for Article 1 .
This would allow Member States to regulate or prohibit strictly for reasons other than safety during transport the transport of dangerous goods within their territory .
Secondly , the Council is proposing adding a new paragraph to Article 8 , stipulating that the Commission shall provide financial support to the Member States to cover translation into their respective official languages of the European Agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by road , the Regulations concerning International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail and the European Agreement concerning the International Carriage of dangerous Goods by Inland Waterways .
In my capacity as rapporteur , I support both of the Council 's proposals and call for their adoption .
Finally , I should like to say how delighted I was with the effective , efficient and accommodating approach of the Commission and the Council .

Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before speaking about the directive for which Mr Liberadzki is the rapporteur , I should like to thank this House for having placed its trust in me today as the European Commissioner with the transport portfolio .
I am expressing my gratitude to the few Members still present , but I , too , often missed evening meetings .
Thank you your confidence in me ; thank you in particular to the members of the Committee on Transport for their presence .
I must say that I feel somewhat moved .
I am speaking for the first time not so much from a different place in the Chamber - I have moved four seats along - but it is certainly a great honour for me to be here , and I think it is important for Parliament to have a Member - for that is still how I think of myself deep-down - sitting on the Commissioners ' bench .
I apologise for this digression , Mr President , but I thought it only right before beginning my speech to thank Parliament once again for what it has given me over the years and for the trust it has placed in me , as confirmed this morning .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately my contribution to this debate will have to be a brief one .
At the first reading of this text a number of amendments were adopted by Parliament and supported by the Council in its common position .
The present text , which allows the proposal to be adopted at second reading , only puts forward various technical additions .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism supported these unanimously and the Commission is in absolute agreement with them .
The points that are to be introduced at second reading will put the finishing touches to the proposal for the transport of dangerous goods .
The text has therefore been made much clearer in its fine details , which is something I welcome .
I would also like to take this opportunity to express my particular thanks to Mr Liberadzki , the rapporteur , for the efficient manner in which he worked on this proposal .
I also thank him for the confidence that he has placed in me today and I hope that I will be able to work with him and indeed with all the Members of this House from today until the end of the parliamentary term .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for his work and for his tireless willingness to discuss the matter at hand .
The proposed directive on the inland transport of dangerous goods integrates international rules for the transport of dangerous goods into Community law and extends their application to national transport .
It updates the existing four Directives and four Commission Decisions on the transport of dangerous goods and merges them into one simplified piece of legislation .
It is a welcome example of a European law which genuinely reduces red tape and embodies the principle of better law-making .
Regulation of the transport of dangerous goods is important for our transport system .
The total amount of dangerous goods transported in the Union is about 110 billion tonne-km / year , and safe transportation of these goods is essential , on both traffic safety and environmental grounds .
The provisions ensure a high level of safety in international and national transport through the application of harmonised rules , which will have a positive effect on the internal market in transport .
At the same time , uniform rules make things easier for transport operators and thus improve intermodality .
Multimodal transport processes are encouraged .
What is particularly welcome , from my perspective , is the expansion of the scope to include inland shipping .
In future , uniform safety provisions will apply to all the inland waterways in the EU .
This will improve working conditions on board and enhance transport safety .
It will also offer benefits in terms of environmental protection and reduce costs .
This is likely to improve the opportunities and market prospects for inland shipping , which in turn will ease the burden on our roads and , again , help to protect the environment .
The Council 's common position , which was adopted without amendments by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , contains two amendments to Parliament 's position at first reading .
Firstly , the common position introduces a provision which allows Member States to regulate or prohibit strictly for reasons other than safety during transport the transport of dangerous goods within their territory .
This provision is purely declaratory in nature and is included for the purpose of clarification .
We had various discussions about it .
Secondly , the common position provides for financial support from the Commission to the Member States for the translation of the ADR ( European Agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road ) , RID ( Regulations concerning International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail ) and ADN ( European Agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Inland Waterways ) and their amendments into their respective official languages .
I must admit that I was initially sceptical about this amendment .
The European Commission has assured me , however , that this approach is essential in order to ensure the quality of the translations and thus facilitate proper implementation of the provisions .
It is also cheaper , incidentally .
In short , then , all the amendments are acceptable from our point of view , which means that we can now finally bring this important and generally non-contentious matter to a conclusion .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , now it is my turn to extend greetings to you this evening .
This is in some respects your baptism of fire and speaking as a French person I especially appreciate the fact that at Monday evening 's hearing and this evening too you spoke in French and fluently at that .
This was a real pleasure .
I would also like to thank my colleague Mr Liberadzki for the discussions that he led in the Committee on Transport and Tourism when examining this proposal for a directive on the transport of dangerous goods .
As has just been explained , Parliament already expressed its views on this proposal for a directive in September 2007 and I in turn welcome the fact that agreement has been reached with the Council and the Commission , which ultimately means that this evening 's discussion of the text is in many respects a mere formality .
However , I would like to use this opportunity , because we are among friends as it were , to stress that in my view this text represents significant progress towards better control of the transport of dangerous goods within our borders and also that the problem of transporting goods , and especially dangerous ones , is of major concern to our fellow citizens and an important issue for sustainable development .
The volume of dangerous goods currently being transported within the European Union makes up some 10 % of all goods in transit , which is a very large figure indeed .
This represents 110 billion tonnes per kilometre a year , of which 58 % is carried by road , which is an enormous amount , 25 % by rail and 17 % by inland waterway .
This directive , which is aimed at updating the existing provisions , is all the more creditable in these difficult times because it also merges four Directives into one piece of legislation .
This represents a clear step towards greater transparency and it is very important that the people of Europe as a whole find our decisions intelligible .
Finally , I too am pleased that inland shipping has also been included in the directive .
Much greater attention needs to be given to moving goods by waterway , for this is an environmentally-friendly mode of transport that can also provide an answer to the constant demand for a rebalancing of Europe 's transport system .
Combining the Directives into a single piece of legislation will also bring greater clarity and greater transparency to the rules that apply in the current situation in which we are hoping and praying for greater intermodality of transport .
I welcome this progressive step , especially for those working in the transport sector , at a time when the work of the European Union is not always sufficiently well explained and , unfortunately , is sometimes misunderstood by our fellow citizens .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is not exactly crowded in here .
I would have thought this would have been an important enough subject to bring more people in .
The second reading on the Directive on the inland transport of dangerous goods prompts me , yet again , to draw attention to a major problem , namely that any directive is only as good as its control .
We have a slight increase in the volume of dangerous goods being transported across all modes of transport .
Unfortunately , we are also seeing an increase in carelessness , according to inspectors , notably in the declaration of goods .
A false declaration of a dangerous good that is being transported can literally have deadly outcomes if an accident occurs .
For example , if the fire service is unable to determine which extinguishing agent they need for the good being transported , this can have fatal consequences .
In Innsbruck , which is almost my home town , a large-scale disaster was narrowly averted simply because the region 's senior chemist happened to be a part-time fireman .
I urge you , then , to keep the issue of control and inspection in mind as well .
This is a core issue ; indeed , it is the most important issue , and I voice the same appeal to Member States as well .
I do see an improvement through the inclusion of inland shipping .
An accident involving the transportation of chemicals by river can have extremely long-term and fatal consequences for the environment .
I think it is important to retain and reinforce provisions on the prescribing of certain routes for the transport of dangerous goods .
When there are steep hills and inclines , perhaps combined with very heavy traffic at certain times of the year or at the start of the holidays , it is essential to guard against major hazards here .
In my view , it would be right and proper to extend the escort requirement for particularly dangerous goods here , such as corrosive substances or explosives .
We need to make further progress on this issue because other transport users could also be put at risk and major problems would arise in the event of an accident .
Unfortunately , the inspections which are carried out often reveal , too , that the condition of the vehicles in use is not particularly good .
I would therefore like to conclude with an appeal to the House : inspections and controls are needed to safeguard the effectiveness of this directive .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) I would like to welcome the new Commissioner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , dangerous goods must be transported within the European Union , just like ordinary goods , whether we like it or not .
Today , dangerous goods account for approximately 8 % of all freight traffic and it is good that this report aims to merge the existing four Directives , in accordance with the applicable international agreements .
The harmonisation of goods transport , in particular in regard to multi-modal transportation , is an absolutely vital and logical step that should have a positive effect on the EU 's internal market .
The safety of the transport can best be achieved by merging the regulations .
These regulations must clearly define the marking of the goods and classify the transported goods according to the degree of danger involved .
I can see the need for this technical directive and I agree with my fellow Member Mrs Lichtenberger that it is necessary to examine it very carefully in order to make sure that the content matches the description .
The Council took over all the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading .
The common position introduces only two minor amendments .
These involve giving financial support to the Member States for the translation of the directive into their respective official languages , and allowing the Member States to decide whether or not to implement the requirements of Annex III in specific cases .
The directive helps to provide a clear interpretation of the legislation and simplifies it for carriage by rail , road and inland waterways .
I think that carriage by road is often the most dangerous mode of transport , rather than carriage by waterways .
The GUE / NGL Group will therefore vote for the proposed directive .
Mr President , I would like to thank first of all my friend and colleague Bogusław Liberadzki for his work on this important dossier .
I would also like to congratulate our new Commissioner on his debut this evening .
I will be honest with Mr Tajani : I did not vote for him earlier today .
I did not vote against him , I did not abstain , I just did not participate in the vote .
I should like Mr Tajani to understand it was nothing personal , it was more a protest against the system and against Italian procedures .
Nevertheless , I respect his appointment and I am sure in the months ahead his will be looking to do everything he can to convince me and others of his great merits and qualities and indeed competence in the role that he brings to this House .
In the last few days I think the Irish voters showed us that far from all Europeans are fully signed up or are clear about the role and benefits of the European Union , about European cooperation and why Europe-wide regulations are necessary in the first place .
However , I think all of these people , people who voted ' no ' as well , will expect their national governments and indeed the European Union to look after them .
Whilst this particular subject may not be top of the list of ones that come to their mind , in fact the inland transport of dangerous goods is a serious issue , a serious responsibility and one that it behoves all of us to look after .
Only now , with this directive , do we actually have Europe-wide regulations that cover the transport of dangerous goods as they move from one country to another across the continent .
Mr Liberadzki was quite right to point out that in many countries there were no regulations internally or nationally .
So this report will put responsibility on national governments .
But any legislation is only as good as its enforcement .
So in his quest to gain my full confidence , I hope Mr Tajani , by his good offices , will be doing everything he can to encourage Member States to ensure that this legislation is properly monitored , enforced , and modified if necessary , and that strong action is taken against those who contravene this directive .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) Honourable President , Mr. Commissioner , I would also like to congratulate you and wish you success in your activity and I would like to say that we are expecting a lot from you .
I would like to congratulate our colleague Mr Liberadzki for his report , which is part of the process of simplifying the legislation and actually gathers and updates the text of four directives into a single one .
The previous European legislation did not cover the naval transport of hazardous goods , which was governed by rules established by various multilateral agreements to which Member States adhered .
Therefore , it is important that we will have Community laws with common rules for all Member States , for the transport of hazardous goods , for all modes of transport .
The existence of these rules allows the transfer of hazardous goods from one mode of transport to another .
In addition to the provisions of this directive , Member States can introduce into the national legislation specific requirements for vehicles , wagons and ships designed for inland waterways transport .
The amendments proposed by the Council introduce two new elements : the first one introduces and allows Member States to regulate or strictly prohibit , for other reasons than those related to safety , the inland waterways transport of hazardous goods on their territory .
The second amendment imposes the responsibility of the Commission to financially support member States for the translation into their official languages of European agreements for the transport of hazardous goods in road , railway and naval systems .
Nevertheless , I consider that all Member States should also carry out information campaigns to inform the interested people about the provisions of the new directive .
Compliance with these rules is essential .
The responsible authorities have to make sure that the transport of hazardous goods is carried out only by complying with the common rules and restrictions established .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , may I offer you my warm congratulations on your new post .
We will undoubtedly have many opportunities to discuss the issue of transport with you in the future , and I very much look forward to that .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for ensuring that we have a good legal text .
We must now make sure that this legal text is implemented as swiftly as possible in the Member States , and even more importantly - as has already been said today - we must ensure that the relevant national legislation and regulations are applied correctly at local level .
Here , we need commitment and a meticulous approach from the relevant authorities .
What we do not need is carelessness or any turning of a blind eye by those who are responsible for monitoring .
It is also important - as previous speakers have said - that the declaration of dangerous goods takes place in such a way that inspections and escorting can be undertaken as appropriate .
This will improve safety on our roads and also on our inland waterways .
( PL ) Mr President , almost a year ago I was travelling along a motorway when I saw a tanker lorry carrying liquid gas overturn .
It was impossible to leave the motorway , and a long queue soon formed .
Everyone held their breath fearing an explosion .
Situations like this arise on the Union 's road networks every day .
It is good that we are at last adopting legislation on the matter and that our road and rail networks will be safer as a result .
The directive under consideration is a further measure designed to increase the safety of our citizens , reduce the number of accidents and establish a single set of legal provisions .
I should like to thank Mr Liberadzki for his work , which will benefit us all .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that a good job has been done in approving a legislative text which will contribute to making the roads in the European Union safer for citizens .
The transport of dangerous goods can entail risks , as we are well aware .
That is why it is right for the European Union to undertake to ensure the safety of all of its citizens .
To repeat what I said during the sitting two evenings ago , one of my priorities is to protect citizens ' rights .
Every initiative taken by the Commission will serve to create safeguards for citizens and offer practical responses to their concerns .
During this evening 's debate I have gained a strong sense of Parliament 's desire to contribute to the adoption of legislation enabling citizens to travel more safely on the roads .
The Commission certainly promises to keep an eye on enforcement by the Member States , as it does for all other legislation .
The Commission is the guardian of the Treaties , and as far as I am concerned I intend to perform my duty rigorously in this respect .
Therefore , for the directive we are approving at the moment , as for others , I shall do my utmost to see that it is enforced and shall verify that all the EU Member States enforce it in the overriding interest of Europe 's citizens .
Thank you , Mr President , and I thank the rapporteur once again for his excellent work and for having been able , even at second reading , to help make the legislative text better and clearer .

rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , namely Mrs Sommer and Mrs Griesbeck , as well as Mr Evans and Mrs Ţicău for their statements , cooperation and support .
I will now offer two responses to Mrs Lichtenberger 's comments on monitoring the implementation of the provisions .
The two-year transitional period has been provided to allow Member States to prepare to implement the new measures effectively .
I should like to emphasise that to date only eight of the 27 Member States have simultaneously accepted all three international acts , namely the ADR , RID and ADN .
It is therefore appropriate to aim at full implementation of these regulations , regarding both international transport and their transposition into national transport .
I am confident that we are progressing well in that regard .
Commissioner , I should like to thank you once again for your understanding and would ask you to convey my thanks to your team .
It was a pleasure to work with the Commission and with the Council .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 June 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - This future directive is a big step forward towards protecting our safety and our environment , as it introduces European rules for transport of dangerous goods not only by road and rail but also by inland waterways .
Accidents in inland waterways can have an extensive impact and serious consequences such as water poisoning , extinction of wildlife and human health problems .
All the more reason to try to reduce the risks by creating common rules for this mode of transport as well .
Furthermore , I strongly support the inclusion of a provision that Member States can regulate or prohibit transport of dangerous goods for reasons other than safety .
If we take the case of cyanide , an extremely toxic material , 14 % of the cyanide releases into the environment were caused by transport accidents .
These figures highlight the vulnerability of cyanide transport and underlines the need for stronger environmental and safety standards .
I therefore encourage Member States to take the strictest possible measures to regulate transportation of cyanide and , where necessary , to prohibit bulk transportation of cyanide on their territory .
Sometimes minimising the transport of hazardous goods is just the safest way to minimise the risks .
Road infrastructure safety ( debate )
The next item is the report by Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on road infrastructure safety management - C6-0331 / 2006 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing another topic related to the safety of our citizens on Europe 's roads .
I believe that we must emphasise this issue .
This afternoon I had a meeting with the officials in my Directorate-General with a view to enhancing and redoubling the Commission 's efforts in the field of road safety .
The figures for the past few months are not reassuring , unfortunately , and could jeopardise the aim we have set ourselves of halving the number of victims on the roads .
That is why we must press on with our work .
I am delighted today that we are able to conclude another directive relating to road safety and hence the safety of all of Europe 's citizens .
In the 2001 White Paper on European transport policy , spearheaded by Mrs Loyola de Palacio , the Commission put forward the ambitious goal of halving the number of lives on the roads by 2010 .
Parliament welcomed this initiative and has always supported it .
As I was saying , after a series of extremely positive figures in recent years , the past year 's results have unfortunately not been as positive as we would have liked .
Moreover , we all realise of course that the overwhelming majority of accidents are primarily caused by human error or carelessness .
Nevertheless , the state of the road network , combined with growing volumes of traffic , is often a key factor in causing accidents .
The state of the road infrastructure has in fact been shown to play a determining role in one in every three accidents .
For this reason , over and above initiatives geared to improving the conduct of road users and the level of vehicle safety , infrastructure ought to be the third pillar in any road safety programme based on the principle of an integrated approach .
The proposal for a directive on road infrastructure safety management offers a good combination of preventive and corrective measures .
The procedures introduced by the directive seek to ensure that safety is built into the planning , design and construction phases , but also into the management and operation of the road infrastructure .
The directive is not of course meant to teach civil engineers how to build roads and certainly does not constitute an incentive to construct new roads .
Rather , it is a mechanism intended to extend to all Member States procedures that are already in use , sometimes in different ways .
The added value of action at European level lies in extending and spreading best practice to Member States which are not yet applying it .
Mr Markov and his colleagues in the Committee on Transport have worked hard on the proposal , helping to improve its outcome .
The draft text has undergone some amendments during its passage through the institutions .
Many administrative obligations and requirements to forward information have been removed , in order to ease the burden of red tape .
The annexes , which list the criteria to be taken into consideration for the procedures introduced by the directive , have been made non-binding .
Some of the definitions have been revised so as to bring them into line with practices already existing in certain Member States .
Nonetheless , the principal elements of the initial proposal have remained unchanged , so the current text is acceptable to the Commission .
Once it has been adopted , the directive will be the first European Union legislation geared to the road infrastructure as a whole ; it will be an especially important and powerful tool .
Allow me to recall once again that , if this directive is applied to the trans-European network , it will save more than 600 lives and prevent around 7 000 accidents every year .
Obviously , the directive will also have an important social and economic impact .
It will begin a long-term process .
Our aim is to change the cultural attitude to safety at the road design , construction and maintenance stages .
To this extent , it is a forward-looking directive which could remain valid for the next 50 years .
Thank you again , Mr Markov , for the work you have done , and thank you again for your attention , ladies and gentlemen .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The House realises of course that the Commission wishes to halve the number of deaths , not lives .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after more than one and a half years of negotiations , all the parliamentary groups , the Council and the Commission have finally agreed on a compromise for a directive on road infrastructure safety management in the EU .
The most important aspect of this agreement is that all participants recognise that road infrastructure safety is essential to improve safety on Europe 's roads .
Besides the fundamental goal of a modal shift from road to rail , drivers ' behaviour and vehicle safety , as well as considerate driving and compliance with traffic rules , are of course all key factors .
In these areas , various European legislation exists , albeit patchy .
There are currently no common rules on infrastructure planning and maintenance , for example .
This is difficult to understand , for when do roads ever stop at national borders ?
Surely all drivers using these roads should be secure in the knowledge that they are using a good road infrastructure ?
Despite these arguments , the Committee on Transport and Tourism rejected the Commission 's original proposal in its entirety by a very narrow majority of just one vote , drawing attention to the Member States ' rights of subsidiarity .
Both in the Council and in the Parliament , there are differing views on just how detailed and binding a directive should be .
For that reason , it was essential to find compromises which did not go as far as the original Commission proposal and , indeed , my own initial draft report .
I personally would have preferred the adoption of uniform , binding although , of course , not exclusive criteria governing how roads in the EU - and not only the TENs - are planned , built , checked for their compatibility with traffic regulations and regularly inspected in terms of road safety , and if necessary improved .
In my view , that would also be useful in terms of risk assessment , the key phrase here being the collection of accident data .
Unfortunately , the present proposal is merely an initial step in the right direction , but at least that is something .
The Member States will , I hope , gain positive experience with these recommendations and perhaps opt for a more harmonised approach at a later date .
In the recitals in particular , it is apparent that this will be a test phase which by no means precludes the option of closer cooperation in future .
As to the main content of the report , firstly , attention will be paid to safety during all stages of road design , construction and maintenance .
Secondly , road sections with the highest accident density will be subject to particularly intensive checks and signed appropriately for drivers .
A further aim is to introduce similar signage at road works , for example , so that drivers spot these hazards in plenty of time during the day and at night .
Thirdly , independent staff with appropriate and regular training must play a key role in planning and inspections .
While detailed harmonisation of training in the various Member States is not mandatory , Member States should work towards mutually compatible training curricula for road safety auditors .
Fourthly , those Member States which already possess well-functioning road infrastructure safety management systems should be permitted to continue using their existing methods , provided that the requirements of the directive are fulfilled .
Fifthly , the directive offers many useful examples of methods and criteria which can be applied in safety inspections and risk / accident analyses .
It emphasises , again , the need for adequate safe parking areas .
Sixthly , and finally , it points out that new technologies should be developed and applied in order to achieve ongoing improvements in road safety .
The Commission is in a position to promote the exchange of best practice in relation to safety management on roads which are not TENs but which were built with European funding .
The compromise ensures that Parliament will be adequately involved in the amendment and further development of the directive 's provisions .
I feel sure that the compromise achieved , which will be voted on as Block 1 , will be supported by the House .
I would like to thank sincerely the shadow rapporteurs as well as the Commission and Council representatives for their intensive cooperation , even if it did not always make life easy for me .
I hope that the directive will bring about the improvements that we need .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would also finally like to congratulate you on your new post .
Congratulations , and I wish you all the best , but I would also like to express the hope that in future , we are not going to have any more nonsensical drafts from the Commission .
A year ago , the Committee on Transport rejected the proposal from the Commission on road infrastructure safety management as it was too bureaucratic and , in our view , failed to generate any added value .
I still believe that the directive is superfluous and is unlikely to add any value .
The road infrastructure varies very widely in the Member States and I think we should only support those Member States that need to catch up , but to do that , we do not need a directive which applies to everyone .
Instead of a directive , it would be better to adopt guidelines based on existing good practice in the Member States .
That being the case , I would prefer it if we could completely reject the directive , but we will not secure a political majority in favour of that option in the House , and the Council is also insisting on rules that are devoid of content , which is why we have now agreed a compromise on the basis of the report by the Committee on Transport .
This compromise essentially consists of minor changes , such as improvements to language or amendments to the annexes , which give more details about safety management procedures .
Road safety is of course a very important issue for us , but at EU level , a great deal has already been done to improve road safety , for example as regards driving and rest times , additional mirrors in lorries , tunnel safety , etc .
These are areas where it is useful to have regulations at EU level .
More could be done here , but only if it adds value to road safety .
Due to the subsidiarity principle , however , this is not the case for road infrastructure safety , but because the Commission 's proposal has been watered down , I am able to go along with it , despite my objections .
The directive only requires Member States to introduce four procedures on road infrastructure safety management , and only concerns roads that are part of the TENs .
Because the annexes are not binding , Member States can arrange the requisite procedures for themselves .
This means that Member States have enough leeway to retain their existing successful systems .
There are no new obligations for those who already have a good management system .
We have also deleted the extensive reporting requirements the Commission was requesting , and we have prevented the scope from being extended to motorways , which was what the rapporteur wanted .
Anything else would have infringed the subsidiarity principle .
Ultimately , what we have now are guidelines in the guise of a directive .
This is the first time that I have ever experienced such a thing .
It is a result that my group can endorse , as we only ever wanted guidelines from the outset .

May I ask that as regards Amendment 70 we take the English version as a basis , as the German version , at least , contains mistakes and I think the other language versions may need to be checked as well .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to begin by saying how delighted I am that the Commissioner has upheld the stance adopted by his predecessor .
Mr Markov devoted a lot of time to this directive , but along with all of us he was aware , as Mrs Sommer said , that this directive was under serious threat .
It was not clear whether it was to be or not to be .
My political group and I were numbered amongst those who wanted this directive and we still do .
One reason why we are anxious to have it is that we wish to use it as an efficient instrument to bring about action , notably in the countries that joined the Union in the last two enlargements .
We have in mind the method , technology , tempo and timetable for modernising their infrastructure to improve safety .
There are very important reasons for this .
If the number of road accidents in Poland is similar to that in Germany , it means that the situation in Poland is bad .
The same applies to the other new countries .
That is why we shall support the compromises and amendments tabled .
I call for strong support .
This is not simply a face-saving compromise in relation to the version submitted .
It is , I believe , an important compromise that should be acceptable to all concerned .
I should like to thank Mr Markov once again for his cooperation .
Contrary to what you stated , Sir , you were not a difficult colleague .
I am glad we are in a position to put in place an important instrument that will improve the safety of road traffic .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I too would like to offer the Commissioner a warm welcome , and trust we shall cooperate and work well together .
We are today working on the directive on safety of road transport .
This is certainly in keeping with the theme ascribed to the current sitting of Parliament in Strasbourg .
Yesterday we worked on the subject of safety of pedestrians and cyclists .
Earlier today we discussed the transport of dangerous goods , and now we are discussing the safety of roads .
Tomorrow we are due to discuss the proposal for intelligent cars .
All this is good news for the citizens of the European Union , because it shows that the European Parliament is working on specific issues that can improve their safety when travelling by road .
This good news does of course give rise to a whole series of questions .
Firstly , we need to realise that this is a sequence of events , and that no single one of these directives or other legal acts will resolve the problem on its own .
We have to understand that it is our wish to improve the system , so that the number of accidents decreases year on year , and the consequences of those accidents become less and less serious .
Implementation of these measures is very important , however .
This is especially true for the new countries , whose road infrastructure has been seriously neglected .
This directive will be very relevant to them .
It should be made quite clear that this is not a case of European law over-regulating .
It is a directive that can prove useful in that regard , setting the standard governments will have to implement .
I should like to add to what Mr Markov , our rapporteur , has said .
This is a sound and positive document .
As I stated earlier , it is part of the ongoing work of the European Parliament aimed at improving road safety for our citizens .
I am grateful for it and trust that the House will pursue its work on this subject in the future .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , in your comments on the directive , you mentioned the fact that the statistics have shown a deterioration of the situation as far as fatalities in accidents are concerned , specifically over the past year , whereas previously there had been a decrease in the number of deaths .
This probably has very little to do with the infrastructure itself , for it is unlikely that within just one year the state of Europe 's roads has deteriorated so rapidly that suddenly many more people are dying in traffic accidents .
You will gather from my introductory remarks that I am somewhat sceptical about this directive .
I too would have thought that guidelines would have been quite adequate .
I am still not entirely clear about the added value generated by this directive , and I will be looking very carefully at the implementation process to see precisely how this is being achieved .
I always have problems with the fact that , as I see it , there is an imbalance in relation to road safety .
On the one hand , in terms of technical measures , we move very quickly to prescribe remedies , even if it is simply a matter of making things more expensive and the safety benefits are not entirely clear .
We are generous , too , when it comes to infrastructure and adopt very comprehensive prescriptive measures here .
However , when it comes to human beings , who are still a key factor in the context of accidents , there is an extreme reluctance in this House to even talk about the issue .
I still believe that if a driver cannot adjust to weather conditions , it will be very difficult for him , for the weather is something that we cannot yet control at EU level and the weather always has a major impact on accidents .
I am waiting to see what happens during implementation , and will be following this very closely .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , road accidents are the main cause of death and disability in countries with a developed transport system .
The directive on improving the safety of road infrastructure on the trans-European network is a document that will reduce the number of accidents .
It is a necessary provision and it deals with the challenges of road safety from design to use in a comprehensive manner .
The amendments tabled have sound foundations .
I proposed deleting the amendment to Article 5 ( 1 ) that increased the time period for controls on dangerous sections of the road network from one to three years .
This increase will be unnecessary once the directive is implemented .
It is a comprehensive directive and pursuant to the provisions for better supervision , the safety of existing , constructed , upgraded and planned roads should halve the number of fatal accidents by 2010 .
Member States can draw on the provisions of the directive when organising supervision of national and regional roads with a view to reducing the number of accidents on the European Union 's roads .
Some 40 000 people lose their lives in road accidents every year , and accidents of this type are the main cause of death for people under 45 years of age .
It is also important to take action to ensure that vehicles are in a better state and of better quality .
Action is needed as well to improve infrastructure and training , and to disseminate information on safe driving .
I should like to congratulate Mr Markov , the rapporteur , on a good report and on contributing to the drafting of the directive .
We support this directive .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) One of the important goals set by the European Union in relation to road traffic in 2001 was reducing European road accident fatalities by 50 % by 2010 , i.e. from 50 000 to 25 000 annually .
The results so far are not very satisfactory .
The death toll for 2005 was 41 500 people .
Consequently , we need new measures .
Road safety is determined not just by vehicle safety and the quality of driver training , but also by the state of the infrastructure , meaning the safety of road construction and road markings .
Most existing measures concentrate on vehicle safety , while some attempt to influence driver training and eliminate those that may be dangerous to other road users , for example through the points system .
Not much has been done so far in relation to the method of improving road infrastructure at European Union level .
Consequently , the so-called best practice must be expanded as quickly as possible .
Since the roads included in the TEN-T network are considered to be the most important , the report looks at this issue as well .
I think that targeted investment in the maintenance of infrastructure and road markings , including the application of information technology , are needed in the long run , and not just on main roads and in the new countries .
Apart from the passive and active safety elements in new cars and the eCall system , this is an aspect that could have the biggest impact on road safety in the future .
The GUE / NGL Group strongly recommends voting in favour of the report .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the Commission was defeated by the UK before when trying to impose harmonised measurements - caught like graffiti vandals altering UK road signs .
But they do not listen , and Mr Markov is going to put road safety standards under the control of an unelected Commissioner .
Amendment 5 is good : ' Several Member States already possess well functioning road safety management systems .
These countries should be permitted to continue using their existing methods ' .
Will some countries be more harmonised than others ?
Which countries ?
Please name names .
UK roads have high safety standards - for instance , too many speed cameras .
Why not harmonise those ?
Please take away as many as you like .
Amendment 53 requires harmonisation of sign visibility and readability , and 49 requires harmonised road signs and markings .
Is this readability designed to confuse UK motorists in 35 EU languages ?
What is it ?
Is the rapporteur proposing huge road signs with massive texts so motorists can pick out their language at a distance ?
Or maybe parking bays so motorists can get out and read it all ?
What next ?
UK distances are in miles , with stopping distances in yards .
The EU is about harmonisation , not people , so the unelected Commissioner will take away UK imperial distances and traditions via the back door without asking the people .
The title of this report should be ' EU cannot read the signs ' .
Well , the writing is on the wall .
Keep your distance , listen to the people , not to politicians .
If you want to mess with the imperial measure , let us have a UK and Irish referendum on it , or do you want just more road rage ?
The UK would be better off out .
( PL ) Mr President , before I contribute to the debate , I should like to congratulate the Commissioner on his appointment .
A degree of progress has been made in the area of road safety by taking appropriate action regarding vehicles and drivers .
There is still much to be done , however , as the statistics are alarming .
Some 43 000 people die every year on the European Union 's roads .
At global level , the number of fatalities in road accidents is even more horrifying , as it amounts to 1.2 million individuals .
Almost one third of deaths amongst young people are due to accidents .
The initiative aimed at improving the safety of road infrastructure is very important .
This is because the physical condition of the roads is a major contributory factor to the number of accidents that occur on them every day .
Much of the existing road network was created decades ago .
It no longer meets current safety standards due to its physical condition and state of repair , and also because of present-day traffic levels .
I share the rapporteur 's view that this directive should apply not just to trans-European road networks : its scope should be much broader .
According to the statistics , only 7 % of fatal accidents happen on motorways .
Two-thirds of those who lose their lives in road accidents are victims of accidents on single carriageway roads outside built up areas and in the countryside .
Safety issues must be taken into account at the planning and design stage , including the planning of road infrastructure , as well as when the roads come into use .

( RO ) Honourable President , Mr. Commissioner , dear colleagues , every year , in the European Union , approximately 43,000 people die and other approximately 1.7 people are injured in road accidents .
In addition to designing and building safer vehicles , Member States should also invest in the safety of road infrastructure .
The road safety impact assessment should prove , at a strategic level , the implications of various alternatives for planning an infrastructure project on road safety and this should be decisive in choosing the route .
The TRAN Committee supported the amendment by which Member States can implement the provisions of this directive , as a set of good practices , for the national road infrastructure as well , not included into the TEN-T network , built by entirely or partially using Community funds .
In order to encourage bicycle riding , especially in urban areas , Member States should include special routes for cyclists into any variant of building the road transport infrastructure , which would avoid as much as possible crossing with the main drive routes .
I consider it extremely necessary that Member States ensure the provision of adequate road signals in order to warn traffic participants about the segments of road infrastructure that are under repair and may endanger the safety of traffic participants .
I also consider that , in case the implementation of the provisions under this directive generates new obligations for the achievement of a road infrastructure project , the Commission and the Member States should ensure the adequate increase of allocated funds .
I end by emphasizing the need to build safer parking areas and I hope Mr. Commissioner will support the amendment I submitted for this purpose to the 2009 Union budget .
I congratulate the Rapporteur .
- ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank our rapporteur very much for the discussions that he led for two years in the Committee on Transport and Tourism in the preparation of this text that is aimed at improving safety on Europe 's road network .
This important and constantly recurring topic is of major concern to this House , which is often called on to give its opinion on a whole range of technical issues relating to vehicle safety standards , and once again , this very evening , we can point out that we have responded in a very concrete way for the benefit of the people of Europe .
Safety issues of this kind concern them and can affect them in their everyday lives and , indeed , if this legislative proposal seeks to lower the risk of accidents and reduce the number of dead and injured on our roads by helping to ensure that safety is integrated in all phases of planning , design and operation of road infrastructures in the trans-European network , then it warrants our attention .
I , for my part , will support this initiative because , without imposing excessively strict procedures that would not take account of the economic and structural reality of each Member State , this proposal for a directive will provide clarity by arranging for an impact assessment prior to each new construction project , a road safety audit that will allow existing facilities to be developed and a risk management procedure that will provide a specific response to targeted risks .
Although not as optimistic as Commissioner Tajani , I hope that the Commission 's assessment of the impact of all these measures proves to be a realistic one .
Indeed , I think it will be a very good thing if by introducing these measures we are able , as is estimated , to prevent nearly 7 000 road injuries and some 600 fatalities on Europe 's roads each year .
( PL ) Mr President , I am glad that we are working on a directive concerning management of the safety of road infrastructure .
The current situation is that certain Member States such as Germany , Denmark , France , Sweden , the Netherlands , Austria , Spain and the United Kingdom have a safe road network , though this does not mean that it could not be improved further .
In other countries such as the Czech Republic , Italy and Portugal , the network is mediocre , and in still others , such as Poland , Romania and Bulgaria , it is simply bad .
The aim is to provide maximum security for Union citizens in all Member States .
It is therefore surprising that pursuant to the principle of subsidiarity , and essentially not infringing it , we are endeavouring not to implement compulsory provisions .
Many issues are being left to the discretion of Member States , for example broadening the scope to include national roads that are not part of the trans-European road network .
That being the case , the question arises as to how we intend to improve the condition of other roads , in Poland for instance .
How will we be able to insist that no ditches several metres deep are dug , and that safety lanes are created on motorways and national roads alike ?
How will we be able to insist that paint that is visible in rainy conditions is used on road surfaces , and that unnecessary signs and markings are done away with ?
It will not be possible to achieve all this unless it becomes compulsory to implement the provisions in the proposal for a directive we are currently discussing .
I therefore suggest that representatives of the Committee on Transport and Tourism visit Poland .
That would enable them to take the right decision and convince all Members to support it .
I was more favourably inclined towards Mr Markov 's earlier report , but I trust he will not succumb to pressure and will stand by his views .
I am in favour of making Annexes I , II , and III binding .
Finally , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur .
( DE ) Mr President , road safety is an important subject in Europe .
There is still a lot to be done to ensure that we achieve the high level of safety for road users , and for the environment along our transport routes , that we all would like .
To this end , we also need rules and regulations .
However , paper , as we know , is patient , and too much paper can be harmful .
Apart from introducing a great deal of new red tape , the first draft presented had precisely that flaw : it was heavy on rhetoric and light on substance , which is why we referred it back to committee at first reading .
The second time round , things look rather different and - being cautiously optimistic - they look a little better .
Mrs Sommer has already talked about the basic content of the current text .
What we would like is something which is more of a guideline and is not binding in nature .
We want to have an exchange of good practice , but we do not to be prescriptive .
Above all , we do not want the annexes to be binding on the Member States .
We are quite deliberately limiting ourselves to the TENs .
Many of our fellow Members have said that a great deal happens , and can happen , in the other road networks too , and in response to that , I would point out that there is nothing to stop Member States taking action here .
On the contrary , we would all be delighted if the Member States were to do their job and not simply sit back and wait , in every case , for Europe to take action .
From that point of view , I think that if we have reduced red tape , we have made a constructive contribution to this subject , and can continue to do so .
What is more , as a consensus was reached with the Council in the informal trialogue , we can conclude this matter at first reading .
All that remains is implementation , and that is a task for the Member States .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by welcoming Mr Tajani in his new role as Transport Commissioner .
I hope that we will be able to cooperate successfully with him and , above all , make improvements in the area of road safety , as he himself hopes .
Secondly , I would like to sincerely congratulate Mr Markov and thank him for his tenacity and patience in pursuing and achieving this agreement .
There is no doubt that it is still inadequate , but it is certainly satisfactory given that there was the risk of it being permanently blocked .
In that respect , Mr Markov , I believe that we must be moderately content , but content all the same .
As you rightly said , it is a small step , but it is a first step , and when it comes to road safety we are used to being patient and achieving small victories little by little on behalf of all the victims of traffic accidents and their families .
Since the outset we have believed that it was necessary to have this text , which seeks to put an end to the vicious circle of the fight against road accidents : after the rules on speed limits and blood alcohol level , it was time to talk about the need to change drivers ' attitudes and protection in vehicles ; it is now time to highlight the black spots on the European road network .
I am therefore pleased that we have included in this procedure the aspect of sufficient safe parking areas , which we called for in other texts and which I believe is of considerable importance in this text .
I am also pleased that we have succeeded in ensuring that the text makes specific reference to central reservations and crash barriers , which prevent injury and death among vulnerable users , such as motorists , since the rise in their number today actually generates new accidents .
Finally , I welcome , too , the fact that particular importance has been placed on all vulnerable users , and the special emphasis on level crossings , as these will have to be taken into account in the audits .
In conclusion , I want to say that there is a future-oriented dimension to the introduction of the intelligent and interactive road signs that are to be developed and that will doubtless have a significant impact on road safety in the future .
I also welcome the fact that emphasis has been placed on auditor training .
In my opinion , this is an important professional field for the future .

Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Markov not just for the quality of his report but also for his perseverance in concluding it , in spite of the obstacles put in his way , mainly by some members of the Transport Committee - perhaps inadvertently .
It is , indeed , regrettable that , when dealing with a report whose sole aim is to save thousands of EU citizens ' lives , certain colleagues , using perhaps suspiciously and British-imperially , nationalistically motivated legalistic excuses , have tried to stop this proposal by the Commission from being advanced on apparent subsidiarity grounds .
Perhaps some of us ought to consider more carefully the view that what Europe needs today is more unity and cohesion and less subsidiarity .
Nevertheless , the delay caused is not without some benefit also , for it has given a chance to the rapporteur to better his report by incorporating , amongst other things , many amendments tabled to the first report draft .
This is much welcomed .
On the substance of the report , my main point is that I agree with the rapporteur that Annexes I , II and III should be binding .
If these were not to be so , then the value of this proposal would surely diminish .
I would like to conclude by taking the opportunity of reminding the House and the Commissioner of two important issues on road safety .
Firstly , an effective high-friction coefficient road surface can reduce the stopping distance of a vehicle by as much as 50 % .
This can make an enormous difference in reducing car accidents on our roads .
My second point is not directly related to this report but is worth making again and again at every possible opportunity .
It is this : one third of all fatal car accidents are alcohol-related .
Many are attributed to alcohol levels in drivers ' blood which are below the existing legal limits .
Citizens and ourselves should not be fooled .
There is no safe alcohol level in drivers .
Any alcohol intake impairs driving capability .
If we want to reduce substantially the number of people killed on our roads then we ought to consider implementing a policy of zero alcohol level in drivers .
( DE ) Commissioner Tajani , I would like to congratulate you and wish you every success with your decision-making .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what distinguishes a racing driver from an ordinary car , lorry or bus driver , or indeed a cyclist ?
The racing driver walks the course before driving it , in order to gain an impression of its quality .
Obviously , that is not something that we can do with our extensive trans-European networks .
Regardless of where we are in the European Union , we must be able to rely on a minimum level of quality in our road infrastructure .
Road infrastructure management is therefore an important topic for Europe .
Improving road safety - as this House has repeatedly said - has a horizontal dimension .
It must be based on an integrated approach , dovetailing the implementation of existing and new legislation and the dissemination of good practice .
Drivers , vehicles and infrastructure all influence road safety .
We are not starting from scratch .
Some countries already have methodologies and strategies for road infrastructure safety management and they must be able to retain these .
In this context , the maintenance and expansion of road infrastructures are future-oriented topics in precisely the same way as research , education and employment .
I would like to focus on one point of detail , however .
In my view , it is extremely important to improve parking facilities for heavy goods vehicles on a Europe-wide basis ; that is a key element of safety management .
Whereas many other workers are able to have breakfast with their families and finish work at 5 p.m. , lorry drivers are out on the road day and night for weeks at a time , with poor medical care , patiently accepting being away from home , to say nothing of having to contend with the widely varying personal care facilities across the TENs .
Indeed , unlike most other people , lorry drivers have to pay heavy charges for these facilities .
They also have to pay through the nose if they cannot find proper parking areas where they can stop and comply with the rest times that are prescribed by European law .
That is another reason why we need this directive .
( PT ) This debate is about road safety .
However , this proposal for a directive has already suffered several accidents along the way .
To start with , the Committee on Transport and Tourism rejected the Commission proposal , considering it superfluous and in contradiction with the subsidiarity principle .
After the Council agreed on a general orientation on the Commission proposal , aimed at doing away with the binding nature of the annexes to the directive and restricting its application to trans-European road networks , it was finally possible - thanks to the commitment of the rapporteur , whom I must congratulate - to adopt a report in the Committee on Transport .
The report not only makes the text less bureaucratic but also takes account of the different levels of road safety management in the various countries .
The report therefore favours the idea of exchanging good practices , constantly seeking to better coordinate actions at both EU level and among the Member States .
It is therefore with satisfaction that we find ourselves once again debating this issue , now based on a text which offers renewed added value , which reflects the capacity to coordinate actions within the Union and which offers us more appropriate solutions given that real life , as we well know , is pretty diverse .
It gives a clear signal to our citizens that , despite a few accidents along the way , we have not ground to a halt .
In this context , a definition is proposed for the orientations and best practices at all stages of road management , from road safety impact assessments to audits , network safety management and inspections .
It should be underlined that the directive , as amended , will not impose the adoption of any technical rules or procedures .
Instead it encourages the Member States , through guidelines , to make best use of the methodologies defined , even inviting them to apply these to national roads not included in the trans-European road networks .
I am finishing up now , Mr President .
In 2001 the European Union set the ambitious target of halving by 2010 the number of deaths on European roads .
Our expectation is that this directive , together with many other initiatives already discussed and adopted in this House , may also help to save many lives of European road users .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank all our fellow Members once again for the debate .
There are at least two things which have become clear .
Firstly , road safety is something that we are all concerned about , and secondly , the question is how far do we go to tackle this at European level , and there are very different views on that .
Of course , I was very pleased to see that other colleagues were also calling for binding annexes .
Unfortunately , in the Committee on Transport and Tourism I was unable to achieve an extension of this directive to road infrastructure outside the trans-European road network .
One of the recitals now states that this is possible , and I hope , of course , that the Commission will bring forward a new proposal at a later date , as I believe this is necessary .
This , then , is the first small step .
If we were to compare it with a person , it is not a large step , a step that you or I could take .
It is , perhaps , a small step that a six- or seven-month-old baby might take on its tiny feet .
Let us hope that the directive produces results very quickly and minimises the number of road fatalities , for that is our main concern and that is what we are seeking to achieve .
Once again , thank you to everyone , and congratulations on your appointment , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 June 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) This directive is absolutely necessary , especially for the major road infrastructure projects .
Nevertheless , we should not forget that the important aspects related to safety fall to the responsibility of Member States , according to the principle of subsidiary , as a shared responsibility .
As designed , and partly achieved , the trans-European road network is one of the safest in the world .
Major problems related to the overall infrastructure safety and traffic safety are not either in the TEN-T or , mostly , on the highways , but there are problems on the usual roads , especially outside the cities .
For this reason , thorough analyses , building projects designed and achieved with competence , as well as an efficient audit , are necessary particularly in the regional and local road network and , for this reason , I consider that Member States should take over all the healthy principles and implement them responsibly not only where they are bound to but , especially , where they are necessary .
Being designed as non-mandatory , especially from the bureaucratic-administrative point of view , the rules established by this directive should be adopted as a set of good practices for the continuous improvement of procedures for the management of all road infrastructures across the entire European Union .
Future of the sheep / lamb and goat sector in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the report by Liam Aylward , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the future of the sheep / lamb and goat sector in Europe .
Rapporteur . - ( GA ) Mr President , the sheep and goat sectors are very important for the economy and environment in Europe .
Sheep and goat farming is even more important in remote areas and in mountainous regions , where it is often depended on from an economic and agricultural perspective .
It does not adversely impact the environment and it protects the rural landscape .
But yet , the future of this industry is currently under pressure in the European Union .
Sheep production has fallen 12.5 % since 2000 .
Farmers are leaving this occupation as the work is hard and income is too low .
Sheepmeat consumption is in decline , as some feel it is too expensive and difficult to cook .
This is particularly true among younger people .
There is also increased competition in the market from other countries .
Sheepmeat production will fall 10 % by the year 2015 unless something is done now .
This sector should be looked at under the CAP ' Health Check ' , and prompt action should be taken .
Mr President , since being appointed rapporteur for this report in June 2007 , I have opened up a wide-ranging series of discussions with interested parties , including farming organisations , representatives from the lamb-processing sector and consumer organisations .
Ernst and Young compiled a very thorough study of the sheep and goat sectors , for which I would like to thank them .
I consulted with the Agriculture Commissioner , Mrs Fischer Boel , and various European agriculture ministers , who were all very supportive to me in compiling this report .
At all times I try to remain realistic in the proposals I put forward .
Very briefly I would highlight the main recommendations of the report .
Firstly , the introduction of a new environmental sheep-maintenance scheme which would allow sheep farmers to be paid under on a per-ewe basis , in recognition of the positive environmental attributes associated with the maintenance of sheep production , to be co-financed by national and European Union funding .
Secondly , an additional payment for traditional mountain breeds in order to preserve sheep in sensitive areas .
Thirdly , an EU regulation for the labelling of sheepmeat products which would have an EU-wide logo to allow consumers to distinguish between EU products and those from third countries ; this would be underwritten by a number of criteria , including farm assurance schemes and a country of origin indication , thus ensuring that consumers are fully aware of the point of origin of the product .
Fourthly , a review of the introduction of the compulsory electronic identification system for sheep , scheduled for 31 December 2009 .
Due to the difficulty in implementation , high cost and unproven benefits , we propose allowing each Member State the discretion to decide whether to introduce electronic tagging on a voluntary basis if they so wish .
Fifthly , an increase in the current annual European Commission food promotion budget which is valued at EUR 45 million for 2008 , the ring-fencing of funding for EU lamb , and changes and simplifications to the practical rules governing the operation of this budget so that lamb products can be given meaningful access to this budget .
Sixthly , that the European Commission bring forward proposals on price transparency in this sector to provide information to consumers and producers .
Seventhly , a review of existing import quota management regimes by the European Commission so as to ensure that EU-produced lamb is not exposed to unfair competition and that the option of sensitive produce status for sheep meat products be available to the European Union .
Eighthly , support for the European Commission in research and development in the small ruminant industry , concentrating on both technical innovation for farms and product innovation .
Ninthly , as part of the simplification process in the review of the common agricultural policy health check , which is taking place over the next eight months , the European Commission must allow 14 days ' notice to be given to livestock farmers for on-farm cross-compliance inspections .
Finally , the setting-up of an EU implementation task force comprising members of the European Commission , the presidency and the Council .
This EU implementation task force will oversee the practical reforms needed so as to make the European sheep sector viable , competitive and profitable .
I would ask my colleagues to support this report as I believe , if implemented , it will go a long way to help save the sheep and goat sectors in the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am standing in for Commissioner Fischer Boel , who of course knows this sector better than I do .
Nevertheless , as Vice-President Mauro knows , I hail from a region of Italy whose history , whose raison d 'être consisted of sheep and goat farming .
My name actually derives from the shoes formerly worn by shepherds .
It is therefore a particular pleasure for me to be able to express the Commission 's opinion on this topic .
I should like to begin by thanking Mr Aylward for taking the initiative of presenting this report .
As Mrs Fischer Boel stated recently when putting forward the proposals on the CAP Health Check , farmers are the custodians of the countryside : they protect our shared natural heritage , and in many rural areas they continue to represent the beating heart of the economy .
I would add that , in my opinion , this is especially true for sheep farmers .
Having said that , I think we all agree that the sheep and goat sector deserves special attention .
It is nonetheless important to distinguish between two very different sets of circumstances within this sector : on the one hand , extensive farming , which is more beneficial for the environment but often less profitable for those practising it , and on the other , intensive farming systems , which are more competitive but less environmentally sustainable .
It is important to recall , in this connection , that the purpose of the recent CAP reforms was to make agriculture in the European Union more efficient and competitive , but at the same time to ensure its sustainability .
The Health Check will now confirm the validity of this twofold objective .
We cannot of course maintain artificial restrictions which prevent farmers from meeting rising demand , but at the same time we must pursue a policy of protecting the environment .
The Commission has therefore proposed , as part of the CAP Health Check , stronger and better targeted support for environmentally-sensitive production .
One proposal made on these grounds is to maintain coupled aid for sheep and goats .
We are suggesting in addition that the existing Article 69 be applied more flexibly , making it possible for the sheep sector in particular to benefit from it .
Finally , we propose firming up the rural development policy with a view to safeguarding the environment and the rural landscape , as well as creating jobs and encouraging growth and innovation in rural areas , paying particular attention to outlying and depopulated areas or areas that are heavily dependent on farming .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that the new proposals offer numerous opportunities to the sheep and goat sector .
Once the discussions have been finalised and the conclusions reached in Parliament and the Council , it will be up to the operators in the sector to exploit these opportunities as best they can .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , can I first of all welcome the new Commissioner to his post .
I look forward to working with him in the years to come and wish him well in taking up his post as Commissioner with a heavy responsibility .
I know he is not involved in his own particular area tonight and he is speaking for Mariann Fischer Boel but I have little doubt - and I accept what he says - that his background knowledge in the area is quite good .
Like many politicians he came from this House .
I am so delighted to see a Commissioner who actually was a Member , who actually knows what Members think and what Members feel .
So , Commissioner , I hope you will not take personally some of the things I might say tonight but you will take them back to Mariann Fischer Boel and tell her what I really think .
The report that comes before this House regarding the sheep and goat industry is timely and has comprehensively addressed the particular problems which the sector is currently facing .
The sheep and goat sector has come through many years of being non-profitable .
The industry has been demoralised by low prices , cheap imports and a low price for wool .
Sheep production is usually based mainly in mountainous and less-favoured areas where there are no farming alternatives .
As young people look to the future they see that they cannot survive on the present income that this sector provides .
They are therefore turning their backs on sheep and goat farming .
The mid-term review did not bring any improvement to the financial viability of this sector .
Under the present health check the sector must receive special attention and we must look to see how we can best improve the overall viability .
I have to say that the Commission proposal to bring in electronic tagging as proposed will destroy the industry .
If ever there has been a proposal that has not been thought through , this is it .
The industry simply cannot afford to pay for this .
Most of the time , in fact , the tag would actually cost more than the animal might even be worth .
The Commission could ease fears by accepting our amendment to postpone the proposal until 2012 .
This would allow time to see if the technology associated with tagging improves and if the cost comes down .
Then and only then can we really improve the traceability that the Commission requires .
Let me now deal with the proposal for a task force , which always seems to be put forward as a solution to any problem , be it in the national estate or in Europe .
The agriculture industry is littered with task force reports that have emerged in a blaze of glory only to enter the dustbin of history , never having achieved their stated goals .
They are always well meaning but , unless you have the follow-through and the financial support , such reports will be doomed to fail .
I fear this will be no different .
There is an urgent need to develop the momentum behind this report .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development should have a report every six months on the state of play in the industry and what is being done to develop and improve the sector .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must first of all thank the rapporteur , Mr Aylward , for the excellent work he has done in consulting the professionals and the sheep and goat sector and for the very comprehensive report that he has submitted to us .
The sheep , lamb and goat sector has had a rough ride over the last ten years as a result of a series of crises , including epizootic-type diseases , but more especially because of the decoupling of aid , which has led to a marked decline in the sheep and lamb population as breeders quit the industry .
The sector is currently experiencing real difficulties and it is now time for us to sit up and take notice , for this sector is capable of producing high-quality meat and milk and it plays a key role in ensuring the natural upkeep and improvement of the local terrain , which also includes reducing the risk of fire and natural disasters .
I support the proposals that have been put forward by our rapporteur and by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development relating to financial support for the production and promotion of agricultural products .
Faced with foreign imports that already total nearly one quarter of European production , I believe that it is important to develop a European quality mark that can be used in addition to local and national origin labels .
I also think that the introduction of an electronic tagging system on the date set by the European institutions will only be possible if the European Union first provides the necessary funding , for the industry itself in its present predicament would not be capable of doing so .
Unlike the previous speaker , I believe that setting up an implementation task force would be an appropriate step , but in my opinion this should include representatives from the professional organisations so that developments in the field can be closely monitored .
Finally , I would remind you that we need to act as a matter of some urgency , and certainly by next year , if we want to save this sector , for I fear that using Article 69 , which has now become Article 68 , as a health check for sectors in crisis will simply come too late in the day .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would add my own congratulations to the rapporteur this evening .
I have been delighted to support this report since I first saw it and continue that support tonight on behalf of my group .
Mr Aylward has clearly consulted very widely with the industry - the people who know what they are talking about - and that shines through in this report which could provide a few examples of best practice to a few other rapporteurs .
I will pick up on two issues . The proposal to have an implementation task force is absolutely fundamental .
We regularly come up with umpteen ' Christmas lists ' in this Parliament and they do not necessarily go much further into actual reality .
Scotland 's and Europe 's sheep farmers do need a better deal and we do need to have regular updates on how this industry is doing and what we need to do to fix it .
The second issue which will be of no surprise to colleagues is sheep identification and electronic tagging .
I would appreciate it as well if the Commissioner , whom I welcome to his new post , could perhaps bring a fresh pair of eyes - as opposed to a pair of tags - to this issue , even though it is not within his remit , and accept that this well-meaning but deeply flawed proposal is precisely what the sheep and goat sector of Europe does not need at this time or at all .


It is flawed for three reasons : the proposals are impractical in that what works on a Brussels flipchart will not work in the dead of winter up a hill in Scotland ; they are unproven : even the manufacturers of this technology admit that they need a great deal of work ; and they are badly timed because the economic implications could put vast numbers of farmers out of business completely .
So Mr Aylward 's report is excellent .
I am delighted to support it but we have still got plenty of work to do .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , as I take the floor on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group in this debate , I should like to draw attention to four issues .
Firstly , the 2003reform of the common agricultural policy , which involved decoupling direct payments from production , resulted in a sustained decline in the number of sheep and goats bred in EU territory .
Secondly , other factors have contributed to the decline of this sector .
These include higher than average production costs , mainly relating to fuel , electricity and feed .
In addition , an undue amount of meat has been imported from third countries where farmers are not bound by such strict rules on livestock farming .
Thirdly , this type of livestock farming plays an important role in protecting the natural environment , including maintaining less fertile ground by natural methods and preserving biodiversity .
It also helps to protect the landscape .
Furthermore , sheep and goats are raised in areas that are , for all intents and purposes , unsuitable for any other farming activity .
Fourthly , urgent action is needed to protect the sheep and goat sector at European Union level .
In particular , this should involve introducing a system of income support for producers so as to encourage them to develop this type of production .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) It is well-known that sheep and goat farming is extremely important , particularly in less favoured and mountain areas , as it helps to keep people on the land , naturally upkeep less fertile areas , and preserve landscapes and sensitive ecosystems .
It also helps to prevent forest fires , for example in my country .
Having said this , production in the European Union is not meeting demand and the number of animals is constantly decreasing .
It is therefore essential to adopt measures that will help to improve producer incomes and increase the production of meat , milk , cheese and other products in order to encourage young farmers into the sector and to support family-based small and medium-sized holdings .
Urgent action is needed through a range of support measures , mainly financial , bearing in mind the high cost of production , the epizootics which frequently affect these animals and the paucity of technical support in various areas , particularly medical and veterinary support .
We must look at the huge gap between the low prices paid to producers by intermediaries and large supermarkets and the very high prices paid by the end consumer .
This means that the Commission and Member States must give absolute priority to this problem of the transparency of prices in the sector .
However , in particular , we must encourage the formation of associations , guarantee a movement towards fair prices for meat , milk and cheese produced on a small scale and establish local markets , bringing producers and consumers closer together .
To stop the decline in sheep and goat meat production seen in the European Union since 2003 when the common agricultural policy was reformed and the Single Payment Scheme was introduced , with subsidies no longer being linked to production , the new review must change this situation by adopting the necessary measures .
These must include extraordinary support for introducing the electronic identification system which , as has already been said , must only be voluntary , at least in this phase , so as not to overburden producers .
I must also stress the importance of guaranteeing an additional payment for producers of rare native , traditional and regional breeds of sheep and goats .
This type of production must be increased in mountain and other specific areas in order to preserve biological diversity in agriculture and keep these animals in sensitive areas .
Finally , I want to reaffirm the need to support , through a range of measures , the production of traditional cheeses from the milk of these animals .
We must keep alive the artisanal processes that have survived to date and that form part of our cultural heritage and we must guarantee that shepherds and other producers of meat and milk from sheep and goats have the option of continuing their cheese production and selling this directly to consumers at local markets .
I must thank the rapporteur for his report .
- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are dealing with a serious subject , namely the gradual disappearance of Europe 's sheep and Europe 's shepherds .
There are a billion sheep in the world , but Europe only has 97 million , in other words less than 10 % , and when it comes to ewes the situation is even worse , for there are now only 67 million of them in Europe .
Admittedly the UK may create an illusion with its 15 million head of sheep and Spain too with its 16 million , while Chairman Parish 's Ireland is self-sufficient to the tune of 333 % .
France , however , has seen its flocks decline from nearly 13 million animals some 25 years ago to about 8 million today and this will decrease further to a mere 5 million by 2015 .
In France one out of every two legs of lamb consumed is sourced abroad .
Even worse than that it is the lactating ewes that are disappearing .
Of course the causes are well known : massive increase in the cost of feed , reduced consumption levels , the difficult life of the sheep farmer , catarrhal fever , falling prices , decoupling of aid and , above all , duty-free imports of mutton and lamb from New Zealand .
Some 227 000 tonnes arrive from New Zealand every year , i.e. twice the French production level .
It is not a case of wolves eating sheep ; it is a case of New Zealand sheep eating European ones .
A century and a half ago New Zealand had 1 million head of sheep ; today it has 40 million .
Over the same period the French figure has fallen from 30 million to 8 million .
So what can we do ?
We need a major European plan for the sheep and lamb industry , the willingness to pay a subsidy of EUR 15 for each lactating ewe and a sheep subsidy that is 125 % of the cattle subsidy , loans to help modernise livestock buildings , conveniently located abattoirs , a European risk-insurance fund for livestock farmers , an assistance scheme and , why not Erasmus grants so that young shepherds can go to learn their trade in Spain or Italy . Thank you , Mr President .
If we have sheep we have civilisation .
Mr President , thank you .
Well , Mr Martinez , I knew that New Zealand sheep were guilty of many things , but I did not realise they ate other sheep , especially European ones !
But , to be serious , I thank the rapporteur for a very good report .
Can I echo the words of Mr Nicholson that it is great to see you here , Commissioner , and I am glad to see that you come from a sheep-keeping area of Italy , so I am sure you will be able to shed light on this whole project .
Sheep farming is extremely good , not only for farming but for the environment , and we talk a great deal today about a great environment for agriculture .
But it is in the high-landscape areas , the mountainous areas , the hilly areas in my own area that I represent - Exmoor and Dartmoor and Bodmin Moor - that the green landscape is kept by sheep farming .
Sheep meat and lamb meat is a very healthy red meat .
It is also a meat that is fed on grass , and when we now are living in an age where people are saying it takes eight kilos of grain to create one kilo of protein , then do not forget grass-fed meat is extremely valuable .
We must go out and market this , because it is a healthy meat but it needs to be marketed , and that is where I say to the rapporteur in his report : marketing is extremely important .
I actually want to see a form of grassland payment paid to sheep farmers to keep the sheep on the hillside .
I do not want a coupled payment , because I believe all that may do is maintain more sheep than the landscape needs to keep .
We have got to have the right number there to keep the landscape but have a good quality sheep that can then be marketed properly .
Electronic tagging : we are not ready for it .
And when you are halfway up a mountain in driving rain , you try to read these new-fangled monitors and the answer is you will not be able to do it .
There is no system yet that properly stops the collision of the numbers on the different sheep .
And do not forget you are talking about millions and millions of sheep in the European Union .
We are just not ready , and I would say : leave it to 2012 or beyond .
( ES ) Mr President , the European sheep and lamb sector has for a number of years been experiencing a serious crisis that is taking it to the brink of collapse , as has already been mentioned .
The traditionally low profitability of this sector has been aggravated by the rise in the price of feed as well as the massive decrease in consumption of these products .
Mr Aylward 's report correctly depicts the sector and emphasises its key role in supporting populations in the most sensitive and vulnerable areas and in maintaining the natural environment it inhabits .
It seems evident that neither the market nor the current CAP aid will be sufficient to keep this sector afloat , especially since the current regulatory production costs are causing a loss of competitiveness in comparison to imported products , which do not have to meet the same requirements .
If we do not act , there is a serious risk that these undertakings may disappear and with them one of the most important economic activities , if not the only one , in many of Europe 's rural areas , which will pose a serious problem in terms of land use management .
My Group supports the rapporteur 's report and if we tabled amendments it was purely with a view to improving it .
We are concerned not only about the traditional breeds , which are certainly in danger , but also this stockbreeding profession itself , which is also in danger .
Although Mr Smith seems to believe that only Scotland has sheep , there are also some in Spain .
We are in fact the second largest producer after the United Kingdom , as has been mentioned , and we believe that the electronic identification system is the only way to guarantee the traceability of herds and the only way to ensure that EU labelling is completely reliable .
My Group is calling for Community financing mechanisms to facilitate its introduction by the date envisaged .
We also want the Commission to include in the strategy for this sector the revival of the activities of shepherds , milking professionals and shearers , which are disappearing .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the situation of the sheep and goat sector indicates that the common agricultural policy is in crisis .
It provides further evidence that the agricultural policy is not meeting expectations and that maintaining it in its current form will result in the loss of food security .
We have experienced a crisis in the market in cereals , when it proved necessary to take 2 900 000 hectares out of set-aside .
Then there was a crisis in the milk market , caused by a restrictive policy and the imposition of penalties on farmers .
The milk quota had to be increased quickly by 2 % , which does not allow commitments to be properly met in the future .
It now appears that we also have a crisis in the sheep and goat sector .
The situation regarding horses and many crops is also serious .
In short , the agricultural policy must be changed , but not under pressure from industry .
We cannot allow additional burdens to be imposed and paid for by breeders and consumers .
I have in mind , for example , the electronic tagging of sheep .
Mr President , I should like to say thank you and welcome to the Commissioner .
If you have not heard it already , Commissioner , the message coming very clearly from this House is that electronic tagging is a very bad idea and it must be put to bed .
If this report - and I thank Liam Aylward for his work on it - achieves anything , I would hope that it would achieve a bit of realism on electronic tagging of sheep .
You have heard the reasons - it is not practical , it is too costly and sheep farmers quite simply will not wear it .
Irish sheep farmers are in an angry mood at the moment - as you know , we have taken a vote on the Lisbon Treaty - and it would be rather practical if the Commission could say , ' Let 's listen to them and put this one to bed ' .
Do not bring it in .
I would like to say a few things about the report , which details the problems in the sheep sector and does it particularly well .
The real solution for sheep farmers is better market prices and , if we cannot get those , a better share of the price we , as consumers , pay for lamb .
We need to encourage young people to start eating this meat which , as you have heard , is a healthy product .
So measures in terms of marketing initiatives to help that are very important .
I worry about Article 69 .
We are simply cross-subsidising between farmers and I am not so sure that would go down very well with farmers from whom the money will be taken .
I support the idea of an environmental-linked payment but I am a little concerned .
We had them before and there were problems on the mountains because of it .
Then - guess what - we decoupled , hoping to solve that problem , and now we are trying to recouple .
But the sheep sector needs additional payments to keep farmers in business , particularly in sensitive areas .
Moving on to the task force : I am not a great fan of task forces but I am happy to support this idea if the rapporteur , as he has said , is prepared to stick with it and make sure work happens .
Could I ask the Commission to clarify how many people , if any , are working in the Commission on sheepmeat ?
I gather very few .
I think there is one person , but I would like to know .
Briefly , the experience in Ireland of a sheep strategy report is not good .
A year and a half ago EUR 28 million were promised , with great fanfare , to Irish farmers .
Guess what ?
To date EUR 9 000 have been delivered .
I hope this report does somewhat better .

- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Aylward , for the work that he has done on this report , which is aimed at reviving the sheep and goat sector in Europe .
These industries are in real danger because their production levels have been steadily declining for a number of years .
Producers now prefer to switch to other types of product because prices have fallen dramatically and can no longer guarantee them a sufficient income .
What is more , European consumers , and especially the younger generation , have lost interest in products of this kind .
We need to revive these sectors because not only meat but milk and cheese too are the natural products of our land and we should be promoting them .
It is vital that we maintain these sectors for a number of reasons .
The first is that the milk sector , like the meat sector , represents a tradition and a skill that we should continue to offer to our consumers .
Secondly , these two sectors also provide employment for those engaged in the production , processing and sale of these products .
Nor should we forget that sheep and goat farms are often located in isolated , mountainous or insular areas .
I know this because I was born in Sardinia , a region that I know very well , where opportunities for diversification are very limited .
What is more , sheep and goats play a beneficial role in protecting the environment .
This is why we have to ensure that these livestock farms are maintained and that the market in sheep and goat products is revived .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that the report before us contains many provisions that could , if implemented , prove beneficial to the future of the sheep and goat sector in Europe .
The measure providing for the introduction of additional support for sheep farming in mountainous regions and in areas where sheep farming is the only form of farming would , in my view , be particularly valuable .
This sector is not very lucrative and has been experiencing many problems for quite some time .
A fall in production and consumption has been accompanied by a rise in imports and production costs .
In addition , the current outbreak of bluetongue and consequent restrictions imposed on the movement and marketing of animals has created additional socio-economic difficulties .
It should be emphasised that the sector 's problems stem , inter alia , from decoupling payments and production .
Support instruments should be proposed to assist in rebuilding sheep and goat stocks in the Union .
I cannot imagine a situation where sheep have totally disappeared from the mountain landscape : they are quite simply part of that landscape .
In view of the financial situation of the sector , it is hard to justify the introduction of electronic tagging for sheep and goats .
Once again , the cost of introducing new chips would have to be borne by the EU 's farmers .
I believe that we should focus instead on finding ways to increase the consumption of lamb and goat meat .
Both are very beneficial from a nutritional point of view .
Mr President , for the sheep farmers of my country , Cyprus , the main problem for the last year has been the confusing and , as it transpired , apparently false results relating to foot-and-mouth-disease diagnosis which were supplied by an animal disease reference laboratory in the UK .
This animal disease laboratory is used by the Commission as a reference laboratory .
The results it supplied led to thousands of animals being killed and to a catastrophe for many sheep farmers on the island .
This laboratory , I note , is the same place from where the virus escaped a few months earlier , causing an outbreak in the UK with devastating results for the farmers there .
May I call on the Commission to take a second , more critical , look at the standards of the animal disease reference laboratories it uses , in order to make sure that their scientific credibility is of the required highest level ?

( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am sorry to have to say that the report by Mr Aylward is actually more about rescuing the sheep and goat sector in Europe than about ensuring its future .
We hardly noticed when sheep and goats , like horses , practically disappeared from our landscape .
No longer do we hear the sound of bells or barking dogs .
Products derived from local raw materials are disappearing too .
I am referring to products such as milk , meat , wool and leather .
I believe that there is still a chance of saving the breeding of these animals , at least in certain areas .
If we fail to implement at least the measures proposed by the rapporteur , zoos will be the only place where will be able to see these creatures in future .
If production is not profitable , we can of course buy in supplies from New Zealand , Australia and other countries .
We should , however , strive to save our own fauna , of which sheep and goats are a part .
It is important to bear that in mind .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems that all of us here this evening come from regions where pasture farming exists and there is a keen interest in the sheep and goat sector .
For this reason I need to - and certainly shall - inform my colleagues Mrs Fischer Boel and Mrs Androulla Vassiliou of everything that has been said in this House and all the requests made by Members .
Mrs McGuinness , I fully understand Parliament 's position on the sensitive issue of tagging .
I shall , as I said , inform the Commissioner responsible of the view expressed by several Members this evening .
I do understand Parliament 's concerns , and I hope that together with Commissioner Fischer Boel we can find a positive solution .
I believe and trust that , once the debate in Parliament and the Council is completed , the Health Check will provide an adequate response to many of the concerns raised by the rapporteur and raised during this debate by many Members regarding the future of the sheep and goat sector .
Solutions to some of the questions could be at hand in the near future .
We are working towards an agreement on the agricultural aspects of the Doha Development Agenda , which should be finalised before the summer break .
This should shed more light on the question the rapporteur has raised about sensitive products .
As concerns promotion , we are open to all constructive suggestions but , as I have mentioned , we are committed to the principle of targeted support for Community products of clearly identifiable quality .
Another issue has arisen with regard to the future of this sector , which I personally - but the other Commissioners , too - consider absolutely vital for the economy of the European Union , but above all that of certain mountainous regions and regions with a particularly difficult hydrogeological system .
I therefore wished to respond to the suggestion of creating a group of Commission and Member State representatives to monitor developments in this sector .
Concerning the creation of such a group , it goes without saying that comments and proposals from Member States and from stakeholders are always welcomed by the Commission , which , I believe , must become even more open to requests from across the European Union .
Nevertheless , various bodies with responsibility for this sector do already exist within the Commission .
The Management Committee for Sheep and Goats issues opinions on the legislation relating to the sector .
The forecasting group for the ovine and caprine sectors is made up of market experts and meets twice a year to discuss market trends and forecasts .
The conclusions of those meetings are forwarded to the Advisory Group on Sheepmeat and Goatmeat , which also meets twice a year and represents the entire sector , from farm to fork .
This last group also discusses a wide range of subjects which its members can propose for inclusion on the agenda .
It seems to me that the formation of another working group would involve an additional administrative burden and would in a sense duplicate the functions of the existing management system : it would in fact conflict with the aim of simplifying the CAP .
I am nevertheless prepared - and I believe I can also speak for Commissioner Fischer Boel here - to explore any possibilities existing within the present framework .
rapporteur . - Mr President , it was remiss of me not to welcome the new Commissioner , to thank him and to wish him well .
I should of course also like to thank all the speakers here tonight , particularly the shadow rapporteurs , for their contributions .
I would also like to thank the Slovenian Presidency for their support over the last six months , during which they agreed that the development of the sheep sector would be put on the agenda of the Council of Agriculture Ministers in March .
This gave the Agriculture Ministers across the Community an opportunity to discuss the crisis .
My thanks also to the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Neil Parish , who has been very helpful and supportive .
Briefly , I want to refer to the amendments and matters raised here tonight .
I have heard the view from the Commission in relation to the implementation task force .
Now I know I am right because they are against it .
I find it very difficult to agree to Amendment 2 .
Some proposals have been made to me .
If we can get proper wording I have no difficulty with that , but I will not dilute the importance of what we are trying to achieve .
Again , my view on electronic identification has always been clear .
I am against it - not least due to the high costs involved - but also the benefits are unproven and there are difficulties in implementation .
I have , however , always stated that each Member State should be allowed the option of introducing this system on a voluntary basis .
Therefore I am unable to support Amendment 4 but I can support Amendment 1 by the PPE-DE Group deferring the implementation of the system until 2012 at the earliest .
All the other amendments proposed I will accept .
I am not going to go through them now but I can accept Amendments 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 3 and 5 .
I think it is worth pointing out that since 2003 it has been stated that any sector in the common agricultural policy facing difficulty or disadvantage will be prioritised in the context of the CAP health check .
In the forthcoming check I would ask the Commissioner for Agriculture to ensure that the interests of the sheep and goat sector are comprehensively addressed .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to wish the French presidency well over the next six months .
They will be very important to this report .
I have met with the French Minister for Agriculture , Mr Barnier , who is already committed to having a discussion on these sectors at the November meeting of the Council of Agriculture Ministers .
I am confident that he , who has a well-informed understanding of the challenges that the sheep and goat sector faces , will do his utmost to ensure that the necessary proposals in this report on the future of the sheep and goat sectors are implemented in the context of the CAP health check .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 June 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Sheep farming is one of the sectors of animal production that has received less attention recently in comparison to pig or cattle farming .
Sheep farming is , however , particularly important for countries with difficult geographical conditions .
It is also important for regions where , for reasons of historical tradition , the rearing and consumption of lamb is very important to the population .
Care should be taken to ensure that this sector does not collapse .
This is particularly relevant now that we are witnessing rocketing food prices .
We simply cannot afford to restrict this production .
I fully support the rapporteur 's proposal to introduce additional payments aimed at traditional mountain breeds in order to protect sheep in sensitive areas .
I also support the proposal to identify mutton with an EU logo so as to distinguish it from third-country products .
We are duty bound to assist the citizens of Europe to differentiate between good food and food that might not comply with European standards .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.05 a.m. )
Towards Europe-wide Safer , Cleaner and Efficient Mobility : The First Intelligent Car Report ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Zita Gurmai , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , entitled Towards Europe-wide Safer , Cleaner and Efficient Mobility : the First Intelligent Car Report .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Thank you very much .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in our everyday lives we depend increasingly on transport .
The European economy too relies on having efficient road transport .
Increasing traffic , however , has given rise to serious social problems .
It causes congestion on roads and in urban areas , results in serious environmental and health problems , wastes energy , and above all causes accidents .
Very briefly , here are a few shocking statistics : annual carbon dioxide emissions from road traffic total 835 million tonnes ; 40 000 people die on the roads every year ; the costs associated with traffic congestion in the European Union amount to EUR 50 billion annually , equivalent to 0.5 % of the Community 's GDP , and this figure could rise to as much as 1 % of EU GDP by 2010 .
I do have one piece of good news , however : the problems can be mitigated .
Electronic stability control could save the lives of around 4 000 people every year , and if the in-vehicle emergency call system e-Call were fully deployed throughout Europe , the number of road injuries and fatalities could be reduced by as much as 5-15 % .
This would save more than 2 500 lives every year and represent financial savings of EUR 22 billion .
Appropriate software and real-time information in traffic centres would enable a 40 % reduction in congestion .
It is clear even from the few figures I have cited that intelligent vehicle systems have undeniable advantages , but use of these systems so far remains limited ; in the United States , on the other hand , electronic stability control is to be made mandatory in all new cars from 2012 .
The primary reason why they are not more widespread is that these systems are expensive , and the appropriate information and intelligent infrastructure are lacking .
We must ask ourselves , however , whether we can permit a situation in which the citizens of Europe are unable to enjoy their rights ?
You see , I believe every one of them , and every one of us too , has a right to safe , sustainable and efficient mobility .
Because mobility has increased and continues to rise constantly , the problems I have mentioned are European in scale , and if mobility is less than optimum or unsafe we must respond at European level .
Market obstacles must be eliminated , demand for intelligent communication technologies must be fostered , and European-level , interoperable intelligent infrastructure must be developed .
Results already achieved in European research and development in the field of information and communication technologies must be maintained and improved , especially with regard to appropriate driver-vehicle interaction .
All these things are indispensible for the European economy and society , and they are also in the interests of European industry , given that the industrial sector in Japan and the United States ( to cite only one or two examples ) are major competitors .
European decision-makers have recognised this , and this is why the Intelligent Car Initiative is a flagship project within the i2010 initiative .
Overall , therefore , I welcome the Communication from the European Commission , and I support the efforts being made by the parties concerned to expand appropriate deployment of intelligent information and safety technologies in vehicles .
We must acknowledge that the process is still in its infancy , but we now have information on the developments that have taken place since the launch of the Intelligent Car Initiative .
The work we have already done is not inconsiderable , and we are making reasonable progress .
At the same time , however , I await the next progress report with great curiosity , and I am confident that I , too , with my modest resources , have contributed to the goal of fostering the deployment of life-saving , environmentally sound , traffic-optimising systems on as wide a scale as possible .
Last but not least , I would like to take the opportunity to thank everyone who assisted me in my work : the Information Society and Media Directorate General of the European Commission , the secretariat of the European Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism ; I thank my fellow members of this House and those who are unable to be here today for their comments and proposals for amendments , and I thank the professional organisations for all their useful advice , invitations and explanations .
Thank you all for your cooperation .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Gurmai , although I am standing in for Commissioner Reding who is competent for today 's debate , I consider the issue to be of extraordinary importance as it is part and parcel of the strategy which the Commission and my department are intending to pursue over the next few years , i.e. to reduce the number of road deaths in the European Union .
We have a duty to consider this initiative a political priority ; citizens are watching us and young people in particular are expecting us to provide them with answers , advice , suggestions and ideas so that they can use the European Union 's roads without running the risk of losing their lives .
That is why today 's debate , like yesterday evening 's debate , is of extraordinary importance and why the events that the European Commission is organising are of extraordinary importance .
An initiative for young people is to be held in Brussels on 10 July , giving them a chance to discuss road safety , and a series of events on road safety will take place during the French Presidency , the most important of which will be held in Paris on 13 October , although there will also be events geared towards action in this sector in other European cities , with a view to raising public awareness and in particular the awareness of young people .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , from the point of view of today 's debate I should like to thank Parliament as a whole and congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent and comprehensive report .
I particularly welcome the fact that her report recognises the major potential of the technologies and systems promoted by the ' intelligent car ' initiative .
Parliament 's support is crucial if these systems are to filter down to road users .
Citizens have been the focal point , the target , of this initiative from the very outset .
As road users , citizens are having to face increasingly difficult choices in the area of mobility and the messages that the public and private sector are sending out are in some cases confusing or even conflicting .
Therefore , I welcome Parliament 's call for the introduction of further measures , such as incentives , training for drivers and information campaigns for users , to help safer and more ecological vehicles to gain more of a market share .
It is very encouraging , especially for me , as a Member of this Parliament for many years , to see this House recognising eCall as one of the key priorities of the ' intelligent car ' initiative .
We have made a great deal of progress as a result of eCall and at the end of this year the Commission will present a new communication to Parliament and the Council setting out the final stages for the achievement of eCall .
I am also grateful to Parliament for its support for our efforts to discover the best way of achieving energy efficiency and reducing CO2 emissions through intelligent technologies and for guiding us on the possible measures that could be taken .
This sector is nevertheless only in its beginnings , and the regulation on CO2 emission reduction targets has for instance to be implemented ; I am again thinking of further measures in the transport sector based in particular on an integrated approach .
Parliament 's support in this respect will be crucial .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the public should be able to benefit in two ways from the potential for greater road safety .
For this reason , along with the report we are discussing today , I call for more research into , and education about , the safety benefits of driver-assistance systems .
Most people have no practical experience whatsoever of these systems and cannot therefore appreciate , first of all , that driver-assistance systems possess undisputed safety potential - after all , driver error is the cause of some 80 % of road accidents - secondly , that they make driving less stressful , thirdly , that they support drivers and ease the burden on them without usurping their ultimate responsibility and , fourthly , that they encourage economical and environment-friendly driving behaviour .
According to recent studies , driver-assistance systems could prevent up to one third of all serious accidents if all drivers used them .
Systems such as adaptive cruise control ( ACC ) , lane-change assistance , and electronic stability control ( ESC ) are technically well developed and highly reliable .
On the other hand they , too , must undergo regular technical inspection and must be tested after major accident repairs .
Intelligent vehicle systems help to avoid risky situations altogether and , by easing the burden on drivers , are conducive to a more relaxed and foresighted driving style .
Unfortunately , these systems are not yet standard vehicle components .
In spite of Vision Zero , traffic accidents will still happen in future .
From the end of 2010 all new vehicles are to be equipped for the electronic satellite-based eCall emergency call system , so that professional help can be given within what doctors call the ' golden hour ' immediately after an accident .
Through the European emergency phone number 112 , the emergency call centre and the emergency services receive rapid automatic notification of an accident and its precise location .
Until the emergency services arrive , however , each of us should be able to administer first aid .
In modern vehicle cockpits , however , there is also a danger of sensory overload .
The increasingly complex operation of everyday functions such as air-conditioning , car radios and navigation systems , combined with audio and visual signals from assistance systems such as automatic parking systems , bumper-control devices , alcohol and overload interlocks and other devices can distract or even overburden drivers .
For all this potential , there remains the problem of replacing the vehicle fleet .
That is primarily an issue of affordability .
Sadly , the average age of our vehicles is increasing rather than decreasing .
Vehicles must remain affordable .
That is our responsibility .
Lastly , let me express my warmest thanks to Mrs Gurmai for her outstanding work .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) Madam President , Mr. Commissioner , dear colleagues .
I would like to congratulate Mrs. Gurmai for her report and I am convinced that , due to her as well , the roadmap to be drafted by the Commission in the autumn of 2008 , for speeding up the introduction of incentives for intelligent cars , will be more ambitious .
Launched in 2006 , the " Intelligent Car ” initiative is a main project in the e2010 , which represents the strategic framework of the Commission for the Information Society until 2010 .
One of the components of the eSafety programme is the implementation , by 2010 , of the eCall system , which will automatically call the emergency services and supply data regarding the exact location of the vehicle .
Nevertheless , it is important for the Member States to sign the memorandum of understanding .
I support the introduction of this system as standard equipment for all new vehicles as of 2010 .
4000 lives might be saved every year in Europe by introducing the Electronic Stability Control system , which reduces the risk of skidding .
Unfortunately , according to the strategy of car manufacturers , these devices are available in a rather small proportion and often in a package of very expensive options .
I believe it is not enough for us to set the goal that , as of 2012 , the stability control system should be available for all models , but it is also important to introduce incentives for the purchaser to choose this option .
It has been found that 60 % of front-rear collisions could be avoided if drivers had brake assist systems and accident avoidance technology .
Also , the visibility improvement systems equipping cars with adaptive headlights could reduce deadly accidents involving pedestrian victims by 30 % and the number of accidents involving bicyclists by 15 % .
I consider it is extremely important to ensure the confidentiality of data and I draw attention to the fact that the legal clarification of responsibility in the case of accidents for cars equipped with brake assist devices or skid control devices has become urgent .
The car industry should adopt the European Code of Good Practice for development and testing of advanced assistance systems for manufacturers ... for car drivers drafted by REPONSE .
Last but not least , I consider the existence of Community and national financial support schemes for the purchase of intelligent cars to be vital for the large-scale use of these systems .
I would like to congratulate Mrs. Gurmai for her report and , indeed , we are waiting for an ambitious plan for the introduction of intelligent cars from the Commission .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , as we were saying here yesterday , you have come here in your new role at a particularly good time during our debate on transport .
During these few days we have been discussing various issues that are to improve road safety and the quality of transport .
Two days ago we were speaking about the safety of pedestrians and cyclists , yesterday we were discussing the transportation of hazardous materials and safe road systems .
Today we are considering vehicles themselves , that is , how to make the vehicles used by people on roads within the European Union as safe as possible .
For us the goal is clear , which is to enable EU citizens to move about more effectively and make their lives more comfortable but , at the same time , they should feel safer , so that , thanks to our regulations , we can tell our electors , tell the people , that we have made a positive contribution .
Specific measures taken by the European Parliament show the importance not just of this House , they also show that European legislation and European institutions bring something positive and tangible into the lives of everyone .
We should remember that when we are debating initiatives to make vehicles safer , there are two things to bear in mind .
Firstly , it is the car itself and all the systems that we are considering : systems for speed control , for stability control , for maintaining distance between vehicles , all these support systems , together with navigation systems , are all very important things that improve the functioning of the car , which is the tool that is used by those travelling by road .
However , we should also remember , and it is appropriate to point this out in these speeches , that , for our citizens , for those travelling by road , the issue of communications is also very important , should there be a tragedy , an accident , or some misfortune .
Our citizens should feel confident that , thanks to technical equipment and the systems that we are introducing , they will get help as soon as possible .
Both these issues are very important .
Both , that means effective information systems so that help can arrive in case of an accident and , at the same time , systems that improve the vehicles themselves .
In discussing this report , which my political group supports , we have also to remember its limitations .
First of all , when we speak of an intelligent car , we must not forget that a very important part of an intelligent car is an intelligent driver .
This is no small matter and the educational issue is very important .
We have found on a number of occasions that technological progress was not accompanied by improvements in safety .
Why ?
Because , despite improved technology and faster cars , drivers felt impregnable when driving their cars .
Better roads meant they could drive faster .
For this reason the issue of education , showing what is useful in modern technology , but also its limitations , and also showing how drivers should not abuse the modern technologies that we , I hope , will implement , is also very important .
The issue of market forces has also been raised , as there are no guarantees that the regulations introduced by ourselves , however good , useful , appropriate and beneficial for drivers they may be , will result in an immediate exchange of vehicles in favour of cars that we consider to be safer , more efficient and easier to use .
There are no guarantees because there is , of course , the barrier of price .
This barrier could severely restrict access to these vehicles .
I am not a supporter of systems that involve funding and also , both for the Commission and for all of us , it is something of an intellectual challenge to know what to do , not just to make safer vehicles and better roads , but to make our citizens , the citizens of the European Union , want to use them and to have the financial capabilities needed for this purpose .
I would like to thank the rapporteur very much and to express my strong support for this report once again .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the report by Zita Gurmai and the recommendations contained in it are one more step to improving road safety within the European Union .
Most of us use vehicles on these roads .
They are equipped with technologies that are constantly improving : catalytic converters , ABS , ASC , lights , seat belts and so on .
However , as always , there is a ' but ' .
Generally speaking , this electronic equipment is fitted to expensive cars that undergo safety tests , have crumple zones , and are fitted with many air bags or special belts .
These vehicles can withstand almost any accident but , unfortunately , most of the vehicles on our roads are medium or low priced .
What is even more important is that sales of these cars is constantly increasing and , according to the automobile magazines , we shall soon be inundated by a wave of cheap cars from India , China and other countries .
Obviously price is linked to quality and equipment .
Cars costing between EUR 2 000 and EUR 5 000 have little other than an engine , steering wheel , wheels , seats and , possibly in some countries , a single seat belt .
It is very encouraging that , in such a situation , there are people who are trying to make us safer .
Prices are constantly falling and compulsory equipment can be constantly extended .
Not just seat belts or ecological engines .
Perhaps , in the future , ABS or automatic stability control systems , ASC , may become compulsory .
I would like to congratulate Zita Gurmai on her innovative report .
I am sure that , despite the complicated names and functioning of these items of equipment , the report will be greeted with understanding and support .
We are trying to combat an enormous number of fatal accidents and our political group will support this report , as we did the previous ones that were discussed yesterday by my fellow Members .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I am very grateful to the rapporteur , Mrs Gurmai , for her report .
She has chosen the right approach .
Mr Kusstatscher is of course right in his philosophical criticism of the term ' intelligent car ' .
Obviously we are talking here about artificial intelligence and so we also have to include that word .
There are three points that need to be made clear in the resolution on the intelligent car .
Firstly , the development of the intelligent car must be in the interests of a clean environment .
Secondly , its development must have a positive effect on road safety .
I am pleased that those points were also made clear in the report by Mrs Gurmai .
I should also like to make the following comments .
Firstly , I think it is important that an effort is made when developing the intelligent car to meet the European Union environmental targets .
The report mentions that the European Commission objective is for new passenger cars and light-duty vehicles vans not to emit more than an average of 120 grams per kilometre of CO2 .
I would add that the objective for 2020 is 80 grams per kilometre .
I believe that the development of intelligent cars can also be helpful in reaching that target .
In the sustainable development of energy sources for cars , there are certainly a number of other intelligent possibilities for achieving CO2 emission targets .
Secondly , I would say that the development of intelligent cars is also in the interests of road safety .
The report has discussed that at length , so I shall not say any more about it here .
As far as recital J is concerned , it must be clear that , regardless of whether technological progress makes drivers feel safer and therefore less responsible , it is up to each individual driver to drive carefully .
That principle still has to apply and it is excellent if drivers are reminded of it .
My final comments are on the report as a whole .
It is very important that the development of intelligent cars should not be looked at separately from the development of an intelligent car environment .
That combination in particular offers many possibilities for reducing pollution and improving road safety .
A good traffic system is of vital importance to society .
We do need to face up to the fact that transport is at the expense of the environment and will continue to be associated with accidents .
However , the development of intelligent transport systems can certainly help to minimise these negative effects of transport .
I should therefore like to draw attention again to recital 13 .
I expect strong support from the Member States and the European Commission for the introduction of ecological and vehicle safety arrangements .
I also stress that it is important for knowledge of intelligent transport systems to be properly shared out .
It is , after all , likely that the knowledge will be available in Member States that , comparatively speaking , suffer less from the negative effects of transport that I mentioned earlier .
In that case , it would be good for a system to be developed that , on the one hand , ensures that this important knowledge is also made available in Member States that have a strong interest in it and , on the other hand , takes due account of the intellectual property rights of the developers of the intelligent transport systems .
In my opinion , the Member States should make clear arrangements between themselves on that point .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mrs Gurmai on the raft of ideas she has put forward ; I have to say that there is so much human and artificial intelligence in this report and I hope that the former will always take precedence over the latter as otherwise we are opening up a different can of worms , and while one of our objectives must therefore be to propose safer , cleaner and more intelligent vehicles , our objective must also be , as proposed , to halve the number of deaths on our roads by 2010 .
In Italy there was , until recently , a terrifying advert on the television ; it showed the disappearance , from the Italian landscape , of a whole village , a whole municipality equivalent to and of the same demographic size as those 40 thousand and more European citizens who disappear from our Europe every year .
Every step must therefore be taken to bring about a drastic reduction of the number of deaths , and also to reduce the numbers of people who do not die who represent an enormous social cost because so many of them are disabled for life or have other levels of disability and weigh heavily on our social systems and on our consciences , and therefore everything has to be done from that point of view .
I agree that technology applied to vehicles and infrastructure is extremely important for safety - no stone can be left unturned when it comes to safety and assistance , as Mr Piskorski and Mr Kuc have said - but it is also necessary for drivers to be intelligent and informed .
In my opinion , therefore , drastic measures are also needed to limit speed and step up the sanctions that can be taken when drivers are liable , and here I have to say that the new Italian Government is also coming up with some interesting answers .
I wonder , for instance , by what criterion cars capable of unthinkable speeds are still being marketed and , to take up Mr Kusstatscher , if there is no intelligence on the part of consumer motorists who buy cars of this kind and drive them in our towns and cities , then the responsibility lies with those who administer and are responsible for deciding on the freedom of persons who can never be allowed to limit the freedom of others who are unfortunately often physically eliminated in such cases .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report under discussion here , whose draftsman I would like to congratulate , is an excellent opportunity to combine the best aspect of technological development with the most important aspect of road safety , which is safety itself .
The development of new information and communication technologies has made it possible to achieve the political and social objective of reducing the number of victims of road accidents , that avoidable scourge of European roads .
If the potential thus made available is to be exploited to the full , however , awareness-raising campaigns must include brief , clear and comprehensible information on the new intelligent vehicle systems and must reach the largest audience possible .
It is important to ensure that the development and deployment of ICT-based ' intelligent vehicle systems ' is increasingly accepted at international level , and the need remains to ensure that Member States and industry encourage and support investment in such systems .
An integrated approach to these problems will also allow a variety of common safety and environmental objectives to be taken into account , particularly in connection with infrastructure and driver behaviour , as many of our fellow Members have already stressed .
The truth is , however , that not all aspects of this process are functioning well .
The marketing of these systems is still weak .
Their high costs , which even now mean that the safest cars are luxury cars for many people , and the lack of dissemination and awareness-raising campaigns on their benefits prevent greater market penetration .
It is therefore very important to ensure that the negotiations to make the eCall system standard on all new vehicles from 2010 are successful , as the Commissioner has already said .
It is estimated that this initiative alone could save up to 2 500 lives every year after it is fully rolled out in Europe .
Another fundamental aspect of this report , Mr President and Commissioner , is the objective of a 100 % take-up of electronic stability control for all new vehicles from 2012 , something that will also save thousands of lives and avoid many injuries on European roads every year .
We would therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether he is in a position to assure us that this objective still stands for the date scheduled , 2012 .
We must all feel once again that we are involved in combating death on European roads by seeking effective and sustained solutions for applying the new technologies to the road transport sector .
It is consequently essential for the interested parties to coordinate their activity and for the Commission and Member States to support research into new information technologies , and for drivers to be made aware of their safety benefits .
In short , everyone must work together to make these systems a commonplace and financially accessible product on the market so that consumer demand for them increases .
Madam President , I echo the thanks of others to the rapporteur for her work on bringing this initiative forward to Parliament .
I said last night in one of the debates that we are in a week when there is a lot of soul-searching in the European Union about what the idea of Europe is for , and how we can re-engage with our citizens and really show the people of Europe that we are doing a worthwhile job and protecting them , their families and their interests .
I think this is another example , where we are looking at safety measures and at using the most modern technology to help them when they come into difficulties ; we are trying to argue that cars should be better equipped .
Of course , this has a Europe-wide dimension , because cars are made in nearly every European country ( far fewer are made , I have to say , in the United Kingdom than they were before ) .
People drive cars that are French , Italian or German , that are made in Spain or Britain and assembled elsewhere and , of course , we must have transnational legislation to support the highest possible standards .
If this means , through this initiative , that we can save lives through getting medical aid around and we can help people who might not otherwise have done to survive when they have an accident , then this is something that the British citizen and the citizens of the other European countries and Ireland should be able to gauge into .
We may look at this initiative and think this is very much futuristic and not going to happen for while .
But it was not such a long time ago - I am thinking of 30 years ago when I got my first car , and I look around the room and perhaps Members here may have got their first car longer ago than that - that cars did not automatically have radios in them .
Now , I do not know whether it is possible to buy a car without a radio , CD player or those sorts of things .
Now cars , as the previous speaker said , are made to go faster and faster and are more sophisticated than ever : satellite navigation systems , e-systems , as we are talking about here , will be in cars very shortly and they will probably be standard in 20 years ' time .
This is something we should welcome , and we should spread the news .
Therefore , I congratulate all involved .
( PL ) Madam President , fitting cars with automatic stability control systems and automatic accident notification has become today 's challenge .
There are many arguments in favour .
The first of these is the need to improve the safety of drivers and other road users .
There are 41 600 fatal accidents on European roads each year .
The resultant disability as well as harm to the health of many more thousands of road users is a strong argument for all of us .
There would be many fewer fatalities if emergency assistance came earlier to those in need , so the introduction of an automatic accident notification system is a vital solution .
A third important factor that has a significant impact on the number of accidents is the state of the roads .
Investment in roads is vital , especially in the new Member States and in backward regions with poor infrastructure .
When modernising and extending road networks it is important to pay attention to the surroundings .
Roadside trees growing right next to roads are a significant factor increasing the number of fatalities .
Innovation in the automotive industry does not just mean vehicle safety or the safety of people .
It also involves reducing harmful environmental effects caused by CO2 emissions from cars .
It is good that the rapporteur has also addressed this problem as well as many other issues .
For this reason I would like to give my warm appreciation for a job well done .
The only thing I cannot agree with is the name ' intelligent car ' .
I agree with the previous speaker , who said that this concept is reserved for sentient beings .
If we follow this line of reasoning , then we shall finish up with a situation where ' intelligent cars ' will be driven by technically efficient drivers .
In such a situation , whom would we involve in the educational activities that are so important to improve road safety and to benefit from civilisation 's technical achievements ?
( DE ) Madam President , I am the rapporteur on the subject of urban mobility , and my main task at the present time is undoubtedly to induce our House to vote on the report , which has already been dealt with by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , in the course of the July part-session , so that we can send out the right signals in good time for the Commission 's action plan on urban mobility , which is due to appear in the autumn .
One of these signals relates directly to the subject of our debate today .
In general , but especially in our towns and cities , we are finding it increasingly difficult to raise enough money for major developments to our hardware , by which I mean our roads .
There are also numerous good reasons for not doing so .
Accordingly , we need to use the appropriate software , in other words intelligent vehicles and equally intelligent organisation of traffic flows , to ensure that better use is made of the scarce resource that is our road network .
Congestion , then , is one problem for which we undoubtedly need new and better technology .
In this context we organised a hearing as part of our deliberations in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , where we were told by the industry representatives - not entirely surprisingly - that anything was possible .
Many things are possible , but the motor industry needs timely signals on the one hand , while care must be taken on the other hand to ensure that these driver-assistance systems , once developed , are fitted to the great bulk of vehicles and do not remain the preserve of a privileged few who can afford very well-equipped cars .
This is an argument that has rightly been advanced during our discussion today .
It cannot be a matter of reserving the best new technological developments for a very few vehicles , leaving the large mass of drivers , in fact , with the same old problems , compounded by the fact that the systems are not really compatible with each other .
Accordingly , if we really want to explore the subject of traffic movements and the problems they cause us along with the opportunities offered to us by personal mobility , we need a large number of very closely coordinated actions .
In this context let me put forward one final argument , to which Mr Koch rightly referred .
New , good , improved technology can make cars safer and road traffic less dangerous , but it can also be misused and foster a misconception among drivers that , since their car can do everything , they no longer really need to devote much attention to safe driving .
Relaxed driving is a fine thing , but I believe it is far more important to drive safely and , above all , to be aware of the consequences of one 's driving behaviour .
This is , therefore , another area in which we must not lose sight of the psychological impact of new developments .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate Zita Gurmai very warmly .
In addition to her intellectual input , she also conducted a number of promotional activities and has really put everything she had into this report .
Our warm appreciation and thanks to the rapporteur .
Today we are talking of an intelligent car .
Let us not worry about whether the description ' intelligent ' is good or not .
Yesterday we were talking about intelligent roads , without actually calling them intelligent roads .
Yesterday we had many more reservations than today .
Today we understand each other better .
There is of course a third factor , which is the intelligent driver .
What should the driver 's intelligence involve ?
Firstly , he should want to benefit from an intelligent car .
We need to convince drivers that there is an economic calculation to be made .
How much pain are we ready to suffer , how many days in hospital , to save EUR 1 000 by buying a less technologically advanced vehicle ?
To be aware that this technologically advanced car and road can mean fewer accidents , less serious accidents , and a better quality of life and that this can be within our reach provided that , and I repeat , that we understand that it is worth spending those EUR 1 000 on this new technology .
Madam President , can I just first of all warmly welcome Antonio Tajani and congratulate him on his appointment .
It is very important that he is here for this significant debate .
I want to pay tribute first of all to Zita Gurmai , who has done an excellent piece of work , not just in putting this report together but also in promoting the whole of the Intelligent Car eSafety programme .
But I just want to say to the Commission that it is a remarkable example of how a Commission initiative can bring people together across their own services , because as you will know Mrs Reding and her predecessor Mr Liikanen were actively involved in this .
I am pleased to see my friends André Vits and Juhani Jaaskelainen sitting behind the Commissioner , because they have been instrumental in engaging all the participants together and really making progress ; and I echo what Robert Evans says , it is a remarkable example of how the European institutions can cooperate together without heavyweight legislation and with a clear vision to move forward .
My only regret today , Mr President - and I hope you will take this up on behalf of Parliament - is that the other principal actors in the whole of the Intelligent Car programme are notably absent from the front row here , because the Council has a crucial responsibility here .
The Member States are responsible in large part for much of the detailed legislation that will help introduce these programmes and help our citizens .
Where are they here to listen to this debate ?
I just want to make a couple of remarks to follow up what colleagues have said about the crucial issues of cars and roads .
Let me say to colleagues who have talked about safety features in vehicles that the whole process of evolution of the industry has been one of technological progress ; indeed it is true that safety innovations have started first on more expensive cars with lower volumes , and have then trickled down to become available on cheaper cars .
Now all cars sold in the European Union will have anti-lock braking systems .
That is an intelligent system because intelligence , in my view , is collecting and using information .
This is what these systems do .
Once you have that information collection system on , you can then use it for anti-skid systems .
The incremental cost is much lower .
But if we have the eCall system , then we have all cars equipped with that external information-collection system which is what we want to interact with the intelligent highway systems too , where we are also collecting information .
Back in my region - and by the way , Robert Evans , the United Kingdom is now producing cars close to its historic high level and we have more car producers making cars in the United Kingdom than any other European Union country , so please do not run down our car industry - on my local motorway , we have Britain 's first intelligent highway which opens lanes and controls speeds according to the traffic flow , and I can tell you that not only does traffic flow more smoothly , but fuel consumption has also been improved : it is a win-win-win situation .
That is what this is all about .
It is about winning by using intelligence and I hope you will all support it .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate my colleague Zita Gurmai because she has done something wonderful - she has mastered and prepared an excellent report in an area that would appear to be very technical and ' masculine ' .
We live in a society dominated by information technology .
This kind of equipment is with us from dawn to dusk .
We found out very quickly that it makes life easier and we quickly learned to benefit from it .
For this reason it has been an excellent development that , as part of the overall strategy of the Information Society and Media , the European Commission has found an issue that touches us very closely , namely the safety of people and road safety , and has prepared this ' intelligent car ' initiative .
I like the name ' intelligent car ' , I do not have any issues with it , as I understand that it is being used figuratively .
It is an interesting name , ' intelligent car ' , it attracts people 's attention , catches the media , it is not meant literally .
For me , this name is a symbol of modern European transport which , thanks to new information and communications technology , will become even safer , more ecological and more efficient .
The primary purpose of the intelligent car is to help people .
In second place are the benefits for the environment , and thirdly it should make European transport more efficient .
I do not know if the intelligent car will need enormous promotion and advertising .
People are naturally curious and like to buy novelties , especially when they are financially accessible .
I am convinced that , even if this type of car is a bit more expensive , that everyone who buys it will feel they are investing in their own safety .
I also believe that they will not feel they have wasted those few euros in ensuring their safety .
The only thing I would say is that users have not only to know what there is in the intelligent car , but also to know how it works , and need to learn how to operate the modern technology to which so often we have a theoretical access , but never actually use .
I would like to see that as part of its safety brief , the ' intelligent car ' should disallow use of mobile telephones and that mobile telephones in cars should be installed in such a way that they do not take the driver 's attention away from the road .
My last point is that even the most intelligent car packed with all the latest gadgets and technology will not fulfil our expectations if the driver makes a mistake and if the road system in Europe is not as good as it already is in certain European Union countries .
( RO ) Madam President , dear colleagues , Mr. Commissioner , it is a great pleasure for me to address you in your new position .
I congratulate Madame Gurmai for this extremely necessary report .
Dear colleagues , the price of oil has increased alarmingly and the efforts to replace traditional fuels have not produced the forecasted results yet and , for the moment , solutions are either too expensive , or controversial , or insufficiently tested from the technological point of view .
Nevertheless , the car remains the most popular means of transport for Europeans and , unfortunately , this preference causes numerous problems , both from the social point of view and as regards the environment protection , as well as accidents with material damage and , especially , human losses .
The large-scale use of intelligent transportation systems and , first of all , of the electronic stability control is necessary .
This way , thousands of human lives can be saved , pollution can be reduced , traffic can be decongested and both the car drivers ' comfort and safety and the relations between road traffic partners can be improved .
Member States and private entrepreneurs should get involved ever more actively both in developing and implementing the eSafety initiatives , and in designing new accident avoidance systems , new materials and types of sensors interconnecting both the cars and the cars with the roads .
It is clear that the " Intelligent Car ” initiative cannot be separated from the intelligent road initiative .
I support without any reserve the Commission 's proposal to launch a programme for implementing cooperative driving systems , as well as ensuring the availability of the related radio frequencies , whose benefits are visible in experimental phases in various countries and , with all costs involved , will produce long-term results .
It is true that these systems address mainly the highway and TEN-T traffic .
I insist on the fact that , over time , it is imperative for the differences between the major infrastructures and the other categories of roads to diminish , especially in the new Member States .
It is necessary for Member States to efficiently use the European funds provided to them and also find other financial and technical solutions to draw up and put into practice long-term strategies for implementing assisted and cooperative driving in areas that are truly problematic as well : on national , regional and local roads , bypass routes for the transport of goods , on linking roads with conurbations from ... in peri-urban areas and in the cross-border sectors .
Also , the European Commission and the Member States should continue their efforts to harmonize the legislative framework for eCall , as well as for the emergency telephone number 112 , which are the pillars of essential safety and to consolidate durable mobility and for the welfare of European citizens .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to congratulate our colleague , Zita Gurmai , on her achievement with this report on the Intelligent Car Initiative .
We are well aware that in terms of the development of society , mobility is a source of wealth , growth and , consequently , the capacity to promote solidarity between territories and between people .
If we want sustainable development we must combine the various transport modes to improve the traffic flow in towns and in the country .
Although we certainly do not want to build our society around the car as in the past , the motor vehicle nonetheless remains a vital means of achieving the intelligent and sustainable mobility to which we aspire .
If we want to make that a reality , we must design intelligent and sustainable vehicles , based on three requirements : they must be safer , cleaner and more intelligent .
Over and above that statement of principle , Europe must give practical support to this initiative with directives and policies that will , in the long run , integrate all the electronic systems , nomadic or not , and make it possible to control the processes and to drive cars that are safer and cleaner , with lower CO2 and particulate emissions .
To that end , we must encourage car makers to consider even at this stage introducing all these electronic systems into the design of new cars , with a view not just to greater efficiency and ease of driving but also , as a result of all this , to reducing costs and simplifying manufacturing and installation .
If we want to achieve sustainable mobility , we must also broaden the scope of these policies .
Research projects and innovations should eventually generate intelligent roads , which will improve safety , reduce energy costs , use dialogue between vehicles and improve traffic flows .
The European Union wants to promote a knowledge-based society and sustainable development .
These initiatives must take pride of place in that context .
Let me conclude by emphasising the vital need to be really ambitious , to set ambitious targets and create the conditions for growth and progress in Europe .
Echoing the report by our colleague Zita Gurmai , the European Parliament is convinced that the Commission will respond to that expectation and to these needs by setting a new frontier for the European intelligent car and finally allocating the necessary funding to achieve that ambition .
( HU ) Mr President , I support the report by the rapporteur Mrs Gurmai .
Mr Vice-President , the time has arrived to implement intelligent transport systems and in doing so to open up a new era in the history of European transport .
We know that implementation of intelligent transport systems is one of the most important instruments - we could even say weapons - at our disposal if we wish to respond appropriately to climate change .
Just two years ago , here in a plenary session of the European Parliament , I said that , in my opinion , one of the most significant challenges facing transport today is clearly that of making intelligent transport systems widely available in Europe .
Then , one year later , I presented the European Parliament 's review of the White Paper on European Transport Policy to this House , and Parliament unequivocally supported intelligent transport , as it does now , as one of the key priorities of European transport policy .
Why , then , are we making such slow progress ?
The technology is widely available .
This includes the intelligent car , for example , and ICT-based urban traffic management systems ; the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay System ( EGNOS ) will be on stream from 2009 , and the Galileo system from 2013 .
One of European industry 's great strengths is its automotive sector , where we are highly successful in global competition , not least thanks to highly innovative small and medium-sized enterprises operating in the sector .
Nowadays , moreover , developments in this sector span western and eastern Europe .
In Budapest , for example , there are two important knowledge centres of European-level significance operating alongside the Budapest University of Technology and Economics .
The sector is therefore committed .
Now it is time for action on the part of the Community , and above all on the part of the Member States .
In the case of the Equal programme , for example , it must ensure that the necessary infrastructure investment is in place ; in the case of the intelligent car and intelligent infrastructure initiative , it must provide an appropriate economic environment to foster their development .
Of course it is not easy to introduce new technologies , but we can help to promote this process by means of judicious public procurement .
We have a plethora of instruments at our disposal .
We ask the Commission to draw up an appropriate , cross-sectoral strategy to facilitate implementation of intelligent transport systems .
Europe 's citizens waste valuable minutes , indeed hours , travelling .
Meanwhile , vehicles pollute the atmosphere unnecessarily and personal mobility is under threat , in part because the price of fuel for vehicles used in this way is becoming prohibitive .
Intelligent transport is a key component of the solution to these problems .
As far as European citizens are concerned , people are now open to consider any means of resolving the problems outlined here .
Let us therefore take action .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to Zita , our rapporteur , for this report .
I know you , Zita , as someone who , when she tackles anything , does so with a ready wit , determination , intelligence and vigour .
In my opinion , that is precisely the spirit that underlies this report .
I should also like to take the opportunity to follow up a point that Mrs Grabowska made .
I do not believe that cars are something that should be mainly for men .
I am more inclined to take the opposite view .
If we can trust the statistics that exist on this subject , women drive with greater foresight and care and more safely .
In other words , they drive more intelligently , and I believe this is one of the reasons why it was only right that a woman drafted this report .
To come to the point , we are all aware that road traffic consumes a great deal of energy and emits huge volumes of exhaust fumes throughout Europe .
It is one of the main risks to human life in Europe .
Large numbers of people die or are injured in road accidents every year .
It is therefore important that the European legislature should try to reduce these figures .
Accordingly , it is imperative that vehicles should be made more intelligent in the truest sense of the term , so that these things do not happen so often in future .
I believe this report points in the right direction .
The key to success , however - and I agree entirely with Mr Rack here - is that these systems should be available to the great mass of car owners , that they have a general impact and do not remain the privilege , as it were , of a small class of people .
I believe the report expresses that view quite clearly too .
This is why I believe it is right for us to adopt it today .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I will begin by thanking Mrs Gurmai for her excellent report and for giving this initiative such a high profile , thereby encouraging players and stakeholders to take part .
This is a serious problem .
We cannot forget the 42 000 deaths in 2005 .
I cannot forget that Portugal recorded 150 fatalities per 1 000 000 inhabitants in 1993 , although these figures have been falling .
The contribution of this report and our colleague 's work is crucial , and there are two aspects I would like to highlight .
Nowadays mobility is essential to the running of European society .
We all depend on transport in our everyday lives , and the intensity of transport and mobility causes increasing social and environmental problems .
The appropriate response must therefore be given in stages , but it does have to be given and given quickly .
The constraints facing consumers and the automobile industry must be taken into account , but they must not prevent us from achieving the objective of safety .
The second aspect is information .
Consumers must be informed about intelligent infrastructures and cars .
Information must be clear and comprehensible and must be given at the right time .
Car dealers and sales staff , all the agents involved , Member States , regions and local authorities have a great responsibility in this area , as does the media .
Such cooperation must be ensured by the European Union , because on our own we cannot achieve the final objective , which is without doubt the objective of the Commission and of our rapporteur .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to offer my warm congratulations to my colleague , Mrs Gurmai , for her enthusiasm in converting the ' fantasy car ' of our youth into a real car for the future of Europe .
Of course , it is technology this is coming to the fore , and all the proposals she makes in her enterprising report will help us to continue making progress in the logistical development to which the European Union is committed .
I also believe that after the agreement reached about the deployment of Galileo , the ' intelligent ' car is going to be one of the initiatives that will add content to the Galileo deployment .
Yesterday , without going further , we approved the Directive on road safety infrastructure , which already highlighted the need to develop intelligent and interactive systems and vehicles .
If we already have the infrastructure , all we clearly need is the intelligent vehicle .
The intelligent car will also help improve the prevention and control of traffic offences , especially regarding interaction with traffic lights , speed limits and anti-alcohol blocking .
In the field of road safety , of course , everything connected with mass sensors for pedestrians and other vulnerable toad users will be crucial .
With regard to the eSafety system , which is too far behind schedule , Commissioner , we have already called for it to be included in all vehicles and not only in premium vehicles and Mrs Gurmai wants to see this implemented as soon as possible .
However , we had also envisaged that it would include vehicles for occupational use , especially in agriculture , where the isolation of the driver make the consequences of any accident worse as time passes .
I ask you , Commissioner , when will we be able to include the eSafety system in occupational vehicles , in particular agricultural vehicles ?
In any case , the ' intelligent ' car should be accessible to all and these technologies should be supported to make them cheaper and accessible , not only to the countries that need them most , but to all European citizens .
( SK ) The report states that the Intelligent Car Initiative cannot be fully accomplished if it is separated from the ' smart roads ' initiatives .
However , as other Members pointed out before me , nor can it be accomplished if there is no intelligent driver who understands the rules of the road and has adequate technical knowledge .
As a physician I want to add that an intelligent European driver should also be much better prepared in terms of administering first aid in the event of an accident .
A driver needs to be trained on an ongoing basis , not just in theory but by means of suitable practical accident simulation training , so that he or she is prepared , can react correctly and can administer good first aid , thereby saving more lives in a stressful accident situation .
Since saving lives is one of the goals of the initiative in question , I wished to briefly mention this issue .
( BG ) Mr. President , Mr. Commissioner , Madam Rapporteur , it is more than obvious that we need a common approach and an integrated policy to ensure road safety for citizens .
This has several important aspects .
Firstly , prevention , improvement of infrastructure , improvement of driver capabilities , introduction of safe , technology innovations in car design .
Next , control and enforcement along the entire chain to ensure road safety .
The rapporteur deserves full credit for this initiative and for the excellent quality of this report .
Road safety is of extreme importance to all of us because the measures that need to be adopted save lives .
The " intelligent car " initiative is not merely about technical solutions .
It is about less risk , more safety .
It is about staying alive , and life should be accessible to all citizens .
The preparation of this report was accompanied by a good awareness campaign , and the rapporteur deserves congratulations for that as well .
( CS ) Road safety should be backed up by assistance systems .
These systems benefit drivers and make traffic flow more efficient .
They aim to make driving easier and reduce the risk of loss of concentration .
Intelligent car technology makes it possible to mitigate or even eliminate these problems .
I support the rapporteur 's view that at present penetration rates for intelligent car systems and applications remain very low in relation to their potential .
I am also convinced that we must fully exploit these systems and applications in due course .
Intelligent cars also need the support of an intelligent infrastructure but the ' intelligent road ' is not yet ready .
It is quite clear that the active safety elements in cars help to reduce the number of road accident fatalities .
The eCall system is an effective additional feature of the overall system for protecting road users .
I congratulate the rapporteur on her report .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that as a result of Parliament 's work , as a result of the text of the communication drawn up by Commissioner Reding for whom I am standing in , and also the excellent work by Mrs Gurmai , we have today given an important signal to the citizens listening to us in the gallery , who in theory represent the five hundred million European citizens , that the institutions are listening to citizens and are trying to find answers to citizens ' needs , something which has to be the first priority of this Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
Only in that way will we close the gap between the peoples of Europe and the institutions .
The best response that we can give to the sceptics , those who voted ' no ' in the referendums , is to show that Europe is close to citizens ; we have to send out a positive message and have the courage to press ahead and make it understood that people , that citizens ' needs , are our top priority , and I am therefore pleased to take up your invitation , Mr President .
Road safety will be , as far as I am concerned , and as far as the Directorate-General which answers to the Commissioner for Transport is concerned , the priority - I said so in the speech through which I was able to gain the confidence of this House , which I thank again , having been here for so many years , for the confidence it has shown in me - as I was saying , the safety of citizens : the individual has to be at the heart of our initiative .
I have listened to the whole of this debate with a great deal of interest , and there was indeed a resolve today on the part of the institutions to provide answers , to save human lives ; every human life that we are capable of saving through our legislative work , through our commitment , will be commendable work that will be to our credit .
It is for that reason that we need to press ahead and for that reason that I share the stance of so many Members who have today stressed the importance of intelligent instruments and intelligent cars , although we have to ensure beforehand that man is intelligent because the first responsibility lies with citizens at the wheel who have to be aware that there are other citizens whose lives depend on their actions .
Technology undoubtedly has to be at the service of man , the human and fundamental element , and it is for that reason that I share the stance of those - and I said this during my presentation speech - who argue that drivers need to be educated , that citizens need to be informed about the new instruments that technology and research enable us to place at the service of the citizen .
Otherwise , it is pointless to spend public money , or private money , on research , if the discoveries that are made , if the initiatives that are brought to a successful conclusion are not placed at the service of citizens in order to save human lives .
It is for that reason , I repeat , that the road safety sector will be a priority - and that is a commitment which I formally make to the European Parliament - and one of the main undertakings that the Commission and the transport sector will pursue in forthcoming months .
I should like briefly to answer the question raised by Mr Pribetich as regards timing .
On the basis of the results of a consultation launched on 23 May 2008 , the European Commission has proposed a regulation on type-approval requirements for the general safety of vehicles which states that , from 2012 , electronic stability control systems are to be installed in new vehicles in order significantly to improve the safety of those vehicles .
The regulation refers to the technical regulations harmonised within the World Forum of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe .
In reply to Mrs Ayala Sender , as regards heavy vehicles , in November 2007 the UNECE World Forum for harmonisation of vehicle regulations approved a text relating to the compulsory installation of ESC and related technical standards .
That text has been supported by the European Commission which means that it will be compulsory to install ESC in new models of the most common categories of heavy vehicles from 2010 .
As regards the occupational vehicles to which she referred , especially those in the agricultural sector - in Europe there are unfortunately still deaths from accidents caused by agricultural vehicles , in some cases as a result of the irresponsibility of drivers failing to drive with due care - at present no provision has been made , as priority has been given to cars and heavy vehicles .
I welcome her suggestion , however , as regards my own area of competence and I shall also pass it on to Commissioner Reding because it seems to me to be an important proposal and would meet a need in rural areas in particular .
In the agricultural sector , I repeat , there are unfortunately still many deaths which are not deaths on roads but on agricultural land and we cannot pretend that this is not a problem .
For that reason , I thank you , Mrs Ayala Sender , for your suggestion , and I thank all the Members who have spoken ; the Commission , I reiterate - I am concluding , Mr President , and I apologise if I have taken a few extra minutes , but I feel that this issue is important enough for us to overrun the times laid down by the rules .
As I was saying , we welcome the report by Mrs Gurmai who I also thank for her enthusiasm , because we have to show that we are enthusiastic about our commitment to defending the rights of citizens .
I welcome Parliament 's encouragement , its support for the eCall system and the measures to promote its implementation , and I therefore believe that the outcome of today 's debate is positive because the Commission , Parliament and I hope the Council , Mr President , have agreed to be on the side of citizens through this endeavour to save as many human lives as possible .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , citizens of Europe , thank you very much for your comments and opinions .
I believe this is indeed a new era in the history of European transport , as my fellow Member Etelka Barsi-Pataky put it .
It is very important that everyone present in this House has voiced support for the report ; it is a plain fact that one has to be as green as possible in order to please the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , and we are delighted that in the end they too have given their support to this report .
I must stress how very important this is .
I agree with you , Commissioner , that if we manage to save even one single life on the roads , then we have achieved something ; you see , I believe that the most important thing we can do as European decision-makers is to protect human lives .
Several of you have cited the shocking statistic : 41 600 people die on the roads .
I also thank you for your support because in order to bring this matter to a conclusion we need to have everyone on board .
I am very proud of Viviane Reding and her team , André and Juhani , who are sitting here .
They have seen this whole process through .
Not just over the past month , but over the past few years , because the technologies had to be tested to see if they really worked .
Do you remember there was a time when there were no safety belts , and now we take them for granted ?
Or , as Robert Evans put it , there is a radio in every car nowadays .
The new technologies will one day become as natural as safety belts and radios are today .
We need the citizens of Europe , who will buy these intelligent systems once they have clearly seen the benefits they can bring .
It is important also to have the vehicle manufacturers on our side , because 17 million cars are produced annually in Europe and 2 million people are employed in this sector .
It is important that the Member States should be with us on this issue , although I must concur with Malcolm Harbour : the Council is notably absent .
There is little point in the Commission and the European Parliament doing everything in their power if the Council does not take this matter sufficiently seriously .
The Council must be aware , however , that it too needs to represent the citizens of Europe .
Let us therefore work together .
I am asking you this because actions speak louder than words .
It is in our common interest to recognise that everyone stands to gain if we achieve results in this area , as we will be able to travel in safety , traffic will be optimal , environmental pollution can be reduced , and Europe 's industrial sector can become a leader in the field of information and communication technologies .
This is an opportunity to make a real difference .
Let us not miss our chance .
Thank you for your attention .
I am very optimistic that Commissioner Tajani will do everything in his power to make this dream a reality .
Mr President , on a point of order , I do not have in front of me Parliament 's Rules of Procedure but I am sure that your services do , so you will forgive me if I rise .
This is not related to the Gurmai report because we have spoken about that .
Whilst you were speaking , indeed whilst Mrs Gurmai was summing up her report , I noticed that there were members of the public coming into the visitors ' gallery .
I warmly welcome them and I think it is very good and important that people are coming into the visitors ' gallery , but I am also conscious that as soon as I sit down from this momentous speech that I am making , what will happen is that you will suspend the sitting until 12.00 for the voting period .
These poor people , who have come many hundreds of kilometres , will not have the benefit of hearing a debate and a speech this morning .
They are getting a little bit from me , but I wonder if it would be possible for you and your assistants to go back to the relevant authorities and look for a way of ensuring that , in the event of the debate finishing at 11.30 , as it has done this morning , with nothing scheduled until 14.00 , something could be put in to fill the half-hour gap between now and 12 noon , whether it be the urgencies from this afternoon or something else of mind-boggling importance ?


I am speaking on behalf of these perhaps 100 or so people in the gallery who have come to hear people speaking and all they are going to hear at the moment is me rabbiting on for two minutes about nothing - but making a very serious point .
( Applause )
Mr Evans , you had one minute to speak , not two .
We take note of the idea put to us by the ever witty Mr Evans .
Anyway , before suspending the sitting , I would like to share with you and the Commissioner the good news that , a few hours ago , the House of Lords of such an important country as the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland , ratified the Treaty of Lisbon .
I imagine that Queen Elizabeth is in the process of signing the relevant document , so that the United Kingdom , with this measure , ratifies the Treaty of Lisbon . I think we are all happy about this news , including those who are not present , even if they leave their flag on their seat and are not usually present in the Chamber when there is work to do .
With this happy news , we end this debate .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.30 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

1 .
Inland transport of dangerous goods (
2 .
Road infrastructure safety (
3 .
European Union 's disaster response capacity ( vote )
- After the vote on Amendment 37 :
( ES ) Madam President , amendment 37 has been withdrawn , so will not be put to the vote .
Unfortunately we had not been informed that it had been withdrawn , so it was put to the vote anyway .
- Before the vote on Amendment 15 :
Madam President , on behalf of our group and in the interests of trying to seek compromise and agreement on this , we would be willing to withdraw the subsequent amendment if the rapporteur would accept a small oral amendment , as written in the list , simply to make this less specific in terms of calling for the legally binding ' directive ' and leaving it as bringing forward ' measures ' .
If the rapporteur will agree to that , then we can withdraw the subsequent amendment .

( EL ) Madam President , as author of the motion for a resolution , which was adopted almost unanimously in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I am sorry , but I cannot accept Mr Bowis 's proposal , because his suggested oral amendment drastically undermines the thrust of the text .
May I call on those Members who agree with this view to stand .
Mr Bowis , it would seem that there are more than 40 Members on their feet , so we cannot deal with the oral amendment .
( The oral amendment was not accepted . )
- Before the vote on Amendment 35 :
Madam President , if nothing else it is a little bit of exercise .
The oral amendment suggested to the Socialist amendment is on the order paper and I hereby propose it on behalf of our group .
We will see if there is a little bout of aerobics coming from across the room .
It 's exercise from one side of the Chamber to the other !
( The oral amendment was not accepted . )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see minutes . )
Welcome
I would now like to welcome a delegation from the Swiss Federal Assembly to the official gallery .
The Swiss delegation is headed by Mrs Brigitta Gadient .
( Applause )
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you all to the European Parliament in Strasbourg where you have been taking part in the 27th EU-Switzerland interparliamentary meeting yesterday and today .
I know there have been some interesting discussions on developments and the current state of play , and future challenges for the relations between Switzerland and the EU , with special emphasis on the EU-Swiss dialogue on tax issues , free movement of persons and the experiences from the latest EU enlargements , cross-border service provision and the Schengen-Dublin agreements , Swiss financial contributions to the EU enlargement , and free trade in agricultural products .
There is a long relationship between our parliaments - almost three decades - and it has led to the development of a profound knowledge both on the EU side and the Swiss side .
I am sure that the exchange of views that has taken place this week will enhance our parliamentary cooperation .
( Applause )
1 .
Fortieth anniversary of the Customs Union ( vote )
2 .
Towards a European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers (
3 .
Imports of poultry carcasses ( vote )
4 .
Crisis in the fisheries sector ( vote )
5 .
EU-Russia Summit ( vote )
6 .
Future of the sheep / lamb and goat sector in Europe (
7 .
Towards Europe-wide Safer , Cleaner and Efficient Mobility : The First Intelligent Car Report (
Voting time ( continuation )
We now continue with the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see minutes . )
Explanations of vote
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to explain my vote on the European Parliament resolution on stepping up the Union 's disaster response capacity .
Certainly the document 's tone of solidarity and mutual help is a step in the right direction .
The Barnier report challenges us to take practical steps and in this regard the Commission communication shows the way forward .
Indeed we must ensure compatibility and strengthen cross-border cooperation between our countries ' protection forces at different levels .
Unfortunately , I was unable to support the resolution because our oral amendment was not adopted .
In this amendment we oppose creating legally binding instruments that would affect national legislation , policies and programmes and so affect the element of solidarity .
I simply believe that we will achieve better protection against the impact of disasters by supporting the protection forces in our Member States , through coordination and investment in their equipment , not by drawing up new legislation that will do nothing more for the whole process than create more bureaucracy .
( SK ) Since 1968 the Customs Union has played a crucial role in preserving and developing the single market .
Forty years of the Customs Union has been a substantial achievement and it has provided benefits for EU business and citizens .
I welcome the resolution by Mrs Arlene McCarthy , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the 40th anniversary of the Customs Union and I voted in favour of it .
Due to globalisation and technological progress , the Customs Union is having to cope with challenges such as counterfeit goods , increased imports of dangerous products and the need to set up electronic customs systems .
Only mutual cooperation between the customs administrations and surveillance authorities at international level will be able to protect the EU market against imports of dangerous and counterfeit products , thereby strengthening consumer protection .
I became convinced of this when visiting the national customs authorities and customs administrations in Prague , Antwerp and Washington , as well as Beijing and Shanghai .
This anniversary is a suitable occasion to thank customs officials for their demanding and often dangerous work , and for expressing our appreciation of the successes they achieve in their fight against dangerous products , counterfeit products and piracy .
Madam President , the 40th anniversary seems an opportune moment to address a misapprehension that has existed , I think , in our country ever since your constituents and mine voted to join what they thought was the Common Market some 35 years ago - the misapprehension concerning the difference between a free-trade area and a customs union .
What I think most British people understood by the Common Market was that there would be mutual product recognition , that if you could sell something in the UK , you should also be allowed to sell it in Germany , France and Spain and the other way round .
But of course what we have instead is standardisation .
Something is required to contain certain ingredients , to be of a volume of not less than ' x ' and not more than ' y ' , and even if that product was never intended for export , even if it never crosses frontiers , it can find itself criminalised and prohibited in its own country ; and this is often because a rival somewhere in the EU - as often as not in Britain - which happens to meet all of a group of specifications anyway , uses the mechanisms of the European Union in order to pass on its costs to its rivals .
I think it is a shame that we have lost the original concept of free circulation of goods and services in favour of harmonisation , which reduces consumer choice .
Madam President , how wonderful it is to see you in the chair .
When I give speeches in my constituency of London - for those of you who may have heard of London , the greatest city in the world , capital of the greatest country in the world - it is often pointed out to me by my constituents that they thought in 1973 that we were joining a customs union .
Then I say , ' Do you not understand the nature of the beast ?
Do you not understand the nature of the European project ?
It is all about further political and economic integration ' .
In fact in my first week in Parliament the leader of my group , Hans-Gert Pöttering , stood up and said , ' Nothing must be allowed to get in the way of European integration ; nothing must be allowed to get in the way of the European project ' .
So clearly , there is a misapprehension of the nature of the project in my constituency .
My plea to you , those of you in this Chamber who support the project , is : please be honest about its intentions .
If you seek to deny the truth about this project , then , once you ask the people , they will reject it , as they did in the referendum in Ireland .
Madam President , I too am delighted to see you in the chair .
I voted for Amendment 6 because I believe that the authorisation of the chlorinated chicken imports would undermine European standards and I see that happening on two fronts .
First of all , there is a lack of scientific data on the environmental and health impact of using the substances that are proposed .
Secondly , given the regime under which poultry producers operate , it is unreasonable to have two different standards , both from the perspective of the producers and more importantly from that of the consumers .
The previous speaker mentioned the Lisbon referendum in Ireland .
Certainly one of the issues on the ground that I came across when canvassing was that people do object to different standards .
But what we are doing here in Parliament today is dealing with that , so I am delighted that Parliament has passed that resolution .
Madam President , I fully support the resolution passed by Parliament .
Again , one of the things we often speak about in Parliament is how we respond to the needs of citizens .
I think this is a clear case where a response is needed .
The fishing industry is in crisis , with fuel prices having increased by more than 300 % in the last five years while prices for fish are similar to those paid 20 years ago .
So the bottom line is that fishermen cannot survive , they are going out of business and I think some of our proposals in this resolution will help to improve the situation .
I am pleased to see that the Slovenian presidency has said that they will take this on board , and I would call on the Council of Fisheries Ministers when it meets next week to pay particular attention to this resolution .
Now , Mr Kamall , I suppose you are going to tell us about fishermen in London ?
Madam President , I do not think there are any left , thanks to the common fisheries policy !
Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to explain the way I voted on this important debate .
But what I would say to my colleagues in the House is , actually , let us look at what the real problem is .
Whenever there is an international crisis , you seek to blame that for the problems in the fishing industry .
Actually it is not the rise in fuel prices that is the real problem in the fishing industry .
It is the common fisheries policy , a system of central planning that the Soviets would have been proud of .
I find it amazing that colleagues in this House are so willing to espouse Soviet economics .
Let us look at some of the more successful fish preservation systems around the world .
If you look at the ones , for example , in Iceland and New Zealand , you will find that they are based on the rule of law and property rights and transferable property rights .
If we really want to solve the problem in the fisheries industry , it is time to trust the rule of law ; it is time to trust property rights ; it is time to trust the free market .
Madam President , I do not want to speak on this item but the previous item .
I was trying to attract your attention .
I abstained on the poultry carcass issue , primarily because I believe there is evidence to refute the claims that we need to keep the ban in place .
I particularly think there is scientific evidence in place to allow this ban to be lifted .
But , in any case , none of this discussion has come to the fore .
What we have instead is a very expensive process in Europe for cleaning chicken carcasses .
That is the real problem because any carcasses that come into the European Union would seem to be cheaper ; as a result they sell more quickly and obviously suit the consumers .
This is not about health claims , this is about protectionism .
I think it is a very sad day for Europe that we have this particular debate in such a short and truncated way , rushed through as a resolution this week in Parliament .
I abstained as a result of this and I believe our relationship with the US and with other countries is stained as a result .
( SK ) The EU-Russia Summit is rightly receiving a great deal of attention .
Taking into account Russia 's important geopolitical standing and its enduring historical and cultural ties with Europe , I support the establishment of a strong political partnership between the EU and the Russian Federation .
This partnership should include mutual assistance in security issues , namely the fight against terrorism and organised crime , and overcoming the obstacles to free trade and travel .
However , we must not overlook the presence of several problematic aspects in the relationship between the Union and Russia .
In this regard , it is important for the EU to speak with one voice .
No Member State that takes the common foreign and security policy seriously should build its bilateral relations with Russia in such way that would damage the just interests of the Member States .
In areas concerning sensitive international issues , the EU and Russia should reach a consensus based on respect for international law and territorial integrity , for example in the case of Serbia and Kosovo .
To conclude , I would like to say that the EU should help Russia to develop and strengthen democracy , the rule of law and the protection of human rights .
( PL ) Madam President , the EU-Russia summit is approaching .
This is a significant event , which is why the debate in our Parliament concerning the preparations was so important .
Relations between the European Union and Russia are of enormous importance for stability , economic growth and security in Europe and the whole world .
These relations took on a new dimension after the EU 's enlargement with another 12 countries , principally from central and eastern Europe .
These are countries that , in the past , were closely linked economically , politically and militarily with the former Soviet Union .
Thus far , bilateral trading relations with individual countries have been transferred to the level of the EU and Russia .
However , Russia is constantly trying to make arrangements with individual countries , bypassing the EU .
Exceptional circumstances are frequently cited for this bilateral cooperation .
Russia is an enormous country with great political and military aspirations , with vast energy resources that define its position in Europe and the world .
Having ratified the Kyoto Protocol , Russia is an important partner that should be included in measures to combat climate change as well as those relating to environmental protection .
Madam President , in the case of paragraph 29 , which ends , ' to offer a greater EU involvement in the conflict resolution process ' , I support the original version , which adds and continues , ' including the possibility of an EU peacekeeping mission on the ground and a replacement of the CIS and Russian troops ' .
I find that it is absolutely important just now to send a clear message on behalf of the EU that we are ready to make a concrete commitment in the form of a peacekeeping mission in Abkhazia .
Madam President , I voted for this report because , as in other sectors , I am concerned to see the EU decline in sheepmeat production against a rising tide of imports .
There are not just farm income issues here but pertinent environmental issues because , of all farmed animals , sheep probably contribute the most to the natural upkeep of less fertile areas and the maintenance of biodiversity .
Environmental degradation of many upland and less-favoured areas will result from diminishing sheep farming .
Thus the necessity to sustain this industry and contemplate environmentally-linked payments to support it .
I also believe a proper country-of-origin labelling regime could greatly help promote growth in consumption of local lamb , particularly with rising imports .
Finally , the Commission 's rush to electronic tagging will impose further costs on a sector already diminishing because of uneconomic returns .
At most , such tagging should be voluntary for each Member State and region .
Madam President , I agree with the final speaker about the electronic tagging .
It certainly should be voluntary .
I supported Amendment 4 because I want to ask the Commission and the Council to look at introducing some kind of Community financing for the system of electronic tagging .
The goat , sheep and lamb sectors are in crisis and they certainly cannot afford to have further costs foisted upon them .
Indeed , I would have preferred Amendment 1 - but of course that fell on the adoption of Amendment 4 - where it was recommended that the implementation of the electronic identification system be deferred until 2012 at the earliest .
I agree with the former speaker , as I said , that the bureaucracy and cost involved far outweigh any of the benefits .
Madam President , as I said last night , this is a very good report .
Unfortunately last night the Commissioner ruled out possibility of the Commission agreeing to the rapporteur 's proposal to have a task force to look at the industry .
Now I am not a great believer in task forces because the place is littered with them ; every time we have a problem we set up a task force and you never hear tell of it again .
But I think if we had had better cooperation before we came to this Chamber , we could have put forward a firm proposal that would have helped the industry and worked for the industry .
Now we have got nothing .
We have got electronic tagging .
We have not got what we asked , that it be put back to 2012 .
The industry cannot afford it .
But I think we will return to this ; we have not heard the last of it , because we have got to defend the sheep industry throughout the whole of the European Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) The transport of dangerous goods has been discussed many times , and safety standards have gradually been clarified and simplified as a result .
With Mr Liberadzki 's report , therefore , existing legislation on the transport of dangerous goods will form a sound basis for the scope of the directive in particular , which has been extended to inland waterways .
I congratulate the negotiators on reaching an agreement that will make it possible to conclude this dossier at second reading .
The extension of the directive to inland waterways will involve a two-year transitional adaptation period for Member States , which will be able to regulate or prohibit the transport of dangerous goods in their territory for reasons other than safety during transport .
It should therefore be stressed that this legislation illustrates our efforts to make the transport of dangerous goods in the Union increasingly more effective and safe by eliminating unnecessary bureaucracy and added costs , or rules that do not make its management more efficient .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in truth there is very little to discuss in Mr Liberadzki 's excellent report on the inland transport of dangerous goods .
I voted for the report in committee and I confirm my vote here .
The more intramural trade like that between the Member States of the Union increases , the more useful it is , in my opinion , for such flows to be comparable , especially in terms of safety , but also in terms of inspections and related administrative procedures .
It would not , moreover , be logical to criticise or worse to reject such a technical text , the wide-ranging consultation on which has involved and has been qualitatively informed by so many experts from the Member States .
in writing . - ( NL ) I fully support this report .
Every year an enormous quantity of dangerous goods , such as chlorine and petrol , is transported by inland waterway in the European Union .
No rules have so far been drawn up on that , although there is legislation on the transport of dangerous goods by road and rail .
Legislation on the transport of dangerous goods by boat is badly needed , not just for safety reasons but also to regulate protection of the environment and public health at European level .
Much of the transport of this kind is cross-border .
Furthermore , European rules are also to the benefit of businesses , which at the moment have to comply with different national requirements in the various Member States .
Inland waterways transport also emits less greenhouse gas .
It is therefore very important to harmonise the requirements for the various forms of transport .
It will then become more attractive to combine several modes , for instance with part of the journey being done by rail and the freight then continuing by boat .
Not only is that efficient , it is above all sustainable .
I therefore hope that transport firms will actually opt more often for a combination of different modes of transport .
in writing . - ( PL ) I abstained from voting on the report by Mr Helmut Markov on road infrastructure safety management .
The reason is that this report runs flagrantly counter to the principle of subsidiarity : ' a larger entity should not exercise functions that can be carried out by a smaller one ' .
This principle should be maintained with all possible care .
Unfortunately , even in this House , I have often witnessed this principle being breached .
I hope that on this occasion we managed to safeguard the principle at least partially , but how much time was spent doing this !
Our legislative work was not directed towards the creation of good law , but to amending a poor legislative proposal .
I am not , however , under any illusion that this will be the last attack on the principle of subsidiarity .
This is paradoxical really , as these attacks come from the same quarter as the loudest criticisms of Ireland , a country that , a few days ago , rejected the Lisbon Treaty .
People are just not making the connection that the citizens of that country said ' no ' precisely because it is well known that this principle is regularly breached by the European Union .
In fact , it is just this example , that of Ireland , that should make us aware that we cannot just ignore subsidiarity , or sacrifice it to what are allegedly higher goals , such as road safety .
Sooner or later , and probably sooner , this will come back to haunt us .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be voting for Mr Markov 's report .
In my view , this a very comprehensive proposal which includes a whole range of aspects geared towards ensuring that safety is taken into account through all the stages of life of road infrastructure : from planning to design and use .
I agree with the respect of the subsidiarity principle in the proposal , leaving it to the discretion of Member States to decide how intensively ' road safety impact evaluations ' , road safety audits and safety inspections are to be applied .
The adoption of a legislative instrument geared to the safe development of the road network , through an approach which is not too inflexible , has to be seen as a positive result , whose effects will depend on the intensity with which it is applied .
However , I feel that it is essential to lay down binding minimum standards , from which no derogations are possible , to be applied in all Member States .
in writing . - British Conservatives know how devastating the effects of a natural disaster can be .
From the floods in the UK last year , we are aware of the human , economic and environmental damage that can be caused .
We also understand the effects such natural disasters have upon other countries .
Nonetheless , we believe that individual Member States are best placed to respond rapidly and appropriately to disasters occurring within their own territory .
We believe that the creation of a European Civil Protection Force would merely slow down the capacity for response by adding an extra bureaucratic burden .
What those affected require is timely and necessary intervention , not more bureaucracy .
Finally , we cannot agree with further EU legislation in the area of disaster prevention and response .
We consider that adequate legislation already exists at both Member State and EU level , and that financial aid is already available through the Solidarity Fund which serves , as it should , to mitigate structural and long-term damage .
In supporting this resolution in the final vote , we wish to make clear that we have also voted in favour of the amendments which called for the deletion of references to the Civil Protection Force and further EU legislation in this area .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am voting firmly in favour of this motion for a resolution on stepping up the European Union 's disaster response capacity .
As a member of this Parliament 's Committee on Development , I have had the opportunity to visit some of the world 's poorest and most disaster-prone areas , in some cases struck ( as in the case of the tsunami ) by catastrophic natural disasters .
I should like to take this opportunity to stress the first-rate work of our Development Commissioner , Louis Michel , who has always swiftly and efficiently resolved to show solidarity and offer cooperation when these tragic events have occurred .
As the resolution points out , however , the procedures laid down in our legislative framework are still too convoluted : mechanisms need to be streamlined and substantial resources set aside for emergencies which will , unfortunately , continue to occur .
Parliament is giving a clear signal in that direction today .
Now we have to move from words to deeds .

in writing . - ( PT ) Despite our vote in favour , we regret that some of our proposals have not been approved , particularly the one considering it essential to pay particular attention to the less favoured or ' convergence ' regions in the event of natural disasters , in connection with regulating the Structural Funds , or those underscoring the importance of maintaining the eligibility of regional-scale disasters for the European Solidarity Fund and its adaptation to the specific nature of natural disasters such as drought and fires , in terms of time limits and eligible actions .
We believe it is positive , however , that others have been adopted in relation to the recognition of Mediterranean region natural disasters , namely drought and forest fires .
Support mechanisms for the people affected and for reforestation that must also cover the prevention of further large-scale disasters are required , however , as is an EU-funded public agricultural insurance scheme to guarantee farmers a minimum income in the event of national disasters such as droughts , fires or floods .
The common agricultural policy must be radically modified to support small and medium-sized farmers and family farming , thereby stimulating agricultural production , biodiversity and use of the land .
in writing . - ( PT ) We believe that a framework for cooperation between Member States must be established for preventing , combating and minimising the consequences of disasters .
Among other aspects , however , we disagree with the creation of a European civil protection force ( particularly if it has a military dimension ) , since capacities and operational resources in this area must be subject to the jurisdiction of Member States , which have to guarantee the resources and strategies to provide a ( rapid ) response to needs and which know their territory better .
We consider the approval of our proposals advocating the following to be positive :
Community-level recognition of the specific nature of Mediterranean region natural disasters such as drought and forest fires , and the resulting adaptation of Community instruments in terms of prevention , research , risk management , civil protection and solidarity in order to improve each Member State 's response ;
The need for greater Community funding of prevention measures .
However , we regret the rejection of our proposals :
Highlighting the importance of maintaining the eligibility of regional disasters for the European Solidarity Fund ;
Advocating the adaptation of the European Solidarity Fund to the specific nature of natural disasters such as drought and fires , in terms of time limits and eligible actions .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the Commission 's initiative in finally producing a document on improving the coherence , effectiveness and visibility of the EU 's reaction to natural or man-made disasters .
Yet I am sorry this is still not a really practical proposal that is likely to boost Europe 's capacity in the area of civil protection , including prevention and rapid reaction , in the event of major crises occurring within or outside the Union .
I thank MEPs for supporting my amendment on using the expertise relating to the geographical location of the outermost regions ( OR ) and the overseas countries and territories ( OCT ) .
Thanks to those overseas communities , Europe is present off the African coast ( Canaries , Madeira ) , in the Indian Ocean ( Reunion ) , close to the American continent ( Guyana , Guadeloupe , Martinique , Azores ) , not forgetting the Pacific OCT ( French Polynesia , New Caledonia ) .
Europe 's overseas territories could become bases for pre-positioning vital products and logistics .
That would make it easier to predict the available European human and material resources in the event of the need for urgent intervention outside the Union .
in writing . - Clearly there is great merit in improved coordination and readiness for mutual assistance of disaster response organisations in European countries .
However , as always , the European Commission seizes on another opportunity to extend its own remit and responsibilities - here ' to develop a knowledge base , identify gaps ' , etc .
The report , against the wishes of British Conservatives , also includes a call for legally-binding instruments .
For these reasons I abstained in the vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite the report 's positive appraisal of 40 years of the Customs Union , many production sectors , particularly in Portugal , do not share the same view .
Quite the contrary in fact .
They know that the full opening of borders , in the name of free competition , has created profoundly unjust situations and has exacerbated structural deficits due to uneven development between the various countries .
Added to this inequality in productive capacity and in the development of the production process are other measures , policies and instruments that have made the situation worse , most significantly the creation of the internal market , international trade liberalisation , the Stability Pact within economic and monetary union and the neoliberalism of the Lisbon Strategy .
Consequently , although the report includes some positive proposals for reinforcing cooperation , its initial basis is unacceptable .
Hence our vote against the report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We take a positive view of this resolution , since we support the common commercial policy and customs legislation as a precondition for the functioning of the internal market .
We would point out , however , that we are deeply critical of many of the trade agreements which the EU has actually concluded with third countries .
in writing . - Whereas we fully support cooperation between the Member States to prevent the import of dangerous toys , drugs and other illegal or dangerous products , and whereas we fully support cooperation with trading partners to this end , we cannot vote in favour of this resolution due to the severe impact of the Customs Union on developing countries ' trade .
The EU uses the Customs Union as a tool to negotiate favourable trade deals with developing countries while at the same time imposing high tariffs on products that are seen as unwanted competition for EU products .
This policy is hampering the potential for economic growth in developing countries .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report begins by supporting the range of liberalisation packages for the electricity and natural gas markets , pushing for their privatisation even though they are strategic sectors for development and social progress .
As is well known , the application of these packages in Portugal has exacerbated supply problems and increased consumer prices , and has also increased unemployment and job insecurity in the sector .
The European Commission is now seeking to gloss over the problems its strategy has created by presenting the ' European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers ' .
Despite the limited number of rights it refers to , we do not disagree with this Charter .
The question is whether it will be adhered to by the sector 's controlling economic groups , which Community policies are increasingly subservient to . Hence our abstention in the final vote on this report .
in writing . - ( PL ) The report that has been adopted on a European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers significantly increases the rights of energy consumers .
More information will be made available to consumers , which will make it easier to choose between suppliers and various supply options .
The Charter is a very important step in the liberalisation of the energy market .
I am convinced that clearer and more readable information given to consumers will make it possible for consumers to make the best choices .
This is particularly important when energy prices are constantly rising and are becoming an area of ever-greater concern to consumers .
As a result of the solution that has been accepted , it will be easier to compare offers and real energy usage and this will encourage consumers to change suppliers if they are dissatisfied with the service offered .
The result of this will be real competition between energy suppliers , greater concern for customer satisfaction and greater possibilities for consumers to have an impact on the decisions made by energy companies .
I believe that the Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers will , slowly but surely , help to change the energy market , which is something that we have been looking forward to for a long time .
Let us not forget that consumers are the most important part of the internal market and they expect us to make real changes .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for Ms. De Vits ' report regarding the European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers .
Given the ever higher prices for energy , it is necessary to ensure the supply of citizens with lower income and of people living in remote regions , where energy markets are smaller and non-competitive .
Member States should take actions as soon as possible to define these groups of consumers clearly and promote and support actions , for instance social tariffs , to ensure the continuity of their access to electricity and natural gas .
I voted for amendments 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 7 submitted by the Group of European Specialists .
They stated the need to introduce social tariffs , to quarterly inform consumers about their own energy consumption and requested the informing of the public about the provisions of the European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers .
I regret these amendments were not adopted .
The protection of energy consumers should rely on joint actions of the Union and Member States in the future as well .
The European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers is a way to support the citizens in order for them to obtain information about their rights in a more efficient and simple way .
in writing . - I am strongly in favour of consumers being able to obtain secure , safe , reliable and sustainable supplies of gas and electricity at reasonable prices .
National Regulatory Authorities should play an important role in this .
However , I oppose the efforts by the European Commission to move into this area , to extend its powers and remit through ' studies ' , a ' Charter ' and ' harmonisation ' , and I do not recognise the concept of ' Citizen of the Union ' .
For these reasons I abstained in the vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) We consider it positive that the European Parliament has criticised the European Commission proposal seeking to amend the rules on the marketing of poultrymeat , only to authorise the marketing of such meat that has undergone anti-microbial treatment for human consumption .
In practice this European Commission proposal merely seeks to fulfil the USA 's request for the European Union to authorise the importation of its poultrymeat that has been treated with chemicals or anti-microbial substances .
The European Commission is therefore disregarding the precautionary principle and is disregarding the adoption and strengthening of the food safety and hygiene standards that already exist at EU level .
These are much higher than those in the USA , which only uses a cheap end-of-line solution which it now wants the European Union to accept so that it can sell its produce throughout Europe .
We therefore hope that the Council will not accept the European Commission 's proposal .
in writing . - ( SV ) The chlorination of chicken has not proved harmful to health or harmful in any other way , and our policy decisions should always be evidence-based .
In the interests of free trade , therefore , I have voted against this report , which I consider to be motivated by protectionism .
In view of the widespread disquiet among the public in the EU as regards chlorinated chicken , however , it is of the utmost importance that we get legal requirements for labelling so that every individual can choose to avoid this product , for example in shops or restaurants .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution as it highlights one of the most pressing issues facing the EU internally and externally .
We have decided in the EU to push for high food production standards - conscious of the needs for food safety and quality .
We do not permit the use of chlorine dipping of chicken carcases within the EU for produce consumed in the EU and therefore it makes no sense to allow imports of US chicken into the EU which is so treated .
In recent months we have a similar problem with imports of beef from Brazil - where traceability standards fall far short of those in the EU .
We may face a similar problem when we ban caged egg production in the EU but end up importing from outside the EU powdered egg products produced in caged systems .
If the EU insists on internal standards , it must be prepared to defend them and stop imports which fail to meet our internal standards .
in writing . - The Commission proposal to lift the ban on the importation of poultry treated with anti-microbial substances such as chlorine is extremely worrying .
It must be recognised that these practices simply do not meet EU standards of food safety .
This proposal seems to be politically motivated and blatantly disregards the valid health and safety concerns of EU citizens .
Assurances that this poultry will be labelled and clearly identifiable to the consumer are simply not adequate .
The use of anti-microbial substances in the treatment of poultry should not be promoted by the European Union in any way .
This ban has been in place more than ten years and was originally implemented with good reason .
Unfortunately , therefore , the Commission proposal to lift it represents a huge step backwards and is totally unacceptable .
The Commission must re-examine its original decision , which is based exclusively on commercial criteria and results in a crime against public health and consumer protection .
We cannot ignore existing European legislation by making concessions to the Americans and putting commercial interests before public health .
We are awaiting the response of the competent Commissioner for Health , Mrs Vassiliou , and the response of the Greek Government .
in writing . - ( IT ) Thank you Madam President . This resolution is an initial response to the very serious crisis which our Union 's fisheries sector is experiencing as a result of the increasing price of oil .
In recent days , I have personally visited various ports in my country and have seen a very difficult and complex situation to which we have to be able to provide swift and efficient answers .
The unprecedented increase in the price of oil risks bringing a whole sector to its knees .
The Union has extraordinary funds for fisheries that can be used in particularly serious situations .
I invite Commissioner Borg to take immediate action to ascertain whether such action by the Commission is advisable .
Deeds and not words .
Action and not promises .
Among workers , I encountered a growing mistrust of the European institutions .
Our task is to fill that gap and in particular to shoulder our responsibilities in the face of economic and social developments which may well precipitate a serious crisis .
in writing . - ( PT ) As stressed in a press release , we do not support this resolution because :
It does not respond to the immediate problem of workers ' wages , failing to clarify that fishermen ( workers ) pay for fuel , and that this is why the problem affects them directly ( as it does the owners of the vast majority of small vessels ) ;
It disregards the EU 's inertia and refusal to take the necessary decisions ;
It does not table any specific proposals in relation to fuel prices ( petrol and diesel ) and as regards fish price formation at the initial point of sale ;
It does not deplore a policy that takes advantage of escalating fuel prices to reduce and concentrate the sector even further , generate more unemployment , ensure the decline of a production sector and worsen the food and trade balances ;
It falls well below positions adopted previously by the EP and proposed by the PCP ;
In accordance with the recent proposals announced by the European Commission , and irrespective of one or two aspects which , if applied , could have positive effects for the sector , at bottom this resolution further encourages the scrapping of vessels and offers fishermen the alternative of giving up their occupation .
Because fisheries have a future , we call for measures such as the proposals in the resolution we presented to be adopted as a matter of urgency .
in writing . - The fishing industry has faced many crises over the years , but none greater than at present , with rising fuel prices which are pushing the industry over the edge to the point where it can no longer survive .
The continuing spiralling price of oil could prove to be disastrous for many industries , but none is more vulnerable than the fishing industry , with jobs at sea and on shore at risk .
We must look into all the options which are available to us .
One route that should be explored is reducing taxes in order to ensure that fuel costs come down .
May I ask the following question : if we do not have fishermen , where will the fish we require come from ?
Are we going to sit back and allow foreign imports to take over our markets and put our industry out of business ?
Saving our fishing fleets and the industry in general will prove to be a massive challenge .
However , I am confident that with good will and all-round cooperation it is possible .
I welcome yesterday 's statement from the Commission announcing its intention to provide emergency assistance to fishing fleets .
I sincerely hope that these measures will be formally adopted by the Council of Fisheries Ministers next week and then swiftly implemented .
in writing . - ( FR ) The dramatic rise in the price of diesel oil , 300 % since 2003 has made its full impact felt in the fisheries sector .
With the continuously worsening crisis , many fishing undertakings are now in a very fragile financial state .
Fisheries are in fact a particularly important pillar in the economic and social development of the outermost regions .
Moreover , they are hit all the harder by the rise in the price of fuel because of their remote geographical location .
That is an unacceptable situation .
The European Union has a duty to find a compromise .
The European Parliament has just sent out a strong signal to fishers .
In calling for the official aid ceiling to be raised to EUR 100 000 per vessel and not per undertaking , in calling for the immediate application of emergency and social support measures and , lastly , in demanding the reorganisation of European Fund expenditure for fisheries , MEPs have made it clear to fishers that they have heard their distress call .
The Council of European fisheries ministers will be discussing these proposals on 23 and 24 June 2008 .
The European Union has no option but to restore the confidence of fishers in order to plug the huge hole that has recently appeared .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to point out once again that there is no western company that is as closely linked with the state as Gazprom is with the Kremlin .
At present we are faced with a cold political calculation .
The domination of Gazprom in the energy sector will lead to another increase in energy prices in Europe .
Russia will be able to force through even greater political concessions for supplies of gas and oil .
We are already seeing the effects of high prices in the ever more frequent protests in Europe .
We also have , fresh in our memories , the repeated closure of gas supplies to our eastern neighbours .
Mr President , I supported this resolution because I believe that Europe must begin to speak with one voice in its relations with Russia , because only in this way can we guarantee that the EU will be effective .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is well-known that Russia is an important strategic partner for the European Union , and our geography makes us dependent on each other .
Diplomacy must therefore be used to find the best solutions for this unavoidable proximity .
The need to cooperate , however , must not force us into a real or disguised blindness towards the serious problems Russia raises .
Internally it cannot be ignored that Russia is not a full democracy and that the rule of law does not ensure effective respect for human rights .
Externally it is impossible to ignore the use of energy as a weapon in external relations , in particular by promoting EU disunity in this area , the equivocal role it has played in the Iranian issue , and its unwillingness to force China to commit itself to human rights , among others .
Europe 's voice in relation to Russia must be that of a serious partner which is willing to cooperate , but which is not willing to compromise on core issues of democracy , human rights and security .
in writing . - ( PL ) The complex relations between the European Union and Russia require well-managed and coherent diplomatic action .
The approaching EU-Russia summit arouses many emotions , as agreements are to be negotiated that are of great significance for both Russia and the European Union .
Prior to this summit we must realise just how important it is for the future of the European Union that it should speak with one voice in the international arena .
For this reason it is a shame that the people of Ireland put a question mark over the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in last week 's referendum , as it is precisely this Treaty that contains the regulations that will make the European Union a credible partner in international relations .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted in favour of this report , which contains several important proposals for protecting sheep and goat products , particularly in less favoured areas and mountain regions .
We would like it to have gone further , however , particularly in protecting indigenous breeds and traditional cheese production .
It is nevertheless essential for the European Commission and the Council to take account of these approved proposals and the debate in plenary , where we also explained our positions on this very important issue .
The revision of the CAP currently in progress must correct the problems created by the 2003 reform , particularly as regards the uncoupling of direct payments .
I must also stress the importance of ensuring an additional payment for producers to support indigenous breeds of sheep and goat in particular .
This payment must be reinforced in mountain regions and other specific areas in order to maintain biodiversity in agriculture , preserve these animals in sensitive areas and use the land in a natural way - an important contribution to environmental protection and forest fire prevention in southern Europe .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as it highlights the problems in the sheep sector , which is in terminal decline unless action is taken .
The Parliament has voted in favour of EU funding for electronic tagging of sheep and , while this is welcome , I would have preferred to see electronic tagging taken off the agenda until the future viability of sheep farming is secured .
In relation to the proposal for a task force , which was rejected by Parliament , there is now an onus on the Commission to upgrade its focus on the sheep sector and to report to the Parliament on progress or otherwise in implementing the proposals in this report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Thank you , Madam President , I am voting for the report by Zita Gurmai and would like to congratulate her on her excellent work .
In particular , I support the ' eSafety ' initiative ( www.esafetysupport.org ) within which the European Commission , the public authorities , the industry and other stakeholders are all working together to try to speed up the development and introduction of ' Intelligent Integrated Vehicle Safety Systems ' .
These systems use information and communication technologies with a view to increasing road safety and reducing the number of accidents on our roads . ' eSafety ' is the first step in the ' Intelligent Car ' initiative launched in 2006 by the European Commission .
I believe that this is a path we should swiftly follow in order to promote the future growth of transport which will , in the Commission 's words , be ' smarter , safer and cleaner ' .
in writing . - ( SK ) Our dependence on transport grows every day .
All citizens have the right to safe and sustainable mobility .
The current progress in information and communication technologies enables us to manufacture and buy vehicles that are smarter , safer and cleaner .
Consumers must have access to information that will enable them to make informed choices in favour of intelligent cars and it is important for these cars to become affordable .
Since the report by the rapporteur , Mrs Zita Gurmai , offers European citizens the opportunity to benefit from the potential road traffic safety in the near future , I voted in favour of it .
Road accidents are caused both by human error and by poor vehicle condition .
By introducing intelligent technologies , 16 % of accidents can be prevented .
Modern systems can reduce the number of road accident fatalities by as much as one third .
The Galileo programme also represents a significant contribution in this area .
As regards the full deployment of the pan-European in-vehicle emergency call system , the eCall system , the EU Member States have a large responsibility .
The aim is to have a full-scale roll-out of eCall by 2010 .
Therefore , I would encourage the Member States that have not yet signed the eCall Memorandum of Understanding to do so now , in 2008 .
Taking into account that , according to the statistics , there are 41 600 deaths on European roads every year , we need to launch a new era in the road sector .
By saving any number of human lives we will be doing a lot for European citizens .
in writing . - My colleague , Zita Gurmai , has produced an excellent report and needs to be congratulated on her detailed work and the commitment she has shown .
The first intelligent car report is a flagship project within the Commission 's strategic policy framework for information society and the media , and our rapporteur is right to recognise that intelligent vehicle systems could reduce the annual death toll , currently around 42 000 , on the roads of the EU .
She is also right to point out that , at present , many people cannot afford the new systems , so the need to bring down costs has to be a priority .
Electronic stability control technology , the use of portable or nomadic devices and work towards providing cleaner vehicles are all topics covered by the rapporteur .
This is an excellent report , and it has my full support .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Intelligent Car Initiative is a very valuable initiative .
It is important to use modern technology as much as possible to make transport safer and more efficient .
Estimates indicate that if all cars were fitted with electronic stability control ( ESC ) there could be as many as four thousand fewer fatalities in the EU each year .
Another important safety feature , which has not yet been generally introduced , is the pan-European in-vehicle accident notification system known as eCall .
Research indicates that its introduction throughout the European Union could reduce traffic fatalities by two and a half thousand each year .
The final issue that should be considered is the large amount of carbon dioxide and greenhouse gases emitted by cars , comprising 12 % of total CO2 emissions in the EU .
I think that cars with the lowest CO2 emissions should be marketed using social campaigns .
We should also introduce more restrictive regulations to reduce emissions of harmful gases by cars .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.45 and resumed at 15.00 . )

Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Burma : continued detention of political prisoners
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on Burma .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , as I was saying , according to the Campaign for Human Rights , Peace and Democracy in Burma , on 12 March , the oldest Burmese political prisoner spent her 78th birthday in solitary confinement at Insein prison .
This is U Win Tin , an eminent journalist and leader of the National League for Democracy .
U Win Tin is the oldest prisoner of conscience in Burma .
She has spent the last 19 years in prison , since July 1989 .
She was sentenced to three terms of 21 years imprisonment . We only know about her current situation because of the latest report on the conditions of Burmese prisoners by Yozo Yokota , Special United Nations Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in Burma .
U Win Tin has refused to renounce her political ideals in exchange for her freedom .
She was taken into hospital for a second hernia operation in January 2008 .
She is one of Burma 's 1 873 political prisoners .
Obviously , in this resolution , we also want to express our condemnation of the extension of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi 's house arrest .
My group demands immediate measures to begin an urgent and necessary process of political and economic reform .
First , release of all political prisoners .
Second , the restoration of basic civil liberties and , obviously , a political dialogue between all parties .
We also reiterate our request to the Council to adopt vigorous measures against the Burmese Military Junta , which has become world leader in human rights violations .
author . - Mr President , numerous resolutions have been passed by this House condemning Burma 's military junta for the severe breaches it has committed repeatedly against the human rights of the Burmese people .
Yet these heartless generals take little notice of what we tell them .
Instead , they continue their firm hold on power in a most disgustingly pompous and irritating manner .
Even following the devastation of the recent cyclone , they not only hampered aid attempts from the free world but also took advantage of the misery of their citizens in their time of need by promoting their own image as apparent Samaritans and angels of good by gross exhibitionist appearances on the junta-controlled state media and by holding a referendum on the Constitution only days after the cyclone catastrophe struck .
Those who oppose the junta are tortured , killed or put in detention .
An example , of course , is the Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi , who led the National League for Democracy to victory in elections held 18 years ago and has spent 12 years in detention - and recently the junta decided to further extend the period of her house arrest .
I feel that the time has come for more severe measures to be taken against the monstrous junta in Burma .
The most effective measure would be to exert pressure on China to stop supporting it .
If China does not cooperate on this , then we must take action in relation to our trade relations with Beijing and with regard to the Chinese Olympic Games .
This is probably the only way left to us to do something about freedom and democracy in Burma .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , I believe that the attitude of a country towards international offers of aid at times of disasters and natural catastrophes shows what kind of country we are dealing with .
Although there may be many reservations with regards to China , we know that that country , at a very difficult time , was able to accept international aid .
Similarly , we saw the attitude of Burma to international aid , including aid from the Member States of the European Union .
There used to be an American play called ' Same Time , Next Year ' .
Our Parliament is a bit like that with Burma .
Every year we meet and discuss the situation in Burma .
To be honest , there is no real , significant change .
I agree with the facts presented by the previous speakers .
A situation where a woman , the leader of the opposition , has been held under house arrest for so many years is unheard of in the world .
We should not get used to this situation .
I hope that we can overcome the divisions in this Parliament and speak with one voice in defence of democracy in Burma .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , the military junta in Burma is persisting in its attempts to isolate the country and its people from the rest of the world .
In September 2007 , after the Buddhist monks ' protests had been brutally crushed , a news embargo was imposed .
Last month , international organisations were prevented from helping the victims of the cyclone .
There was a lengthy delay before aid workers were able to reach the people in distress , and for some the aid came too late .
Now other reports of an equally alarming nature are filtering out , such as the news of the arrests of cyclone victims who had sought help from UN offices .
In addition , security forces shot dead or seriously wounded inmates who were trying to flee from a prison destroyed by Cyclone Nargis .
The EU did not turn a blind eye .
It imposed a trade embargo , although that has not yet had the desired impact .
It threatened to apply tougher sanctions if the human rights situation did not improve .
Yet the Burmese leaders have not moved an inch .
Let us not relax our demands .
The country 's political prisoners must be released .
The house arrest in which Aung San Suu Kyi has been living for decades must be lifted .
The courageous commitment shown by that Nobel prize winner would be anathema to any dictator .
The Burmese generals must ultimately be held to account for the way they have dealt with their own country 's citizens , many of whom are still missing .
The dialogue with the United Nations ' Special Rapporteur and the assurance that he would be allowed to visit the country constitute a first step .
The governments of the Member Countries of ASEAN should also use their influence to bring the junta to its senses .
There is a need to increase pressure on China too , which is probably the only remaining supporter of Burma .
If necessary , the Council and the EU Member States must tighten their sanctions .
Commissioner , we are truly waiting for you to act - the people of Burma need our solidarity .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , the military regime in Burma tries to give the impression that it is maintaining a good policy and important national values against a hostile outside world that is threatening those positive values .
It demands unanimous support from the population in defending those values .
I wish that claim were true and that the people of Burma could be happy with the situation in the past 40 years , but what are the values that the regime is defending ?
Four characteristics come to mind .
Firstly , privileges for a military caste ; a closed armed group controls the administration and the economy .
That group can enrich itself , while others stay poor .
Secondly , the repression of national minorities , the groups in the country with a different language and culture who want self-government .
Their territories were added to Burma in the British colonial period , but there they are relegated to the status of third-rate citizens .
Thirdly , foreign revenue is earned with exports based on competition through extremely low wages or forced labour .
Fourthly , the systematic refusal to consult with groups that want to change that situation , even though they once won the only free elections this regime dared to hold .
With the aid after the flood disaster , we realised how much the regime fears the possibility that foreigners will see at first hand how bad the situation is or that they will influence the population .
Internal refugees have to return quickly to devastated villages that have not been rebuilt , purely in order to prevent contact between disaffected masses .
Immediately after the disaster , priority was given to holding a referendum whose main purpose was to exclude the democratic opposition permanently from power by means of a false result .
The imprisonment of people on political grounds is a means of survival for such a regime .
The outside world must stand up for those prisoners and other opponents .
China and India should do so , as well as Europe .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , here in Strasbourg we have considered the situation in Burma on Thursday afternoons almost every month in recent times .
We have before us two reports relating to the situation in Burma .
The first was produced by the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the second is a report from the Special Rapporteur of the United Nations on the human rights situation in Burma .
These reports are unequivocal .
They speak of the imprisonment of parliamentarians , assassinations , terrible conditions in prisons for political prisoners and a catastrophic situation for civilisation in that country .
Acting as the European Parliament , we must put pressure on the authorities in Burma .
For the situation to change over the coming weeks and months , what is needed is concerted action by all democratic parliaments throughout the world , as well as the cooperation of countries such as India and China , to put pressure on the authorities in Burma , so that there may be a real improvement in this situation .
I would like to speak of the fate of parliamentarians who today are imprisoned in Burma , both the members of parliament who were arrested in the autumn of 2007 and those who disappeared or died in unknown circumstances , when they were arrested , as well as those who were assassinated and who died in unexplained circumstances .
The report by the United Nations rapporteur is clear .
The immediate release of Aung San Suu Kyi would be a start for talks with the authorities in Burma on democracy and improvements in the human rights situation in that country .
Guaranteeing freedom for political prisoners and , first and foremost , providing medical assistance to those prisoners , is of fundamental importance and this we must force onto the authorities in Burma .
Today we are talking about Burma , about the thousands of political prisoners suffering in its jails , about Aung San Suu Kyi , the charismatic leader of the National League for Democracy .
The party under her leadership won the election in 1990 with 82 % of the vote , but the generals ruling the country refused to respect the will of the nation and Aung San Suu Kyi has been under house arrest for 13 years since then .
' Use your liberty to promote ours ' , as the Nobel Prize laureate once said .
I have no doubt that the people of Burma would then overcome the power of the generals .
There are no immortal dictators , but the spirit of freedom is timeless .
We have no right to remain impartial when confronted with barbaric inhuman behaviour .
I would like to quote Martin Luther King , who said : ' In the end , we will remember not the words of our enemies , but the silence of our friends . '
Therefore , the question facing the European Parliament today is : whose side are we on ?
We are on the side of Aung San Suu Kyi , of the thousands of political prisoners !
We demand their immediate release ; we demand that human rights be respected in Burma .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , a year has not yet passed and this is the third time that we have debated the situation in Burma .
We are again calling on the government in that country to respect human rights and basic humanitarian standards for the treatment of prisoners .
We point out the injustices , we make appeals , we make requests , we lament the situation , we impose sanctions and , once again , we condemn the regime in Burma .
In turn , that regime displays an astonishing immunity to pressure from the international community , ignores the appeals , just does not do anything about them .
For this reason it is with some embarrassment that I am standing up to speak about Burma .
I see our impotence to date , not just ours , that is , of the European Parliament and the European Union , but also of all assemblies including the United Nations .
For this reason I think the time for words is over .
We should make strong demands for diplomatic pressure to be exerted so that , through the diplomatic channels of the Council of the European Union and Member States , the regime should be forced to act properly .
I would like to call for the adoption of points seven and ten of the resolution , which appeal for a process of national reconciliation in that country .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , dictatorships and regimes that employ violence , or regimes that persecute their populations seldom fall as a result of some general diplomatic pressure .
Of course I agree with Mrs Grabowska that pressure is necessary .
These regimes can fall only when the internal situation becomes one where the regime loses the support of those on which its internal policies depend .
For this reason , the whole diplomatic effort should go , on the one hand , towards supporting even a weak and barely visible opposition , and , on the other hand , another solution would be if international political organisations , if international pressure , were supported by force .
For this reason I would like to repeat once again : the European Union should have its own forces to be able to intervene in cases such as Burma .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the problem of violations of human rights in Burma has been discussed on several occasions during the present term of the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , the debates and the resolutions that were passed have not changed the political and social situation in that country , where , since 1962 , the army has held to power in one of the most infamous political regimes in the world .
Over the past 40 years thousands of people who have been persecuted and convicted for political activity have been imprisoned in this country , which has experienced disasters inflicted not only by the regime .
The population of Burma is forced to work and even children are conscripted into the army .
The Secretary General of the League for Democracy has spent thirteen of the last eighteen years as a political prisoner under house arrest and , recently , 1 900 people were arrested - and are living in conditions that breach human rights - for expressing the desire to have democracy in Burma , or even for asking for humanitarian aid , which was needed after the passage of the cyclone .
The regime in Burma does not just persecute the opposition .
In addition , it breached human rights by making it impossible to provide humanitarian aid following the cyclone and this has put the lives of its citizens at risk .
It has also forced cyclone victims to leave temporary camps and to return to homes that were destroyed in the disaster .
Appeals from the UN Secretary General and other organisations have resulted in more arrests and killings of its tormented citizens .
Of course we support a resolution that contains not only our opposition to the persecution of the Nobel Laureate , but also the proposal to release other political prisoners and to carry out an investigation , under the auspices of the UN , into the allegations of killings of prisoners by the army during the recent disaster .
( PL ) Mr President , one year has passed since the last European Parliament resolution drawing attention to the dramatic internal situation in Burma .
The ruling military regime has not , however , taken any steps on the path towards democracy .
The General Secretary of the National League for Democracy has spent the last 13 years under house arrest .
The Nobel Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi , who was also awarded the Sakharov Prize by the European Parliament , has been imprisoned without trial , despite pressure from international organisations .
1 900 opposition activists are being held in jail in inhuman conditions in Burma .
What is also worrying are the reports of the murders of 36 prisoners in a prison facility in Rangoon , and the wounding of a further 70 , as a result of the panic caused by the cyclone that devastated Burma in May this year .
The ruling regime should immediately lift all restrictions on free speech and fundamental rights , including bans on peaceful political activity .
Burma has a responsibility to provide aid to cyclone victims and to give free access to the affected regions to international humanitarian organisations .
Strengthening existing economic sanctions and controls over the junta 's access to EU aid , as well as increased political pressure from ASEAN , will certainly improve the chances of stabilising the situation in Burma .
( SK ) I agree with the Members who spoke before me that the European Parliament must adopt an uncompromising attitude towards a country in which the totalitarian arrogance of power knows no boundaries .
A totalitarian regime that makes political capital out of the tragedy of its own people defies comprehension and must be condemned .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must make use of all the means available to us to work , together with the UN , to help the victims of Cyclone Nargis .
I call on the Council to adopt further measures and to prevent the junta from accessing EU funding .
Since we know for certain that human rights in Burma are being continuously violated , the EU must support the democratic forces in that country and demand the release of all political prisoners .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , today , on the 63rd birthday of the Burmese human rights and democracy campaigner Aung San Suu Kyi , we should pay special attention to what is happening in Burma .
Burma is distancing itself from democratic values at an alarming speed .
So far the Nobel Prize and Sakharov Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi has spent 12 years and 239 days in confinement .
She is not allowed to receive visitors , conduct telephone conversations or receive mail .
In addition to this outstanding woman , thousands of peaceful demonstrators have been imprisoned on political grounds and people have been secretly to disappeared .
The Burmese junta uses brutal violence .
We must condemn the undemocratic and brutal action of the Burmese military government .
China must stop supporting Burma .
Aung San Suu Kyi and other political prisoners should be released immediately ; that means today .
Burma 's continuing defiance of the UN and the international community must not be permitted .
( PL ) Mr President , about 1 900 people are being held under arrest in very poor conditions for expressing their support for the introduction of democracy in Burma .
Dozens of participants in the protests have disappeared without trace .
Aung San Suu Kyi has spent thirteen years under arrest without being charged , which is against the law even in Burma .
Dozens more people , victims of Cyclone Nargis , have been arrested for requesting humanitarian aid .
In addition , prisoners in Rangoon were fired on when the cyclone hit the prison .
We call on the authorities in Burma to abolish the bans on peaceful activities and to free political prisoners immediately .
We expect an investigation to take place into the murders of political prisoners during the passage of Cyclone Nargis .
( PL ) Mr President , despite enormous interest in the situation in Burma from the entire world as well as from various international institutions and organisations , no internal changes have taken place in that country .
Thousands of people are still imprisoned in awful conditions because they stood up for democracy or because they protested against the constitutional referendum , the results of which cannot be considered to be reliable .
The military regime is becoming more aggressive as regards political prisoners .
Hopes that the authorities in Burma would start discussions with the opposition and with international organisations are unlikely to be fulfilled .
For this reason it is essential to impose effective sanctions and pressures on the regime there , with as many countries as possible taking part .
( PL ) Mr President , barely eight days after the cyclone , the Burmese regime forced the country , their own country , to take part in a referendum .
A referendum on a widely criticised and controversial draft constitution .
The results ?
Ridiculous , as if taken directly from the old communist period : turnout - 99 % ; support for the new constitution - 93 % .
A model of implausibility , that is all that can be said of these results .
I am convinced that regimes such as the regime in Burma have to fall sooner or later and the European Union should help it fall .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner is unfortunately not here today , so I shall - on her behalf - share with you a few remarks about the situation in Burma / Myanmar .
The European Parliament 's motion for a resolution focuses on the political situation and in particular on the continued detention of political prisoners .
Before commenting on this issue , I would like to inform you about the Commission 's activities in response to the cyclone which devastated the delta of the Ayeryawaddy River six weeks ago .
The Commission 's response to the cyclone was quick and substantial : we have approved EUR 17 million in humanitarian aid , including EUR 5 million in food aid .
We have also activated the civil protection mechanism - the cooperation with the EU Member States having joined the mechanism has worked very well .
We cover water purification , boat transport , primary health care and other issues of importance in the post-disaster context .
The humanitarian emergency is not over .
So far , approximately half of the survivors reached , that is , one million , are still in desperate need .
Accessing the disaster-hit areas and distribution of aid is not without difficulties .
This has as much to do with the size of the disaster as with the bureaucracy .
Our field workers in Myanmar report gradually better cooperation from authorities .
Our own humanitarian activities continue with reasonable efficiency .
We recognise that the international NGOs are in a more difficult situation , as regards access to the stricken areas .
In the mean time , the ASEAN countries have taken the lead in coordinating external assistance .
They are a member of the so-called ' Tripartite Mechanism ' , which comprises the ASEAN countries , the Government of Burma / Myanmar , and the United Nations .
The Government has issued new ' guidelines ' for external aid .
We have no evidence yet whether they are being used to narrow the space for aid delivery .
For us , the cyclone and its terrible consequences are a purely humanitarian issue .
We defend the concept of ' needs-based ' humanitarian relief .
On the political situation in Burma / Myanmar , the Government seems committed to proceed with its so-called ' Road Map to Democracy ' .
We read this road map as a tightly controlled , slow transition towards a civilian government where the military still plays a dominant role .
The Government seems committed to deliver , at its own pace and without regard to views and comments from outside .
Realistically , there is hardly an alternative .
National reconciliation would require an inclusive dialogue .
Such dialogue cannot take place with political stakeholders in jail or under house arrest .
This is why we continue to push for the release of all political prisoners .
My colleague , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , has said publicly that the Government has missed a chance to send a signal of reconciliation at a moment of national distress when the Government again extended the house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi .
The people of Burma / Myanmar would deserve a system of government which focuses on economic and social development , and on the participation of the electorate in the political process .
For Europe , expressing our indignation and isolating the country is clearly not an adequate response .
The people of Burma / Myanmar shall not pay the price of a political stalemate .
They deserve better .
In conclusion , I wish to highlight our commitment to follow closely the situation in Burma / Myanmar .
This includes continuing to push for a release of all political prisoners , and for an inclusive dialogue , including legal political parties and ethnic groups .
We continue a balanced approach .
We are not up to confrontation for the sake of confrontation .
Our ultimate goal remains to help a peaceful transition to a legitimate , civilian government .
This is why we are fully supportive of the good offices of the UN Secretary General and his Special Advisor for Myanmar .
The interest of the Burmese people is best served with a balanced policy , including substantial assistance .
The Commission has carefully chosen the areas of assistance to help the most vulnerable class of society .
We have already significantly increased funding and hope that - in a coordinated effort with other donors - the overall funding level could reach the equivalent of what is spent per capita in comparable countries , like Laos and Cambodia .
The people of Myanmar deserve a better future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
2 .
Somalia : routine killing of civilians
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on Somalia .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would first like to express my deep concern at the recent cases of hijacking of boats in Somali waters and the hijackers ' humiliating treatment of crews .
From this same seat , I asked the European Union to adopt a Community policy of coordination and mutual assistance that would allow military vessels in international waters and flying the flag of a Member State to protect merchant and fishing boats flying the flag of other Member States at the first possible opportunity .
In addition , I would like to denounce categorically the trade in weapons and ammunition with organised bands and paramilitary factions .
My group would like to ask the competent international organisations and appropriate regional organisations to recommend adequate preventive measures to stop weapons reaching such groups .
My group would like to ask donor countries and the European Union to respect their commitments and guarantee close coordination to increase the effectiveness of development aid .
We would also like to ask the Commission , represented here today , to propose a rapid , considerable increase in European Union financial resources for Somalia , particularly on the occasion of the intermediate review of the 10th European Development Fund , and also an increase in its physical presence in that country .
I would like to take advantage of the presence of the Commission to ask what it is doing or plans to do in this regard .
Obviously , I cannot finish my speech without calling on all Somali factions to end one of the longest and most destructive armed conflicts in recent years and this resolution does the same .
author . - Mr President , Somalia is a country stricken by civil war and poverty over a number of years now .
Thousands of civilians have died as a result , and hundreds of thousands have suffered and are still suffering .
The international community has taken some action and , it has to be said , with some limited success .
But the plight of the Somali people continues , and the killing of civilians in that region , unfortunately , has now become a routine matter .
Bold and effective additional action is necessary , mainly - in my view - as follows :
Firstly , the UN arms embargo on Somalia must be strictly enforced .
This must include China , which is the usual culprit in such situations .
Secondly , it must be ensured that all UN and EU aid going to Somalia reaches those in real and legitimate need and does not enter the pockets of war lords .
Thirdly , pressure must be exerted on the UN Security Council to proceed urgently with the implementation of its unanimous decision of 15 May 2008 to deploy a sufficiently strong UN peacekeeping force in the region - making sure , of course , that such peace-keepers are not of the same quality as those who recently were accused of committing crimes against the local population they were supposed to protect .
Fourthly , the African Union must , once again , be made to understand that it bears primary responsibility for what is happening in African regions such as Somalia , and - instead of much ineffective rhetoric - it must take urgent and practical action against all those regimes or other parties or factions that are throwing African people deeper into primitive and desperately dramatic situations .
author . - Mr President , in 1960 , British and Italian Somaliland looked forward to their dream of independence .
But that dream very soon turned sour and I remember as chairman in the British Parliament of the British Somali Group , having this string of refugees coming to tell us first about the authoritarian regime in that country and then , of course , about the factional fighting and the anarchy .
Somaliland still has a degree of independence and stability , as does Puntland .
But Mogadishu is a name synonymous with violence , murder , riots , hunger and a failed economy .
So what do we do ?
Well , we cannot do that much .
Certainly not individually ; probably not as Europe .
But we can work with other international players to put pressure on the players inside the country to agree to halt the ongoing conflict , to halt violence , to stop the violations of international human rights and to work towards peace .
We have got to persuade them to allow humanitarian assistance to reach those most in need , and we have , perhaps , to help them ensure the safety of those humanitarian aid workers .
We must appeal to those outside who can help .
We appeal to Kenya to allow Somali refugees to have access to the El Wak border and the right to assistance in that country .
We appeal to everyone , as has been referred to already , to ensure that we have the embargo on the sale of arms to that country .
We insist that those who have committed war crimes must be brought to justice and , where appropriate , to the International Criminal Court .
And , of course , we welcome the UN Security Council 's resolution of May calling for the deployment of 28 000 troops as a peacekeeping force ; more realistically , perhaps , we urge that AMISOM be mandated to take protective action .

We need action : not just resolution , but we need international action .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , the violence in Somalia has everything to do with the fact that since 1991 there has no longer been a generally recognised government there .
In the south and centre of the country there has been fighting between the militias of various warlords for years and in the north the administration of the territory of the former British colony of Somaliland that is operating there is not recognised internationally .
Then a conflict broke out between the Union of Islamic Courts and the army of neighbouring Ethiopia .
Talks about reunification of the country never received general support and those who did support them often stopped .
The years of chaos soon turn support from the rest of the world for any transitional government into interference in insoluble armed domestic conflicts .
In the past few years I have warned a number of times that , by helping to finance failing structures , the European Union is being tied to one of the warring parties without any prospect of a lasting and widespread solution .
Europe certainly has to help if a solution is possible , but over-hasty interference leads to disaster .
In a previous urgent debate on Somalia on 15 November 2007 , this Parliament adopted a resolution calling for an end to foreign military intervention and for dialogue and reconciliation within the country .
It is to be welcomed that the resolution that has now been tabled speaks out against European Union support for warlords who are trying to re-establish their power , against the use of child soldiers and against further arms supplies .
Yesterday there was an unsuccessful attempt to murder the Transitional President , Abdullahi Yusuf .
Armed troops are still in sharp conflict with each other .
We now have to see whether the agreement reached last week to end the violence within 30 days and to replace the Ethiopian intervention force with a United Nations peacekeeping force has a real chance of success .
If that leads to real solutions , it will make sense for Europe to support it .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , the recent resumption of fighting in Somalia between units of the Transitional Federal Government and insurgents has claimed the lives of more than a hundred people and has led to the mass exodus of the civilian population from the Somali capital Mogadishu .
Violations of human rights are an everyday occurrence in Somalia by all sides in the conflict , with torture , rape , murder and attacks on civilians .
The international community cannot remain indifferent towards these glaring acts of violence in Somalia .
The European Union must decisively increase its involvement in order to resolve the conflict in Somalia and should call on the parties to the conflict to take all possible steps to provide humanitarian organisations with unimpeded access to victims in that country so that they can bring them aid .
Bringing in UN peacekeepers until the political situation improves would also be a step in the right direction , as would renewing UN embargoes on the supply of arms to Somalia .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , one month ago the Global Peace Index rankings were published .
This is the result of research carried out in 140 countries each year by the Institute for Economics and Peace .
The research found that Somalia was the second most dangerous country in the world , after Iraq .
The reality is depressing .
No progress is visible in the resolution of this long-running conflict and the information that is coming out is horrifying .
I will not describe it all here , but will say just that , as far as Somali pirates are concerned , they have hijacked 26 ships so far since the beginning of this year .
In a conflict that is as hopeless as the one in Somalia , any agreement between the parties should be given due attention .
Let us hope that the agreement of 9 June in Djibouti will prove to be a breakthrough in this conflict and will lead to lasting peace .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , Somalia has become an arena of conflict , not to say a hell .
Human rights and international law are flagrantly flouted ; the country languishes in poverty .
Thousands of civilians have perished in clashes between the Islamists and government units and hundreds of thousands have been forced to flee .
People are killed , raped and tortured every day .
United Nations statistics for 2007 show that there are approximately 457 000 Somali refugees in the world .
That means half a million Somalis who have been forced to flee their homeland for the sake of survival .
During the past three months , the violence in Mogadishu has forced more than fifty thousand people to flee .
The situation is completely out of control .
I sympathise with the people fleeing the violence .
We must do everything that is in Europe 's power to help Somalia to take a course toward peace .
The conflict must not be allowed to develop into a regional war .
Africa needs peace as it needs air .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Somalia has seen brutal fighting for many years .
In the last few days it is estimated that about one hundred people have been killed and about two hundred wounded .
Thousands of people had to abandon their homes in Mogadishu .
Attacks on civilians and the media are increasing .
On 7 June Nasteh Dahir Farah , vice-president of the National Union of Somali Journalists , was brutally murdered .
Workers from aid organisations have also been murdered , among them Mohamed Mahdi .
There is growing recruitment of children into army units .
2.6 million Somalis ( about 35 % of the population ) require humanitarian aid .
In its reports , Amnesty International has described some of the extreme forms of attacks on unarmed civilians .
Attackers frequently just cut the throats of women and teenagers .
We call on the UN Security Council to reinforce the contingent of peacekeepers in Somalia in accordance with the resolution passed on 15 May and also to reinforce the embargo on the supply of arms to Somalia .
( DE ) Mr President , rarely has a resolution in this House ever had such a gruesome title as ' Routine killing of civilians ' .
We cannot make a routine response , ladies and gentlemen ; we must bring our full weight to bear .
One in eight of the population have been displaced in the past twelve months , and by the end of the year half of the civilian population could be dependent on humanitarian aid .
I am grateful to Mr Dess and others for the food aid and medical aid that are being dispensed there , but now we must also target a political solution that has not been in place since 1991 .
The only option , in my view , is for the UN force to be deployed , but it must be supplemented by appropriate civilian structures .
As far as the Transitional Federal Government is concerned , we have to ask where the transition is leading .
It is either a transition to a viable autonomous structure , or else it is necessary to establish an international civilian structure , as has happened in other countries .
If we do not get this right , we shall ultimately have the entire nation dependent on humanitarian aid .
That cannot be the way to eradicate murders , rapes and famine .
Mr President , the humanitarian situation in Somalia is deteriorating rapidly due to a combination of conflict , political instability and severe drought , as well as high inflation compounding matters further .
We could be in danger of a return to the scenes of the 1992 famine if the international community does not give Somalia greater priority .
2.6 million people out of a population of around 8.6 million urgently need assistance .
If there is no significant improvement in this country , this figure could rise to 3.5 million by the end of 2008 .
1.1 million people are now internally displaced .
Since January alone , over 300 000 people have fled their homes .
Humanitarian organisations are severely hampered in their efforts to help Somali civilians and are experiencing attacks , theft and obstruction at checkpoints .
Such personnel face significant risks on a daily basis in their attempts to deliver food to those most in need .
The African Union Mission in Somalia and any succeeding UN peacekeeping mission must be mandated to protect civilians , including women , children and internally displaced persons .
Attempts must also be made to stem the increase in the recruitment of child soldiers , particularly in Mogadishu .
( ES ) Mr President , I have asked to speak in order to mention a single issue , piracy in Somali waters .
Some speakers ( Mr Kaczmarek and Mrs Tomaszewska , I believe ) have mentioned this issue , as do recital G and paragraph 8 of the proposal for a common resolution , but I want to point out that the drafting of paragraph 8 restricts action against piracy to defending vessels carrying humanitarian aid , so it would be better to vote separately on this paragraph and vote against it .
Finally , I would like to ask the Commission if it has any further information on possible European Union cooperation with the Security Council to guarantee maritime security in this area .
( PL ) Mr President , internal conflict and civil wars are particularly dangerous for societies and nations , as they lead to assassinations and pillaging , to people abandoning their homes as well as to forced evictions , to rape and torture and other atrocities .
It is the civilian population that undergoes all of this , civilians who are unarmed and often attacked by different sides in the conflict .
Despite the steps taken by the UN Secretary General , the African Union and the support provided by the European Union , the situation in Somalia is so difficult that people speak of a humanitarian catastrophe .
Children that are forced to take part in the conflict also witness terrible atrocities .
It would seem that the most effective way of dealing with this disaster and with this war is to put an international military force into Somalia .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , unfortunately my colleague Louis Michel is not here today , so on his behalf I wish to share with you some remarks about this issue in Somalia .
Firstly , I would like to share your concern about the continuing conflict and political instability in Somalia .
Somalia remains a context where fundamental rights and respect for basic human dignity continue to be shunned by armed entities perpetrating systematic and widespread attacks against civilians .
Seventeen years of statelessness have seen loss of civilian life , mass displacements and destruction of physical infrastructures .
One third of the population , corresponding to 2.6 million people , depends on humanitarian aid today .
The European Union , together with other key international actors , is committed to helping at this critical juncture .
At the political level , the EU will continue to provide its full support to the UN Special Representative of the Secretary General in his efforts to coordinate the action of the international community and to facilitate inter-Somali political dialogue .
We are now examining - together with other donors - the appropriate ways and means to better assist Somalis to effectively implement the Djibouti Agreement reached on 9 June .
This agreement offers fresh hope for long-term peace and stability to the people of Somalia .
At humanitarian level , the EU is mainly focusing on supporting basic sectors such as health , nutrition , food assistance , shelter and non-food relief items , water and sanitation , as part of a range of activities particularly targeting central and southern areas of the country that have been badly affected by civilian strife and extreme natural hazards .
In 2007 our Humanitarian Aid Department managed to provide EUR 18 million in humanitarian assistance .
In response to the worsening humanitarian situation and to the increase in food prices , the level of assistance should reach a total of EUR 27 million for this year .
At the development level , the EU is already the main aid donor for Somalia , providing medium- to long-term support for establishing a peaceful and self-sustainable society .
The EU Country Strategy for Somalia allocates more than EUR 212 million for the period 2008-2013 , under the 10th European Development Fund .
One third of this programme will be spent on education , which is relevant to respect for human rights .
The critical goal is to encourage reconciliation , democracy and the development of governance structures at all levels .
However , without peace and security it is not possible to engage effectively in longer-term development .
Priority is therefore given to promoting a peaceful and secure environment in which human rights are respected and democratic processes and institutions can develop .
Commissioner Michel met with the Somali President , just a few days ago , on the margin of the IGAD Summit in Addis Ababa .
On that occasion , President Yusuf made a strong appeal for international assistance to support a better , secure environment for people living in Somalia .
We gave a commitment to provide strong support for the Somali Government to this end .
The European Commission is already financing the training of Somali police forces through the UN , and funds are also being contributed to the costs of the AMISOM operation .
Ultimately the political process of reconciliation and stabilisation will also depend on the engagement and support of key regional players , namely Ethiopia and Eritrea , which have used the Somali theatre for a ' proxy war ' .
In this respect the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops from Somalia is a key element for any political breakthrough .
Commissioner Michel , who met Prime Minister Meles of Ethiopia and President Isaias of Eritrea last weekend , urged them to support the Djibouti process , which , although far from being perfect , offered a real if not the only opportunity to bring together the different Somali actors .
Despite the difficult circumstances , the Commission will continue its programme of aid to Somalia , which has been designed with Member States , in order to alleviate the suffering of the Somali population and to establish the ground for a peaceful society .
Some questions were raised about piracy and I would add that , although it is not competent for the deployment of naval forces as foreseen by UNSC Resolution 1816 , the Commission has set up , together with the Council , a working group composed of the relevant directorates-general - namely the Energy and Transport DG , the Maritime Affairs and Fisheries DG , the Development DG and EuropeAid - to study the best way to implement the UN resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
3 .
Iran : execution of juvenile offenders
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on Iran .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , the human rights situation in Iran has deteriorated dramatically since 2005 .
The Iranian judiciary has the sad record of imposing the second highest number of executions per capita in the world .
Only China carries out more executions than Iran .
As mentioned in the resolution , two important agreements , the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , ban the death penalty as punishment for crimes committed when the perpetrator is under 18 .
The most serious aspect is that Teheran has ratified both agreements . Although ratification is positive , the country does not respect these agreements .
Murder , rape , armed robbery , kidnapping and drugs trafficking are punishable by death in Iran .
Most of the children were sentenced for murder , but many sentences seem to be based on unreliable confessions , obtained by torture and during interrogations at which the detained were denied the right of access to a lawyer .
The courts routinely ignore evidence presented by defendants showing that the accused acted in self-defence .
The execution of children in Iran will be one of the issues included in the report to the General Assembly by the United Nations Secretary General , Ban Ki-moon , in September .
We therefore ask Iran to stop these executions once and for all , including those of at least 85 people who are sentenced to death for crimes committed when they were children .
I did not want to finish without saying I consider that , this week , Parliament and the European Union have lost a certain moral credibility to defend the rights of children , when yesterday this Chamber approved a shameful directive that allows the imprisonment of children for committing the crime of coming to Europe without papers .
author . - Mr President , the brutal activities of the theocratic Iranian regime against its own people are well known and have been the subject of previous resolutions by this Parliament .
This regime is known to commit - in the name of God , they claim - systematic and despicable crimes against innocent civilians .
Resistance in Iran is extremely difficult and fraught with the risk of death .
Outside the country Iranian civilians are struggling to fight for a democratic change in their country .
Such people include those belonging to the entirely non-violent PMOI organisation .
Yet the Commission had put this organisation on the terrorist list and until recently was refusing to correct this mistake , even after relevant EU court rulings .
I ask the Commissioner : why was this Iranian resistance organisation put on the terrorist list in the first place ?
Is it because some EU Member State or States having lucrative trade contracts or relations with Iran wanted to please the regime in Tehran ?
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , when we are discussing issues of breaches of human rights in the world , we have to make certain distinctions , particularly between situations where we are considering unstable regimes , civil wars , crimes committed in situations of absolute chaos and situations like the one in Iran , where the state is relatively stable , where there is no civil war , where there are elections from time to time , but where the state uses criminal methods such as executions of children .
This is a completely different situation from the issues we have been discussing , like the matters debated today with regard to Somalia or Burma .
In these situations it is not an issue of some internal disorder , it is an issue of a different civilisation .
It reminds us of Huntington 's book ' The Clash of Civilisations ' , or of the books of the great historian and philosopher Feliks Koneczny , who spoke of fundamental differences in civilisations .
If we wish to resolve these problems , then we must think how we can influence these regimes to change their mentality .

Stop killing children - that is the most important thing , the position the European Parliament is making clear in its resolution .
This is our message to the new Majlis of Iran , who should understand their duty - to reform the Iranian penal code without delay to bring it into line with the international obligations undertaken by this country and the international rule of law .
In my opinion , executions of underage children or those who committed crimes while underage are totally unacceptable .
The fact that the policy pursued by the Iranian Government is in conflict with international law was recently highlighted by the UN High Commissioner .
The European Parliament has more than once expressed its firm belief and position : it is against the death penalty and in favour of a worldwide death-penalty moratorium .
We are talking about men , women , children , teenagers and minorities here , so I would like to finish by calling on the Iranian Government to prevent the execution of those teenagers who have already received the death penalty , as it is inhumane .
author . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I do not share the view of the Bush Administration that Iran represents a threat to world safety and therefore it is necessary to have an arms race .
I am also against forcing our values and our lifestyle on different cultures for one reason alone , namely opening the door to supra-national capital leading to the sources of raw materials on this planet and so to latter-day colonialism .
However , I opposed the barbaric acts that are still being carried out although the reasons for doing so have long gone .
Moreover , there is no justification in Iranian culture for the barbaric acts of executions of juvenile offenders and even political opponents committed by the Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 's Iranian regime .
In the past , this country used to carry out the death penalty only in exceptional cases and public executions took place only as a punishment for mass murders or child murders .
Under the current Iranian Government , however , hundreds of executions take place each year , and many of them involve juveniles , such as 17-year old Mohammad Hassanzadeh , who was executed on 10 June .
Recently I saw photographs of public executions in Iran .
Believe me , they are among the worst things I have seen in my life .
My Group , the GUE / NGL Group , is using the European Parliament to call on the Islamic Republic of Iran to cease executions with immediate effect , especially the executions of people who committed a criminal offence when they were juveniles .
Under Mr Ahmadinejad , Iran has long been sending not just mass murderers to the gallows but also people who have committed acts that in developed countries receive much lighter punishments or are not even considered to be against the law .
The country must review its understanding of the law and modify it to ensure that human life is respected .
Until this happens , Iran will stay on the margins of the civilised world .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , the systematic violation of human rights in Iran brings us together here once again .
The fundamental issue is the execution of juveniles for alleged crimes .
Can I please clarify that it is often a case of relations between juveniles of the same sex , for example , which are not even a crime , and which lead to death sentences and public executions , as has already been seen in films recording the barbarity of the regime .
This barbarity is not confined to juveniles , however , and is not confined to execution by stoning , to the records of the execution .
It also involves the external dimension of terrorism .
We must therefore ask the European institutions once again why they continue to encourage the terrorist regime in Tehran to classify the opposition Iranian People 's Mujahedin as terrorists , as our fellow member Mr Matsakis has stressed .
Why is it that instead of condemning terrorism and human rights violations , they use economic and trade packages to encourage Tehran to condemn the victims of terrorism ?
This is completely immoral and indefensible and is a policy that will inevitably lead us to a confrontation , to war , if we do not challenge it quickly .
And for these reasons I would like to call upon the Commission and the Council to change their policy and to comply with the courts , and not to reward terrorism in this way .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I can understand , although I absolutely do not accept it , that there are legal systems in the world that use the death penalty .
However , I cannot imagine how even the supporters of the death penalty , particularly in our cultural circles , can entertain the possibility of imposing this penalty , and then carrying it out , on children and teenagers .
But this is exactly the situation in Iran .
According to the latest report from Amnesty International more than one hundred teenagers are currently waiting to be executed , and this number does not include everyone , as some of the sentences do not get recorded .
It is right that we should call on the political and judicial authorities in Iran to introduce a moratorium on carrying out the death penalty .
However , we must also ask ourselves how the international community should be judged , how we ourselves should be judged , since we are unable to ensure that signatories to international agreements comply with the clauses contained in those agreements , at the expense of teenagers who are sentenced to death .
There is just one subtext , which is the economic subtext and this , unfortunately , outweigh humanitarian considerations .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , the world does not tolerate the death penalty , but Iran is taking its own course .
The situation in that country is grim .
The Iranian authorities are not selective about who is to be executed ; the death penalty is applied even to young people .
As a country which has ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child , it is running into sharp conflict with the world .
The application of the death penalty is in complete contravention of human rights .
Such a mode of punishment is inhuman .
The execution of at least thirty minors in Iran up to the present is supremely unjust .
I would like to hope that the eighty-five minors currently awaiting the death penalty will be saved by the world - including us - from their cruel fate .
Let us hope that the newly elected parliament will usher in new winds of humanity .
Mediaeval methods of execution should be consigned to history .
Legislation should be introduced in Iran that is consistent with international law .
It is high time that Iran moved into the 21st century .
I fully support the resolution .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are debating this matter today because we have been moved by the threat to carry out the death penalty on four young people under 18 years of age .
This is not the first such decision from the Iranian justice system .
Fortunately Iran is one of just a few countries that sentence teenagers to death and , what is worse , actually carry out these sentences .
In addition , over the past three years , Iranian sentences have constituted over two thirds of all sentences of this type in the world .
It is outrageous that Iran should breach international conventions , to which it is a signatory , and which categorically prohibit such measures , in such a blatant manner .
This raises a question of a much more general nature : does the international community have any mechanisms and instruments to deal with such countries ?
In other words , is it possible for breaches of undertakings made voluntarily by a given country to result in some tangible and meaningful sanctions ?
This brings two things to mind .
The first is the need to reconsider the much-used concept of rule of law .
Convictions of teenagers for homosexual behaviour may be in accordance with the law in force in Iran , but we cannot , of course , agree with rule of law understood in this way .
The second issue is that if we demand that others should comply with their undertakings as well as with reasonable laws that comply with basic freedoms , then we should respect these laws ourselves .
In this context we cannot but remember our own dilatoriness , not to use any stronger words , when it comes to fulfilling the final court judgment and removing the Iranian mujahedin from the list of terrorist organisations .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the most treasured possession that any person has is their life .
Therefore , no one should deprive them of that possession for any reason .
What is particularly outrageous is the use of beatings and torture on young people to force them to make confessions that are needed to justify death sentences .
Iran is certainly one of the countries where many death sentences are carried out , including on young people .
Recent information indicates that at least 85 underage criminals are awaiting execution in that country .
It is therefore high time that Iran should stop carrying out these procedures and should adopt the legal standards accepted by other countries .
Young people should be educated , not killed .
Mr President , just nine days ago an Iranian youth , Mohammed Hassanzadeh , was executed , having not reached the age of 18 .
There are also others who are waiting on death row , sentenced for alleged crimes they committed when they were still minors .
I think this is an occasion to remind public opinion that Tehran has become the world leader for the number of executions of juvenile offenders .
We therefore urge in the strongest terms the Iranian regime to stop these executions .
However - and I address my remarks to the Commissioner - there are more practical things we can do .
We can finally free the hands of the Iranian democratic opposition , the National Council of Resistance , to get rid of this inhuman dictatorship once and for all .
Mr President , Mr Matsakis opened the debate wondering if there was one country responsible for encouraging the whole of the EU to ban the PMOI .
I can answer his question : it was the UK .
The reason the UK Government did this is because the Government of Iran asked it to .
I regret to say that in my country we have a government that will not allow its own people a vote on the referendum on the Lisbon Treaty and will also insist that the voice of the people of Iran cannot be heard anywhere throughout Europe .
I call upon the UK Government , when they vote in Westminster next week , to ensure that they remove the ban in accordance with the EU court ruling .
For too long the UK Government has been part of the problem .
It needs to become part of the solution .
Mr President , this is a very serious issue .
Iran is executing young men and women as a means of social control .
It is incredible in an age of modern civilisation that young girls and boys are executed , stoned to death or hanged from industrial cranes .
We ask and we call for the international community do more , but instead of actually standing together with the international community we hear cries against parts of the international community .
We hear condemnation against the USA , for example ; we hear differences in this House as to how we will handle it .
We will never solve this crisis until we stand as one against this medieval crisis that is occurring in this country .
It is something that we must do ourselves .
Mr President , I only wanted to take the floor for the second time in order to bring to the attention of my colleagues a book which discusses human rights abuses in Iran in 2007 .
It was brought to my attention just a little while ago and it contains many shocking references , one of which is about a girl waiting to be hanged named Ameneh Salam from a village in Naqadeh whose crime is that she became pregnant without being married .

Incidentally the man who made her pregnant was sentenced to 99 lashes .
( PL ) Mr President , in Iran at least 430 death penalties have been carried out on young people since 1990 .
The death penalty for children is a dishonour for adults .
Every crime perpetrated by a teenager is the result of an educational failure by adults .
Transferring the responsibility for one 's own failings or incompetence onto a teenager , carrying out inhumane sentences , including the death penalty , on children , that truly is a crime .
In Iran the death penalty is even carried out on ten year olds .
Death penalties for teenagers are contrary to the international obligations of the Islamic Republic of Iran .
The Iranian authorities should immediately stop murdering young people in the name of an inhumane law .

( PL ) Mr President , one would have thought that , following the publication of Robert Hughes ' ' Fatal Shore ' , a book in which he described the transportation by the British Crown , meaning the courts , of small children together with their parents to Australia , that this would never happen again .
In fact , a century has passed , or perhaps one and a half centuries , and the same thing is happening in Iran , an Islamic country , where , from one side , it can be seen that attention is paid to the family .
What is happening there is a barbarism more extreme than one 's worse imaginings .
If we do not act to defend these children , if we do not boycott the regime , if we do not condemn it as much as possible throughout the world , then we shall be judged to have been complicit , that we kept quiet and did not try to defend human life .
Mr President , I condemn the human rights abuses that occur daily in Iran .
I believe also that we should lift the ban on the People 's Mujahedin , and we should do that as soon as possible .
I want to speak out against the death penalty being used against juveniles .
I will never forget the picture of two boys who were publicly hung by the neck until they were dead .
Their crime was that they were young homosexuals who dared to love one another .
Such inhumanity should be condemned universally .
That is why , Commissioner , we need a radical change in our policy towards Iran .
We cannot sit back and wait : there is no more time !
Mr President , I too would like to condemn the ongoing human rights abuses in Iran today , and I would also like , once the British have their vote next week , the Council - I think it will be under the French presidency - to remove , once and for all , the PMOI from the terrorist list .
Could I say , in fact - even though the UK were responsible having the PMOI in the first place on the list - thank goodness for the common law justice system and the system of the British courts , which at least ensured independent , free , objective justice and , indeed , the recommendation that injustice had been done to the PMOI in the first place by having them on the terrorist list , and recommending their removal .
I urge the French presidency - as I understand , it will be in their court - to follow through and remove them immediately .
We cannot stand over the continuing abuse of human rights and the use of the death penalty at all , particularly where young men and young women and juveniles are concerned .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , my colleague Benita Ferrero-Waldner is unfortunately not here today , so on her behalf I thank you for the opportunity to address the issue of juvenile executions in Iran .
The Commission shares your deep concern about this harrowing question .
While , as you know , the Commission lacks a representation in Tehran , it follows the human rights situation very closely and acts in close concertation with the EU Member States ' embassies represented there .
It is important to note that the European Parliament , the Council of the European Union and the Commission have taken a coherent and consistent line .
The seriousness of our concerns has been clearly stated through the three statements published by the EU Presidency over the past two weeks : on 4 and 10 June , over the cases of Mr Fadaei , Mr Shojaee and Mr Jazee , all facing imminent executions for crimes committed when they were minors ; and on 13 June , on the execution of Mohammad Hassanzadeh .
The Commission fully supports the principle and the content of these statements : there can be no justification for the use of the